---
source: "NUS SMS Corpus"
lang: "en"
contributor: "Tao Chen"
year: "2010"
country: "India"
messages: "95"
license: "Research use; cite Chen & Kan (2013)"
---

Huggggggg uuuuuuuuuu dear.......uuuuummmaaaa
Thank You for calling.Forgot to say Happy Onam to you Sirji.I am fine here and remembered you when i met an insurance person.Meet You in Qatar Insha Allah.Rakhesh, ex Tata AIG who joined TISSCO,Tayseer.
I am late,so call you tomorrow morning.take care sweet dreams....u and me...ummifying...bye.
Good evening Sir, Al Salam Wahleykkum.sharing a happy news.By the grace of God, i got an offer from Tayseer,TISSCO and i joined.Hope you are fine.Inshah Allah,meet you sometime.Rakhesh,visitor from India.
Happy birthday to you....dear.with lots of love.rakhesh NRI
Hi' Test on &lt;#&gt; rd ....
Went fast asleep dear.take care.
Today my system sh get ready.all is well and i am also in the deep well
Howz pain?hope u r fine..
Hows the pain dear?y r u smiling?
Howz pain.it will come down today.do as i said ystrday.ice and medicine.
God bless.get good sleep my dear...i will pray!
Dnt worry...use ice pieces in a cloth pack.also take 2 tablets.
Oh god..taken the teeth?is it paining
TISSCO ,TAYSEER INDUSTRIAL SUPPLIES SERVICES CO.W.L.L.,GG AL WAKALAT STREET.BETWEEN STREET &lt;#&gt; &amp; &lt;#&gt; ,SALWA INDUSTRIAL AREA.DOHA QATAR.PO. &lt;#&gt; .PH. &lt;#&gt; .
the show is on.so lets face it..insha allah!hope to see good days!pray seriously!
Congrats ! Treat pending.i am not on mail for 2 days.will mail once thru.Respect mother at home.check mails.
Good day to You too.Pray for me.Remove the teeth as its painful maintaining other stuff.
Did u fix the teeth?if not do it asap.ok take care.
How stupid to say that i challenge god.You dont think at all on what i write instead you respond immed.
Gain the rights of a wife.dont demand it.i am trying as husband too.Lets see
I am joining today formally.Pls keep praying.will talk later.
May i call You later Pls
What do u want when i come back?.a beautiful necklace as a token of my heart for you.thats what i will give but ONLY to MY WIFE OF MY LIKING.BE THAT AND SEE..NO ONE can give you that.dont call me.i will wait till i come.
Take care and sleep well.you need to learn to change in life.you only need to get CONVINCED on that.i will wait but no more conversations between us.GET CONVINCED by that time.Your family is over for you in many senses.respect them but not overemphasise.or u have no role in my life.
Dear Sir,Salam Alaikkum.Pride and Pleasure meeting you today at the Tea Shop.We are pleased to send you our contact number at Qatar.Rakhesh an Indian.Pls save our Number.Respectful Regards.
&lt;#&gt; , RAKHESH KUPPAYATH RADHAKRISHNAN
Yes ammae....life takes lot of turns you can only sit and try to hold the steering...
i dont need help.
i cant talk to you now.i will call when i can.dont keep calling.
Dear, will call Tmorrow.pls accomodate.
May i call You later Pls
FOR ME,My wife trying to talk back to me on what i believe is really NOT ACCEPTABLE disappointing and really sad.you WERE fortunate to have me.
I might come to kerala for 2 days.so you can be prepared to take a leave once i finalise .dont plan any travel during my visit.need to finish urgent works.
Check mail.i have mailed varma and kept copy to you regarding membership.take care.insha allah.
Cancel cheyyamo?and get some money back?
ok....take care.umma to you too...
Aslamalaikkum....insha allah tohar beeen muht albi mufti mahfuuz...meaning same here....
Pls clarify back if an open return ticket that i have can be preponed for me to go back to kerala.
Dear,shall mail tonite.busy in the street,shall update you tonite.things are looking ok.varunnathu edukkukayee raksha ollu.but a good one in real sense.
TISSCO its the TAYSEER group,a &lt;#&gt; year old company with &lt;#&gt; group companies.TISSCO is headed by a malayali as its GM and i need to report into dpty GM who is also a malayali.
Send ur email.hope you are fine.take care.my email is &lt;EMAIL&gt;
My mobile number.pls sms ur mail id.convey regards to achan,amma.Rakhesh.Qatar
Going on nothing great.bye
Ok.take care
Pls call me for 2 mintes da.smthng 2 ask.no net so pls wn free
No drama Pls.i have had enough from you and family while i am struggling in the hot sun in a strange place.No reason why there should be an ego of not going 'IF NOT INVITED' when actually its necessity to go.wait for very serious reppurcussions.
Da vandiyil irikkunnu.ethikkondirikkunnu.sorry for the delay. aaraaam thampurante kuude aanu....
Dear, take care. I am just reaching home.love u a lot.
Will call later dear.
Missing you too.pray inshah allah
Got ur mail Dileep.thank you so muchand look forward to lots of support...very less contacts here,remember one venugopal you mentioned.tomorrow if not late,i shall try to come up till there.goodnight dear.
Ummma.will call after check in.our life will begin from qatar so pls pray very hard.
Dear Hero,i am leaving to qatar tonite for an apt opportunity.pls do keep in touch at &lt;EMAIL&gt; ,kerala
Leaving to qatar tonite in search of an opportunity.all went fast.pls add me in ur prayers dear.Rakhesh
Leaving to qatar tonite in search of an opportunity.all went fast.pls add me in ur prayers dear.Rakhesh
Manoj,i am leaving to qatar for an apt opportunity after leaving tata aig.pls do keep in touch at &lt;EMAIL&gt; ,kerala
Hey leaving tonight to qatar in search of an apt opportunity.shall keep in touch.pls do mail into my id in case of some good opportunity as well.regret late sms.take care:..... &lt;EMAIL&gt;
Dear Das,wish to intimate that i am leaving to Qatar tonight in search of an apt opportunity.Look forward to your guidance and patronage.shall keep in touch.regret late sms.Regards,Rakhesh.Kerala.
Boss,wish to intimate that i am leaving to Qatar tonight in search of an apt opportunity after leaving Tata aig.Look forward to your guidance and patronage.shall keep in touch.regret late sms.Regards,Rakhesh.Kerala.
Macha,wish to intimate that i am leaving to Qatar tonight in search of an apt opportunity.all went fast.Look forward to your patronage.shall keep in touch.Regards,Rakhesh.
Dear sir,wish to intimate that i am leaving to Qatar in search of an apt opportunity.Look forward to your patronage.shall keep in touch.Regards,Rakhesh.Kerala.
Madam, Leaving to Qatar tonight in search of an apt opportunity.Look forward to your prayers, guidance and Patronage.Respectful regards.Rakhesh.
Qatar welcomes VP HR Qatar alkulut company....
Defenitely Boss.shall be in touch.Thank You.
In the lap bag that we carry as hand baggage.also one more thing i forgot ......ya the blazer for u hold it like ceo's do ok ..i am also holding it.will show how to carry.dont worry
Boss,Wanted to intimate on my visit to Qatar tonight in search of an apt opportunity after leaving TATA AIG. Look forward to your guidance and patronage.respectful rgds,Rakhesh Kerala ex ipru Rural.
&lt;#&gt; .amma tommorow pls call prajaad in this number and tell him that we need inverter on 1st may.his mob is switched off.
Just one copy of passport and visa.actually one scan also was good anywats its late now
&lt;#&gt; he brot,alex asked if he need to come
Car ninte aano airportil pookan?
Surej brot first 2 pages xerox.hw bout u?
Dad asked to take a xerox of paaspoet.me and varma going for that.
&lt;EMAIL&gt; . Shamsu pls sms brothers number.
S
Dear,hope u have sent a reminder mail to dileep on helping us.good day ahead
Cant believe you are so smart like me. Al viswas halful kaima
Rajee,pls get the address or we cant answer the airport authority qatar
No issues carry on.trying the other guytoo.insha allah.keep praying that we face less difficulty.
What is this sms?i dint sms and was sleeping.either mol or amma must have sms'd.what the bloody hell is the sms.who asked you to bloody suffer?
Roshni here..msg wen u get bus.u know which ones cum via chertla?
Yes by &lt;#&gt; pm
Watsh acv
Halo sireee,called u to say i rchd safely.wanted to talk to ur mummy.and once more thanks to aunty.pls tell uncle also.
Without verbal jugglary,a simple happy vishu.Rakhesh
Happy Vishu to You,chechi and kids.convey regards too.i was at shabarimala for darshan.take care.
A question in new kerala syllabus on cherthala as mukya mantri,pradhirodha mantri and external affairs mantri are from cherthala.Question is in essay section-what is the difference between Vayalar kavala and thanki kavala.explain in not less han &lt;#&gt; words.revert with answer to pareekshabhavan.u can win a chakiri naaru from Mr.CM.
A question in new kerala syllabus on cherthala as mukya mantri,pradhirodha mantri and external affairs mantri are from cherthala.Question is in essay section-what is the difference between Vayalar kavala and thanki kavala.explain in not less han &lt;#&gt; words.revert with answer to pareekshabhavan.u can win a chakiri naaru from Mr.CM.
Happy Vishu Dear.
Hope u met life today.happy vishu.
be with amma and mol and make them happy with your company.i will be happy.happy vishu.
Swami saranam...njan avashanayee...anubhavichu physically...will call later
Ok da...njan avashathayude pala levels kazinjukondirikkunnu.
Vishvasikkumoo ennariyilla.njan vallathe kaahtappettu.now sitting on the footboard of a kumali bus to reach erumeli.in between my in between leg got injured after long walk.
Vishvasikkumoo ennariyilla.njan vallathe kaahtappettu.now sitting on the footboard of a kumali bus to reach erumeli.in between my in between leg got injured after long walk.
