---
source: "NUS SMS Corpus"
lang: "en"
contributor: "Tao Chen"
year: "2010"
country: "India"
messages: "98"
license: "Research use; cite Chen & Kan (2013)"
---

Just making dinner, you ?
I'm putting it on now. It should be ready for &lt;TIME&gt;
Babe, have you got enough money to pick up bread and milk ? And I'll give you it back when you get home ?
Hello my little party animal! I just thought I'd buzz you as you were with your friends ...*grins*... Reminding you were loved and send a naughty adoring kiss
Geeee ... I miss you already, you know ? Your all I can think about. Fuck, I can't wait till next year when we will be together ... *loving kiss*
Ok babe, i'll see you at &lt;TIME&gt; i love ya
Ignoring me ?
Ignoring me, eh ?
Honey ? Sweetheart ? Darling ? Sexy buns ? Loverboy ? Snuggle bunny ? Sugar plum ? Nom nom nom ... Yummy ... Delicious ... *grins*
I'm home, my love ... If your still awake ... *loving kiss*
LOL ... No just was busy
Merry Christmas to you too babe, i love ya *kisses*
LOL .. *grins* .. I'm not babe, but thanks for thinking of me!
Geeeee ... I love you so much I can barely stand it
Did you catch the bus ? Are you frying an egg ? Did you make a tea? Are you eating your mom's left over dinner ? Do you feel my Love ?
Are your freezing ? Are you home yet ? Will you remember to kiss your mom in the morning? Do you love me ? Do you think of me ? Are you missing me yet ?
Mmmm ... Fuck ... Not fair ! You know my weaknesses ! *grins* *pushes you to your knee's* *exposes my belly and pulls your head to it* Don't forget ... I know yours too *wicked smile*
Of course ! Don't tease me ... You know I simply must see ! *grins* ... Do keep me posted my prey ... *loving smile* *devouring kiss*
Babe! I fucking love you too !! You know? Fuck it was so good to hear your voice. I so need that. I crave it. I can't get enough. I adore you, Ahmad *kisses*
Oh! Shit, I thought that was your trip! Loooooool ... That just makes SO much more sense now ... *grins* and the sofa reference was ... The "sleep on a couch" link you sent me ... Wasn't that how you went on your trip ? Oh ... And didn't your babe go with you for that celebration with your rents?
How's my loverboy doing ? What does he do that keeps him from coming to his Queen, hmmm ? Doesn't he ache to speak to me ? Miss me desparately ?
Who were those people ? Were you in a tour ? I thought you were doing that sofa thing you sent me ? Your curious sugar
Good afternoon, my love! How goes that day ? I hope maybe you got some leads on a job. I think of you, boytoy and send you a passionate kiss from across the sea
Hey sweet, I was wondering when you had a moment if you might come to me ? I want to send a file to someone but it won't go over yahoo for them because their connection sucks, remember when you set up that page for me to go to and download the format disc ? Could you tell me how to do that ? Or do you know some other way to download big files ? Because they can download stuff directly from the internet. Any help would be great, my prey ... *teasing kiss*
Fuck babe ... What happened to you ? How come you never came back?
Hey sexy buns ! Have I told you ? I adore you, loverboy. I hope you remember to thank your sister in law for those meatballs *grins* ... i love you, babe
I wonder how you got online, my love ? Had you gone to the net cafe ? Did you get your phone recharged ? Were you on a friends net ? I think of you, boytoy
Mmmmm ... It was sooooo good to wake to your words this morning, my Love!! Mmmm fuck ... I love you too, my Lion ... *devouring kiss from across the sea*
Good morning, my Love ... I go to sleep now and wish you a great day full of feeling better and opportunity ... You are my last thought babe, I LOVE YOU *kiss*
Imagine you finally get to sink into that bath after I have put you through your paces, maybe even having you eat me for a while before I left ... But also imagine the feel of that cage on your cock surrounded by the bath water, reminding you always who owns you ... Enjoy, my cuck
Sounds like there could be a lot of time spent in that chastity device boy ... *grins* ... Or take your beatings like a good dog. Going to lounge in a nice long bath now ?
Hmmm ... And imagine after you've come home from that having to rub my feet, make me dinner and help me get ready for my date ! Are you sure your ready for that kind of life ?
Mmm so yummy babe ... Nice jolt to the suzy
MMM ... Fuck .... Merry Christmas to me
I love you !!! You know? Can you feel it? Does it make your belly warm? I wish it does, my love ... I shall meet you in your dreams, Ahmad ... *adoring kiss*
Good afternoon loverboy ! How goes you day ? Any luck come your way? I think of you, sweetie and send my love across the sea to make you smile and happy
Just haven't decided where yet eh ?
Going to take your babe out ?
No plans yet. What are you doing ?
Good afternoon sexy buns! How goes the job search ? I wake and you are my first thought as always, my love. I wish your fine and happy and know I adore you!
Hello, my love ! How went your day ? Are you alright ? I think of you, my sweet and send a jolt to your heart to remind you ... I LOVE YOU! Can you hear it ? I screamed it across the sea for all the world to hear. Ahmad al Hallaq is loved ! and owned ! *possessive passionate kiss*
Hmmm ... I thought we said 2 hours slave, not 3 ... You are late ... How should I punish you ?
Hey ! Don't forget ... You are MINE ... For ME ... My possession ... MY property ... MMM ... *childish smile* ...
Fuck babe ... I miss you already, you know ? Can't you let me send you some money towards your net ? I need you ... I want you ... I crave you ...
I wonder if your phone battery went dead ? I had to tell you, I love you babe
You have come into my life and brought the sun ..Shiny down on me, warming my heart. Putting a constant smile on my face ... Making me feel loved and cared for
I wish that I was with you. Holding you tightly. Making you see how important you are. How much you mean to me ... How much I need you ... In my life ...
A
Y
No
Hi jen
O, i.'m not disturbed but frestratf
Okay let's say bye
So finally u don't f'give me
Han re
To naraj kahe hoti hoti hai, jeb mughe tu to janti hai
Why don't u understand my life codition
AB choti behen ko manana padega kya, mai tripti ke karan upset tha
Maderchnd kahan hai bhosdi ke kabhi yad ker liya kero
Havd u got angry now
Bhul gaye ho sale
Kahan laude
A
Test kaisa gaya
Kahan
So gaya
Cigg. Ke sath aa
Ganit banathew, te kahan? Test dilaye.
Kahan hai
Hi
Abe chappal dek laude
Aa na laude
Are aunti , uncle seb khole he , tai jaldi aa to.
Moro b, pani giret me keti jabe beta.
P beta tore maja ja, mai h khekhuwat haun.
Lauda dherke thodi baithe hes re ,mausem baiman he.
Kahan hai? Raipur aa gayi?
Sale padai tor beba kerhi kel test he ka.
Kay kerethes
Kahan hai?
Gad mera.
Maderchod mai to bana raha hun , aa to sahi.
Lund kat ke du laude.
Khana milega mader..
Cig lete ana
Khana paka raha
Kahan hai mad.., r枚om to aa
&lt;#&gt; / &lt;#&gt;
Home
How do u do?
Ab tu kya ker rah矛?
Watching movie- 'kudret'
Hellow, how what u?
Ok
Kya bataun, tu wahin hai
Han re bes 4 kam to hai - khana , sona , nahana aur tv dekhna. Life is much enjoyfull at home.
Are yahan do time naha raha hun
Nai abhi nahana hai, phir khaunga.
