---
source: "NUS SMS Corpus"
lang: "en"
contributor: "Tao Chen"
year: "2010"
country: "India"
messages: "72"
license: "Research use; cite Chen & Kan (2013)"
---

But i don't think the bgvs look horrible. Look how much space they have to work with.
Just no excitement in these voices.
Smh.
Ok, when you get home ima play the real version of this song. She kinda sux.
So glad i'm not there. he is just annoying. Usher?? Really?
The bread? It's GOOD!!
Is it alright if i pay you back for the movie ticket with my free ticket i had forgotten to bring? Or do you need the cash?
I'm not coming home then! I'm tired of crying!
Nuh-uh. Before bed on tuesday.
I'll cry.
I'm gonna be home soon and i don't want to talk about this stuff anymore tonight, k? I've cried enough today.
Of course. I guess god's just got me on hold right now.
You've already got a flaky parent. It'snot supposed to be the child's job to support the parent...not until they're The Ride age anyway. I'm supposed to be there to support you. And now i've hurt you. unintentional. But hurt nonetheless.
Which is why i never wanted to tell you any of this. Which is why i'm so short with you and on-edge as of late.
Most of the tiime when i don't let you hug me it's so i don't break into tears.
No. It's not pride. I'm almost &lt;#&gt; years old and shouldn't be takin money from my kid. You're not supposed to have to deal with this stuff. This is grownup stuff--why i don't tell you.
It's sooooo not.
Are you busy tonight?
says the &lt;#&gt; year old with a man and money. I'm down to my last &lt;#&gt; . Still waiting for that check.
It's not that you make me cry. It's just that when all our stuff happens on top of everything else, it pushes me over the edge. You don't underdtand how often i cry over my sorry, sorry life.
No i'm not. I can't give you everything you want and need. You actually could do better for yourself on yor own--you've got more money than i do. I can't get work, i can't get a man, i can't pay the rent, i can't even fill my fucking gas tank. yes, i'm stressed and depressed. I didn't even call home for thanksgiving cuz i'll have to tell them i,m up to nothing.
Idk. I'm sitting here in a stop and shop parking lot right now bawling my eyes out because i feel like i'm a failure in everything. Nobody wants me and now i feel like i'm failing you.
I don't want you to leave. But i'm barely doing what i can to stay sane. fighting with you constantly isn't helping.
Idk. You keep saying that you're not, but since he moved, we keep butting heads over freedom vs. responsibility. And i'm tired. I have so much other shit to deal with that i'm barely keeping myself together once this gets added to it.
You are right though. I can't give you the space you want and need. This is really starting to become an issue. I was going to suggest setting a definite move out--if i'm still there-- after greece. But maybe you are ready and should do it now.
I am sorry it hurt you.
You are always putting your business out there. You put pictures of your ass on facebook. You are one of the most open people i've ever met. Why would i think a picture of your room would hurt you, make you feel violated.
The last thing i ever wanted to do was hurt you. And i didn't think it would have. You'd laugh, be embarassed, delete the tag and keep going. But as far as i knew, it wasn't even up. The fact that you even felt like i would do it to hurt you shows you really don't know me at all. It was messy wednesday, but it wasn't bad. The problem i have with it is you HAVE the time to clean it, but you choose not to. You skype, you take pictures, you sleep, you want to go out. I don't mind a few things here and there, but when you don't make the bed, when you throw laundry on top of it, when i can't have a friend in the house because i'm embarassed that there's underwear and bras strewn on the bed, pillows on the floor, that's something else. You used to be good about at least making the bed.
Please don't text me anymore. I have nothing else to say.
I'm done. I'm sorry. I hope your next space gives you everything you want. Remember all the furniture is yours. If i'm not around when you move it, just lock all the locks and leave the key with jenne.
I tagged MY friends that you seemed to count as YOUR friends.
Wow. I never realized that you were so embarassed by your accomodations. I thought you liked it, since i was doing the best i could and you always seemed so happy about "the cave". I'm sorry I didn't and don't have more to give. I'm sorry i offered. I'm sorry your room was so embarassing.
I NEVERsaid dirty. That is YOUR word, not mine.
You said to me before i went back to bed that you can't sleep for anything.
no, i *didn't* mean to post it. I wrote it, and like so many other times i've ritten stuff to you, i let it sit there. it WAS what i was feeling at the time. I was angry. Before i left, i hit send, then stop. It wasn't there. I checked on my phone when i got to my car. It wasn't there. You said you didn't sleep, you were bored. So why wouldn't THAT be the time to clean, fold laundry, etc.? At least make the bed?
I can't keep going through this. It was never my intention to run you out, but if you choose to do that rather than keep the room clean so *I* don't have to say no to visitors, then maybe that's the best choice. Yes, I wanted you to be embarassed, so maybe you'd feel for once how I feel when i have a friend who wants to drop buy and i have to say no, as happened this morning. I've tried everything. I don't know what else to do.
Yes. that will be fine. Love you. Be safe.
&lt;#&gt;
it's still not working. And this time i also tried adding zeros. That was the savings. The checking is &lt;#&gt;
&lt;#&gt; Didn't work. And i tried it without the zeros.
what is your account number?
No prob
Ya sure?
&lt;#&gt; and &lt;#&gt; @ braintree
!!! "Nana wants me to stay in the city, so I guess I'll just see u in the morning. Me n jaleah will be at home at like 9."
Home and in bed!
Didn't get.
No. Did you multimedia message them or e-mail?
Send me a pic!
Is that what time you want me to come?
Alright. I'm out--have a good night!
And Chuck.
I absolutely LOVE South Park! I only recently started watching the office.
What do you watch?
i thought we were doing a king of the hill thing there.
Yup.
;-D
I guess you could be as good an excuse as any, lol.
I'm always looking for an excuse to be in the city.
That means from february to april i'll be getting a place to stay down there so i don't have to hustle back and forth during audition season as i have since my sister moved away from harlem.
chile, please! It's only a &lt;DECIMAL&gt; hour drive for me. I come down all the time and will be subletting feb-april for audition season.
Especially since i talk about boston all up in my personal statement, lol! I woulda changed that if i had realized it said nyc! It says boston now.
wow. You're right! I didn't mean to do that. I guess once i gave up on boston men and changed my search location to nyc, something changed. Cuz on my signin page it still says boston.
No sir. That's why i had an 8-hr trip on the bus last week. Have another audition next wednesday but i think i might drive this time.
Yes. I come to nyc for audiitions and am trying to relocate.
I'm used to it. I just hope my agents don't drop me since i've only booked a few things this year. This whole me in boston, them in nyc was an experiment.
Sorry. You never hear unless you book it. One was kinda a joke--thet were really looking for skinny white girls. The other was one line--you can only do so much on camera with that. Something like that they're casting on the look.
Unlimited texts. Limited minutes.
It would have to be after 9. I don't have minutes.
That's great.
I'm fine. And u?
What's your new addy?
