---
source: "NUS SMS Corpus"
lang: "en"
contributor: "Tao Chen"
year: "2010"
country: "India"
messages: "125"
license: "Research use; cite Chen & Kan (2013)"
---

In the process of visit.wl talk later
Chillonnumilla....macha ente thunder bolt ilaki
Reachd sannidhanam..nw lying down by the side waiting for morning
Crowd undu huge crowd....but not like season crowd...
Yes. nw roamimg around with 2 of them
Swami saranam.rchd sannidanam.now with a trvandrum gang..so net surfing?
Mid way thru malakayattam.really out but walked without stopping till half way...areee thooopppikkana....?so i sat now.
Mid way thru malakayattam.really out but walked without stopping till half way...areee thooopppikkana....?so i sat now.
Mid way thru malakayattam.really out but walked without stopping till half way...areee thooopppikkana....?so i sat now.
Pls change the cfl lamp.it broke when i tried to twist it.be careful with ur hand when u tch it.
Unni's pant is ready at sajid's place.pls collect.
Sms'ing you as words cant express certain things when spoken.yOu are a blessed person and i felt lot of divinity from the time i reached kanjirapally till now people came from somewhere to help the kettu nara process.God bless You Vilas.i pray from my heart.swami saranam.
Ok dear.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Swami sharanam.kettu murukki so now started.
Macha if bus is kanjirapally,can i get in the bus?i saw one bus to knjrapally from kaloor..
Macha just could you let me know if thwre are any temples near kanjirapally where people do the kettunirakkal for shabarimala.pls call me we will talk
I want brkfast copy paste copy paste number of times.
&lt;#&gt; min me and varma.i want brkfast no way i want brkfast
jeevan pooyalum njan varuulla.sathyam asathyam...asathyam
Yes
South kadavnthra rchd.varma me.car drving hme.if no vehicle,i can come ur home or u can cme somewhere and i am the picking u.
Ok
Keeriyooodee
Phone adukku monee dinesha oru just turn back.
Da iringunnno to complex or sitting within the family complex.
Ok vedda makali davali
Smoke is ok but no sensual pleasures and food only after bath,may be pray for some seconds after bath inside.
What r u doing?can u atleast try having only vegetarian.we need to visit shabarimala before thursday.there is a reason to it.coincidence.we will go by bus and come back as well in one day.
Pranaam mere aaakkka....prathyaksh ruup se spasht karna chahtha huu ki aap ki vinamru door vaani ki prathikriya hum vyasan sameet vicheet kiya.anya duur vaani ki aagaman se eh ullanghan hua hei.kripya punar samparkh karne ki cheshta karuunga.
Ok now same side pvt bus to kaloor
Ok happy kalyanam
Hey madam,My name is KS.guess what K&amp;S stands for..clue.i was your boss and i take care of my subordinates...uuii maaa....now i dont have any one below...i mean subordinates....so who am i?
Alhul
Vedda makali vedala makali..davali.
Ok dear
great! u r starting on sunday right?
i shall rcg in half n hour takin ur vehicle
Divya,I am not near so cant come.pls manage.call me once u fix it.
Babu sir,are you there?unable to get connected over mobile.it says its a wrong number
Insha allah it will open...it must open
Seems u r slightly dejected.the logic is we only need one job and there are &lt;#&gt; 's of them.sherikkum kashtappedenti varum but insha allah allam shari aakum
Official tour.he spend a late evng party with dileep the guy he refered and now in qatar with oman insu.so he says lot of construction happening and so on.
Yes sir.althani group is a strong group.we need to spot more of such as only a strong sponsor can get us a visa.kesav was online he was in qatar last day.
Ok done.so now lets plan qatar dear.come back soon
Tom,r u there?no response when trying ur mob
MH/ &lt;#&gt; / &lt;#&gt;
Oh great.
Macha did u put the money?u know i have less people to ask
Macha i am a changed person as a husband.full stop to cribbing and trying to be a good person to wife.will talk that later.now at kaloor as she dint get a direct bus to mamanglam..hope u r happy wth my bhaviour
Dear pls call if free
Will makw wndrful cofee for u....once u come home....say cheers and b happy
Parvati is actually creating problem for mr shiva as he lost his job due to recession and she wants all luxories which he is not able toprovide due to unemployment at senior level.No hiring only firing
I am so happy for us
Macha its started raining and it looks awesome outside.nee undayirunnenkil nalla rasamayaeene
I am the office.await your faster arrival.lets plan
Haloooo...ningal purappetttoo?
Hw r u mate?
Peter.edward@tata-aig.com.
Hi...chakkare bharya.sambar is like truth.truth kadvi hoothi hei aur aaj se saambaar bhi kadvi hoothi hei
Da pls put money today.account number; &lt;#&gt; ,Rakhesh KR
Minnallaye ullu....
Ippo edutha shaapam kittum.njan shaapam kittatha ppo vilikkaamm..hehhehe
Ivide ippo kaznjee ullu
Ddrrrrr......kadoravali
Samoosa is good when u r ina mood to fart from the pressure of potatoes and its a wonderful expereince when you fart while u sit back after eating.sitting is again to be proper with little space for the fart to release...prrrrrrrrr......
Jadaka phalam anubhavichariyam.cheerilla ennu paranju.ennalum onnu kuudi evideelum nookkikku at your place.
when will you come home?i want to see you.i want to talk i want to spend time with you....send this sms to all married and ask them to send this to their spouses for a happy married life....hehehe...take care
Good...
Potato curry is good.good day.
Take care
Happy journey
Oh...are u a girl?i thot u r a woman.
Goodnite dear.nothing to talk after we talked just now.so take care and sleep well.
BEGIN:VCARD VERSION: &lt;DECIMAL&gt; N;ENCODING=QUOTED-PRINTABLE:;Rakhesh_kr= &lt;#&gt; yahoo.com TEL;CELL: &lt;#&gt; X-CLASS:private END:VCARD
Take food as u nd enrgy in evening to take tooth.
Ethiyooo....sir...Kerala awaits the arrival of The Great delegate of World Human Resources Development.Pls welcome Mr.Rajeev Nair.Sir a Warm Welcome to You to the State of Gutters and holes.
Kerala awaits the arrival of The Great delegate of World Human Resources Development.Pls welcome Mr.Rajeev Nair.Sir a Warm Welcome to You to the State of Gutters and holes.
Rchd hm
thamasha aano?catch u latwr..
Credit
S.. I knw tat .. She realise her mistak.. Bcoz of tat i dnt wat 2 mis hr luv.. So plz aviod me..
I hear tat u dnt luv me.. I dnt knw it true or nt.. Anyway, ma old luvr ystrday cal me. She stil luv me ennu.. Wat shuld i do ?? Plz eniku pranthu pidikunu..
Tats gud..
Hws ur clses ?
V go by our gang?
Wat ? I dnt mean tat !!! I mean tat ur a mre than a gud frnd 2 me.. If i luv u i wil strightly 2 u.. I hav tat guts....
S.. Nw i wil go by ur way can gt outsid ur hme..
Exm vry tough 2day.. Im also sad.. U dnt gt upset evry thing should b fine..
Dnt worry .. Jst try 2 score gud mark @ public exm..k
K.. If u hurt im sorry.. I jst ask.. Vinee im really sorry
Y.. U dnt luv him.. I think he's mre gud than me 2 u ......!!
If u got me in this life.. Wat shold rayzen do..?
I gt it frm ur schul's &lt;#&gt; th anniversary magazine.. Njan chummathe nokiyapole kandu. Amal, arun okke undayirunu.. If u dnt lik it i wil cut it in2 pces.... K..
K.. I wil surely cum..
Say him tat u luv him / her.. Tats a gud way..
Nice lines 4 life: "Dont miss a chance to express your affection. Becoz hearts are broken when words are unspoken.".. Gud 9t
If al Indians start studying, al get gud marks. bt jobs r limited more unemployment, more youth suicides, more crime. SAVE INDIA stop studying??? Gush 9t.
A raindrop may look too small,but somewhere a thirsty flower awaits its fall. An sms seems too small,but a sending heart always remembers U a lot. Gud afternun
This is a great,great,great nice sms: My lovr &amp; my Bst Frnd r in sinking boat... Bt i can save only one's lif. . Do U knw whm i save? I save my LVR &amp; I wil die wit my FRIEND...
Why do you ask princess?
Great! Daddy can't wait to get better and meet you!
Tuesday. I
D
I
Thank you@?
i am going to bed now prin
ok baby!
Sorry, I'll call later
I need you...
Yes princess! I want to make you happy...
What makes you most happy?
I can do that! I want to please you both inside and outside the bedroom...
Hope you are not scared!
Are you up for the challenge? I know i am :)
Great! I hope you like your man well endowed. I am &lt;#&gt; inches...
have you ever had one foot before?
There is a first time for everything :)
Yes princess! I want to please you every night. Your wish is my command...
Are you being good, baby? :)
I am real, baby! I want to bring out your inner tigress...
