---
title: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1 (Castes in India; Annihilation of Caste)
who: B. R. Ambedkar — the voice of the caste-oppressed
language: English
collection: 20-first-person-voices/written-oral-histories
source: archive.org PARI.dr-babasaheb-ambedkar-writings-and-speeches-vol-1
source_url: https://archive.org/details/PARI.dr-babasaheb-ambedkar-writings-and-speeches-vol-1
license: public domain in India (author d. 1956; copyright term expired)
genre: written testimony — the caste-oppressed speaking
perspective: the caste-oppressed (dalit)
---

Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 


An ideal society should be mobile. should be full of channels 
for conveying a change taking place in one part to other parts. 
Im an ideal society there should be many interests consciously 
communicated and shared. There should be varied and free 
points of contact with other modes of association. In other 
words there should be social endosmosis. This is fraternity, 
which is only another name for democracy. Democracy is 
not merely a form of Government. It is primarily a mode of 
associated living, of conjoint communicated experience. It 
is essentially an attitude of respect and reverence towards 
fellowmen. 


- Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 


in ‘Annihilation of Caste’ 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
VOL. 1 


Compiled 
by 
Vasant Moon 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 
Vol. 1 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt. of Maharashtra : 14 April, 1979 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 


Secretary 
Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : Rs. 3000/- 


Publisher: 
Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 
15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 


M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


- Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumari Selja MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 


The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 


In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 


The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 


Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when these 
were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on the 
base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 


There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 


I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. ' 


(Kumari Selja) 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 
Editorial Board 


Kumari Selja 


Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 
and 
Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 


Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 


Shri P. Balram Naik 


Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 


Shri Sudhir Bhargav 


Secretary 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 


Joint Secretary 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 
and 
Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 


Director 
Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 
Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 
Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 
Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material 
Publication Committee, Maharashtra State 


EDITORIAL BOARD 


. SHRI KAMALKISHOR KADAM 


Minister For Education 


. SHRI JAVED KHAN 


Education Minister For State 


. SHRI R. Š. GAVAI 

. SHRI DADASAHEB RUPAVATE 
. Sari B. C. KAMBLE 

. Dr. P. T. BoRALE 

. SHRI GHANSHYAM TALVATKAR 
. SHRI SHANKARRAO KHARAT 

. SHRIMATI SHANTABAI DANI 

. SHRI WAMAN NIMBALKAR 

. SHRI PRAKASH AMBEDKAR 

. SHRI R. R. BHOLE 

. SHRI Š. S. REGE 

. DR. BHALCHANDRA PHADKE 
. SHRI Daya PAWAR 

. SHRI LAXMAN MANE 

. Pror. N. D. PATIL 

. Pror. MORESHWAR VANMALI 
. PROF. JANARDAN WAGHMARE 
. BARRISTER P. G. PATIL 

. Dr. M. P. MANGUDKAR 

. Pror. G. P. PRADHAN 

. SHRI B. M. AMBHAIKAR 

. Sari N. M. KAMBLE 

. Pror. J. C. CHANDURKAR 

. Secretary, Education Department 
. Director of Education 

. Sari V. W. Moon, O.S.D. 


President 


Vice-President 


Vice-President 
Executive President 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member-Secretary 
Member 


FOREWORD 


Maharashtra is a land of saints and sages, philosophers and political 
savants, social thinkers, social reformers and leaders of national 
eminence, Who have not only moulded and enriched all facets of 
life of Maharashtra but have also made singular contribution to the 
growth and development of India. 


Maharashtra, an ancient land in the Deccan, has witnessed the 
flowering, growth and spread of the Buddhist thought and culture 
and Sanskrit Scholarship. We have saints like Namdeo, Eknath, 
Chokhamela, Sawata Maharaj, Gora, Dnyaneshwar, Sena and others. 
We also see the rise of Indian Nationalism in the form of Shivaji 
the Great. In Mahatma Phuley, a contemporary of Karl Marx, we 
have the “patria protestas of the Indian social revolution and the 
first leader of the peasants. Lokmanya Tilak has been accredited as 
the Father of Indian unrest, Ranade as the Father of Indian socio- 
economic thought, Gokhale as the thinker whom no less a person 
than Mahatma Gandhi acclaimed as his political Guru and Savarkar 
as an ardent revolutionary. In Shahu Chhatrapati, we had a unique 
king who was a relentless fighter for social equality. Maharshi Shinde 
was a great social reformer who combined revolutionary fervour with 
a liberal attitude. Thus, there has been a galaxy of great men in 
different fields im Maharashtra. It may not be too much to say that 
there was a time in pre-independent India when Maharashtra had 
virtually become the centre of all activities, whether social, economic 
or political. The period from Phuley to Ambedkar can, therefore, be 
aptly described as the dawn of social revolution in the history not 
only of Maharashtra but of the country as a whole. 


VIII FOREWORD 


In Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, we have not only a crusader against 
the caste system, a valiant fighter for the cause of the downtrodden 
in India but also an elder statesman and national leader whose 
contribution in the form of the Constitution of India will be cherished 
forever by posterity. In fact his fight for human rights and as an 
emancipator of all those enslaved in the world gave him international 
recognition as a liberator of humanity from injustice, social and 
economic. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru paid a glowing tribute to 
Dr. Ambedkar while moving a condolence resolution in the Parliament 
as follows: 


“Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar was a symbol of revolt against all oppressive features 
of the Hindu Society.” 


There is, therefore, a vital need to preserve the thoughts of this great 
son of India as expressed by him in his writings and speeches. While 
some efforts are being made in that direction by some institutions 
and research scholars, there is an urgent need to bring together all 
the material available and publish it in a series of volumes. 


The Government of Maharashtra has, under its various schemes, 
so far published the works of Mahatma Phuley, Mahatma Gandhi 
and saints such as Tukaram, Dnyaneshwar, Namdeo, Eknath and 
others. The Government had set up an Advisory Committee in 1976, 
with the Education Minister as the Chairman and comprising political 
followers of Dr. Ambedkar, scholars and noted writers, to compile the 
thoughts and writings of Dr. Ambedkar and have them published. 
The Committee set up the following Editorial Board : 


(1) Prof. M. B. Chitnis, Chairman 
(2) Prof. Anant Kanekar 

(3) Dr. P. T. Borale 

(4) Dr. Vinayakrao E. Moray 

(5) Shri S. P. Bhagwat 


(6) Shri G. M. Bomblay, Director, Stale Institute of Education, 
Pune 


(7) Shri Vasant Moon, Officer on Special Duty 


The Government of Maharashtra desires to bring a series of 
volumes comprising all the available writings and speeches of 


FOREWORD IX 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. The present publication is the result of 
sustained work done by the Advisory Committee and particularly 
by the Editorial Board. I thank all the members of the Editorial 
Board, Mrs. Savita w/o Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, Mrs. Meerabai 
Yeshwant Ambedkar and Shri Prakash Ambedkar, for their willing 
co-operation. I am particularly glad that this long awaited commitment 
is being fulfilled. I sincerely hope that people in general and the 
youth in particular, in Maharashtra and all over the country, will 
derive inspiration and guidance from the thoughts of Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar and come forward to contribute their mite for the social 


gh 


(SHARAD PAWAR) 
Chief Minister 
Maharashtra State 


reconstruction of the country. 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


It is almost ten years since the first edition of the first volume of the 
Writings and Speeches of Dr. B.R. alias Babasaheb Ambedkar was published. 
During these ten years the Government could publish six volumes of Writings 
and Speeches of Dr. Ambedkar who has emerged from these pages as a 
constructive social reformer and legal philosopher who in the originality 
of his analysis and profundity of his convictions and conceptions compels 
comparison with the best minds of the East and the West and who still 
shapes our thinking. It is not difficult to discern the reasons for the Second 
Edition against this background. We have availed of this opportunity to 
correct obvious printing errors in the Second Edition of the first volume 
which contains Dr. Ambedkar's contributions such as Castes in India; 
Annihilation of Caste; Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province; Need for checks 
and balances; Thoughts on Linguistic States; Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah; 
Evidence before the Southborough Committee; Federation Vs. Freedom; 
Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve it; States and Minorities; Small 
Holdings in India; and Mr. Russell and the Reconstruction of Society. In all 
these apparently diverse topics, it is not difficult to discern the silver strands 
of fundamental reflections on the value of equality as the comer stone of 
the constitutional polity in democracy. It is interesting to refer to what Dr. 
Ambedkar writes apropos of Mr. Russell and the reconstruction of society 
which is a review of Bertrand Russell’s ‘Principles of Social Reconstruction.’ 
Writes Dr. Ambedkar: 


“Of the many reasons urged in support of the Indian view of life one is that 
it is chiefly owing to its influence that India alone of all the oldest countries 
has survived to this day. This is a statement often heard and even from persons 
whose opinions cannot be too easily set aside. With the proof or disproof, 
however, of this statement, I do not wish to concern myself. Granting the fact 
of survival I mean to make a statement yet more important. It is this: there 
are many modes of survival and not all are equally commendable. For instance, 
mobility to beat timely retreat may allow weaker varieties of people to survive. 
So the capacity to grovel or lie low may equally as the power of rising to the 
occasion be the condition of the survival of a people.” 


Dr. Ambedkar drawing copiously on his vast erudition, eloquently citing 
Burke, depicts the ideal society in Annihilation of Caste. He says: “If you ask 
me, my ideal would be a society based on liberty, equality and fraternity.... 
an ideal society should be mobile, should be full of channels for conveying a 
change taking place in one part to other parts.” Dr. Ambedkar incorporated 
these values of liberty, equality and fraternity in the Constitution of free 
India. It is a living tribute to his juristic genius and social conscience that 
over the years, the High Courts and the Supreme Court have shaped the 
law to serve the social ends of Governmental efforts to improve the lot of 
the poor. 


XII 


Dr. Ambedkar was a supreme social architect who looked upon law as 
the instrument of creating a sane social order in which the development of 
individual would be in harmony with the growth of society. His approach finds 
a responsive chord in the writings of Roscoe Pound- an eminent American 
jurist of our century. Writes Roscoe Pound: 


“Law im the sense of the legal order has for its subject matter relations of 
individual human beings with each other and the conduct of individual so far 
as they affect other or affect the social or economic order. Law in the sense 
of the body of authoritative grounds of or guides to judicial decisions and 
administrative action has for its subject matter, the expectations of claims or 
wants held or asserted by individual human beings or groups of human beings 
which affect their relations or determine their conduct.” 


Law embodies the civilisational values of the time and place. Civilisation 
in this sense is the development of human faculties to their most complete 
possibilities. Civilisation has two sides viz. control over external or physical 
nature and control over Internal or human nature. The Writings and Speeches 
of Dr. Ambedkar show what values Indians should develop and how they 
should modernise their social and political institutions. They provide the rich 
source of the civilising influences in our society. The range of his topics, the 
width of his vision, the depth of his analysis, the rationality of his outlook and 
the essential humanity of his suggestions for action evoke ready responses. 
Such was Dr. Ambedkar-a man whose talents, acquirements and virtues 
were so extraordinary that the more his character is considered, the more 
he will be regarded by the present age and by posterity with admiration 
and reverence, to paraphrase the words of James Bosewell who spoke about 
his mentor Dr. Johnson in his inimitable classical biography. We shall feel 
rewarded in our efforts if we are compelled to bring out the third edition of 
the Writings and Speeches in the centenary year of his birth, as that would 
be the best way to cherish his memory and honour his precepts in practice. 


(Kamalkishor Kadam) 


Education Minister 
Maharashtra State 


INTRODUCTION 


Dr. Ambedkar's thoughts as reflected in his writings and speeches 
have significant importance in tracing the history and growth of 
social thought in India. In the course of time so many of his 
publications are not even available in the market. In some cases the 
authentic editions are getting out of print. Besides, as time passes, 
many of his observations in matters social, economic and political 
are coming true. Social tensions and caste conflicts are continuously 
on the increase. Dr. Ambedkar's thoughts have therefore, assumed 
more relevance today. If his solutions and remedies on various socio- 
economic problems are understood and followed, it may help us to 
steer through the present turmoil and guide us for the future. It was 
therefore very apt on the part of the Government of Maharashtra to 
have appointed an Advisory Committee to compile all the material 
available on Dr. Ambedkar for publishing the same in a suitable 
form. All efforts are therefore being made to collect what the learned 
Doctor wrote and spoke. 


In the present volume, besides Castes in India. Annihilation of 
Caste, his address on Justice Ranade. Federation versus Freedom 
and other publications, some of his articles not easily available such 
as Small Holdings in India, Review on Russell’s book etc. ; have also 
been included. 


The salient features of the contents of this volume are presented 
below : 


Castes in India 


Dr. Ambedkar read this paper, before the Anthropology Seminar 
of Dr. Goldenweizer during his stay at the Columbia University 


XIV INTRODUCTION 


for the Doctoral studies. Naturally he deals with the subject of Caste 
system from the Anthropological point of view. He observes that the 
population of India is mixture of Aryans, Dravidians, Mongolians and 
Scythians. Ethrically all people are heterogeneous. According to him, 
it is the unity of culture that binds the people of Indian Peninsula 
from one end to the other. After evaluating the theories of various 
authorities on Caste, Dr. Ambedkar observes that the superimposition 
of endogamy over exogamy is the main cause of formation of caste 
groups. Regarding endogamy, he states that the customs of ‘Sati’, 
enforced widow-hood for life and child-marriage are the outcome of 
endogamy. To Dr. Ambedkar, sub-division of a society is a natural 
phenomenon and these groups become castes through ex-communication 
and imitation. 


Annihilation of Caste 


This famous address invited attention of no less a person than 
Mahatma Gandhi. Dr. Ambedkar observes that the reformers among 
the high-caste Hindus were enlightened intellectuals who confined 
their activities to abolish the enforced widow-hood, child-marriage, 
etc., but they did not feel the necessity for agitating for the abolition 
of castes nor did they have courage to agitate against it. According 
to him, the political revolutions in India were preceded by the social 
and religious reforms led by saints. But during the British rule, 
issue of political independence got precedence over the social reform 
and therefore social reform continued to remain neglected. Pointing 
to the. Socialists, he remarked that the Socialists will have to fight 
against the monster of caste either before or after the revolution. He 
asserts that caste is not based on division of labour. It is a division 
of labourers. As an economic organisation also, caste is a harmful 
institution. He calls upon the Hindus to annihilate the caste which is 
a great hindrance to social solidarity and to set up a new social order 
based on the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity in consonance 
with the principles of Democracy. He advocates inter-caste marriage 
as one of the solutions to the problem. But he stresses that the belief 
in the ‘Shastras’ is the root cause of maintaining castes. He therefore 
suggests, “Make every man and woman free from the thraldom of the 


INTRODUCTION XV 


‘Shastras’, cleanse their minds of the pernicious notions founded on 
the ‘Shastras’ and he or she will interdine and intermarry”. According 
to him, the society must be bused on reason and not on atrocious 
traditions of caste system. 


Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province 


Part II includes Dr. Ambedkar’s major writings on linguistic States. 
Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province is his first statement on the 
creation of linguistic provinces. It is a memorandum submitted in 
1948 to the Linguistic Provinces Commission. While acknowledging 
the danger to the Unity of India inherent in the creation of linguistic 
provinces with their pride in race, language and literature developing 
into mentalities of being separate nations, Dr. Ambedkar sees certain 
definite political advantages in the reconstitution of provinces on 
linguistic basis. With the proviso that the official language of the State 
shall be the official language of the Central Government, Dr. Ambedkar 
maintains that a linguistic province with a homogeneous population 
is more suitable for the working of democracy than a heterogeneous 
population can ever be. Since six provinces in India exist as linguistic 
provinces the question of the reconstitution of Bombay, Madras and 
Central Provinces as unilingual provinces cannot be postponed in view 
of the new democratic constitution of free India. 


Dr. Ambedkar next pleads for the creation of an unilingual 
Maharashtra as a province with a single legislature and single executive 
by merging with it all the contiguous Marathi-speaking districts of the 
Central Province and Berar with the City of Bombay as its capital. 
Dr. Ambedkar refutes on historical, geographical, demographical, 
commercial, economic and other grounds with solid documentary 
proof, the arguments which are advanced in support of the separation 
of the city of Bombay from Maharashtra and its constitution into a 
separate province. Spurning the proposal of settling the problem of 
Bombay by arbitration he asserts that Maharashtra and Bombay are 
not merely inter-dependent but that they are really one and integral. 


Need for Checks and Balances 


In this article published in the “Times of India’ after tracing the 
history and growth of the concept of linguistic States Dr. Ambedkar 


XVI INTRODUCTION 


examines their viability and communal set-up. The State of Andhra, 
according to him will not be viable if the other Telugu-speaking area 
from the State of Hyderabad remains excluded from it. The caste set 
up, he observes, within the linguistic areas like PEPSU, Andhra and 
Maharashtra will be of one or two major castes large in number and 
a few minor castes living in subordinate dependence on the major 
castes. He questions the propriety of consolidating in one huge State 
all people who speak the same language. Consolidation which creates 
separate consciousness may lead to animosity between State and 
State. Accepting however the fact that there is a case for linguistic 
provinces he advocates that there should be checks and balances to 
ensure that caste majority does not abuse its power under the garb 
of linguistic State. 


Thoughts on Linguistic States 


‘Thoughts on Linguistic States’ is Dr. Ambedkar’s final statement on 
the formation of linguistic States that came as a critique of the report 
of the States Reorganization Commission. What the Commission has 
created, according to him, is not a mere disparity between the States 
by leaving U.P. and Bihar as they are, but by adding to them a 
new and bigger Madhya Pradesh with Rajasthan. It creates a new 
political problem of the consolidated Hindi-speaking North versus the 
balkanized South. Considering the vast cultural differences between 
the two sectors and the apprehensions of dominance of the North 
articulated by the leaders of the South Dr. Ambedkar predicts the 
danger of a conflict between the two in course of time. He observes 
that the Commission should have followed the principle of “one State 
one language” and not “one language one State” 


He favours formation of unilingual States as against multi- 
lingual States for the very sound reasons that the former fosters 
the fellow-feeling which is the foundation of a stable and 
democratic State, while the latter with its enforced juxtaposition 
of two different linguistic groups leads to faction fights for 
leadership and discrimination in administration — factors which 
are incompatible with democracy. His support for unilingual 
States is however qualified by the condition that its official language 


INTRODUCTION XVII 


shall be Hindi and until India becomes fit for this purpose, English 
shall continue. He foresees the danger of a unilingual Stale developing 
an independent nationality if its regional language is raised to the 
status of official language. 


To remove the disparity between the large States of the North and 
the small States of the South which has been accentuated by the 
absence of the provision for equal representation of the States in the 
central legislature irrespective of their areas and populations, Dr. 
Ambedkar's remedy is to divide the larger States into units with a 
population not exceeding two crores. He suggests tentatively division 
of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh into two States each and of United 
Provinces into three States. Each of these States being unilingual the 
division will not affect the concept of a linguistic State. His proposal 
for Maharashtra is to divide it, as in ancient times, into three States 
of Western, Central and Eastern Maharashtra with Bombay City as 
a separate city State of Maharashtra. Such smaller States, in his 
opinion, will meet the requirements of efficient administration and the 
special needs of different areas. It will also satisfy their sentiments. 


In a smaller State the proportion of majority to minority which 
in India is not political but ccmmunal and unchangeable, decreases 
and the danger of the majority practising tyranny over the minority is 
also minimised. To give further protection to minorities against such 
tyranny, Dr. Ambedkar suggests amendment of the constitution that 
will provide a system of plural-member constituencies (two or three) 
with cumulative voting. 


Dr. Ambedkar advocate's also the creation of a second capital for 
India and locating it in the South preferably in the city of Hyderabad 
to ease the tension and political polarization of the North and the 
South. 


Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah 


Dr. Ambedkar delivered this important address on the 101st birth 
anniversary of Justice Ranade, one of India's foremost political 
and social thinkers. At the beginning of his address, Dr. Ambedkar 
discusses the role of man as a maker of history. According to him, 


XVIII INTRODUCTION 


the theory of Buckle that the history is created by Geography and 
Physics, and that of Marx that it is the result of economic forces, 
both speak the half truth. They do not give any place to man. 
But Dr. Ambedkar asserts that man is a factor in the making of 
history and that environmental forces alone are not the makers of 
history. 


Dr. Ambedkar further proceeds to discuss the tests of a great man 
as propounded by Carlyle the apostle of Hero Worship, and also of 
other political thinkers. After exhaustive discussion, he observes that 
sincerity and intellect the combination of which are necessary to make 
a man great. But these qualifications are not alone sufficient. A man 
possessed of these two qualities must be motivated by the dynamics 
of a social purpose and must act as a scavenger of society. 


According to Dr. Ambedkar, Ranade was a great man by any 
standard. He wanted to vitalize the Hindu society to create social 
democracy. Ranade lived in times when social and religious customs, 
however unmoral, were regarded as sacrosanct. What appeared to 
Ranade to be shames and wrongs of the Hindu society, were considered 
by the people to be most sacred injunctions of their religion. Ranade 
wanted to vitalize the conscience of the Hindu society which became 
moribund as well as morbid. Ranade aimed to create a real social 
democracy. without which there could be no sure and stable politics. 
Dr. Ambedkar points out that Ranade's aim was to cleanse the old 
order and improve the moral tone of the Hindu society. 


Concluding his address, Dr. Ambedkar cautions against despotism. 
He says, “ Despotism does not cease to be despotism because it is elective. 
Nor does despotism become agreeable because the Despots belong to 
our own kindred .............. The real guarantee against despotism is 
to confront it with the possibility of its dethronement ....................... 
of its being superseded by a rival party.” 


Evidence before the Southborough Committee 


Dr. Ambedkar’s evidence before the Southborough Committee 
was his first assay in political writings. The evidence comprises 
of a written statement submitted to the Franchise Committee 


INTRODUCTION XIX 


under the Chairmanship of Rt. Hon'ble Lord Southborough and 
also of the oral evidence before the same Committee on January 
27, 1919. 


After arguing theoretically that any scheme of franchise and 
constituency that fails to bring about representation of opinions 
as well as representation of persons falls short of creating a 
popular Government. He shows how very relevant the two 
factors are in the context of the Indian society which is ridden 
into castes and religious communities. Each caste group tends to 
create its own distinctive type of like-mindedness which depends 
upon the extent of communication, participation or endosmosis. 
Absence of this endosmosis is most pronounced between touchable and 
untouchable Hindus, more than between the religious communities 
such as Hindus, Muslims, Parsees etc. These communities have on 
secular plane common material interests. There will be in such groups 
landlords, labourers and capitalists. The untouchables are, however, 
isolated by the Hindus from any kind of social participation. They 
have been dehumanised by socio-religious disabilities almost to the 
status of slaves. They are denied the universally accepted rights of 
citizenship. Their interests are distinctively their own interests and 
none else can truly voice them. 


On the population basis, Dr. Ambedkar demands for the 
untouchables of the Presidency of Bombay, eight to nine 
representatives in the Bombay Legislative Council with franchise 
pitched as low for them as to muster a sizable electorate. While 
reviewing the various schemes proposed by different organizations he 
criticises the Congress scheme which offers communal representation 
only to the Muslims and leaves untouchables to seek representation 
in general electorate as typical of the ideology of its leaders who are 
political radicals and social tories. He does not agree with the proposals 
of moderates to reserve only one or two seats for the untouchables in 
plural constituencies as this does not give them effective representation. 
He brushes aside the proposal of the Depressed Class Mission for 
nomination by co-option by the elected members of the Council as 
an attempt to dictate to the untouchables what their good shall 
be, instead of an endeavour to agree with them so that they may seek 


XX INTRODUCTION 


to find the good of their own choice. The communal representation 
with reserved seats for the most depressed community, he holds out, 
will not perpetuate social divisions, but will act as a potent solvent for 
dissolving them by providing opportunities for contact, co-operation and 
re-socialisation of fossilised attitudes. Moreover it was the demand of 
the untouchables for self-determination which the major communities 
too were claiming from the British bureaucracy. 


Federation versus Freedom 


Dr. Ambedkar's two addresses, “Federation vs. Freedom” and 
“Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It” were delivered 
by him before the Gokhale Institute of Economics. Pune on 
January 29, 1939 and at the session of the All India Scheduled Castes 
Federation held in Bombay on May 6, 1945 respectively. They are in 
the nature of tracts of the time. In 1939 all major political parties 
of India had accepted and some were even implementing that part 
of the Government of India Act, 1935 which related to provincial 
autonomy. The question of accepting the Federal structure at the 
Centre was however, looming large on the political horizon of India. 
Dr. Ambedkar who till then had not expressed in public his views 
on the subject took the opportunity to do so before the learned body 
of the Gokhale Institute of Economics. 


In the address he sets out briefly the outline of the scheme 
of Federation and examines it in the light of accepted tests of 
democratic federations in operation. The examination reveals 
that the scheme granted only a limited responsibility at the centre; 
it has the potentiality to evolve into a dominion status. There is 
inequality of status between the two sets of federating units viz. the 
Provinces and the Princely States. Federation is a natural corollary of 
autonomous provinces. They join the Federation as a natural course, 
while accession of the princely States is governed by the various 
conditions of their historical treaties with the British crown and the 
instrument of accession they would sign. Accession of the States and 
not only of the autonomous provinces, is the precondition for the 
implementation of the Federation. The representation of the provinces 
to the two Federal Houses is by election but the State representatives 


INTRODUCTION XXI 


are the nominees of their autocratic rulers and owe their allegiance to 
the rulers. These representatives will always be at the beck and call 
of the British bureaucracy which yields paramountcy over the rulers. 
Instead of fostering one all India nationalism, the Indian Princely 
States being treated under the Federation as foreign territories will 
encourage separatist tendencies. The scheme also does not permit 
the Federal Legislature to discuss the conduct of the ruler nor the 
administration of his State, though his nominees can participate in 
the debate pertaining to a province and vote on the issue. As in the 
matter of representation so too in that of taxation, administration, 
legislation etc, there is, in the scheme discrimination in favour of 
the princes. The princes thus become arbiters of the destiny of the 
British India. 


On these and several other counts Dr. Ambedkar rejects the Federal 
structure as envisaged by the Government of India Act of 1985. His 
solution of the problem of the States is, to regard it not as a political 
one but as an administrative one. To tackle it legally is to pension 
off princes and annexe their territories as is done under the Land 
Acquisition Act which allows private rights and properties to be 
acquired for political purposes. 


According to Dr. Ambedkar, excepting the Princes, and the Hindu 
Mahasabha which felt that the accession of the Princes was an accretion 
to the Hindu strength, no major political party was happy with the 
scheme of the Federation. The view of the freeman and of the poor 
man of whom the Federation does not seem to take any account says 
Dr. Ambedkar, will be a similar one. If the Federation comes the 
autocracy of the Princes will be a menace to the freedom of a freeman 
and obstacle to the poor man who wants constitution to enable him 
to have old values revalued and to have vested rights devastated. 


Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It 


“Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It” is yet another 
tract of the time included in this volume. It purports to be a 
constructive proposal put forth on behalf of the Scheduled 
Castes for the future constitution of India. This plan was one 
of the many advanced by Dr. Ambedkar’s contemporaries to 
explore the possibility of solving the communal problem in the 


XXII INTRODUCTION 


euentful year of 1945. Earlier, in 1941. Dr. Ambedkar had 
advocated creation of Pakistan on the principle of self-determination' 
and also as a historical necessity. The present tract sets out an 
alternative plan which in his opinion would ensure a United India, 
where with proper checks and balances interests of all minorities 
would be safeguarded. 


He is wholly opposed to the setting of a Constituent Assembly 
before the communal problem is solved. Moreover India has already 
constitutional ideas and constitutional forms ready at hand in the 
Government of India Act of 1935. All that is necessary is to delete 
those sections of the Act, which are inconsistent with Dominion status. 
If at all there is to be a Constituent Assembly, says Dr. Ambedkar. 
the communal question should not form a part of it. 


After examining the two schemes for Constituent Assembly one each 
by Sir Stafford Cripps and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Dr. Ambedkar 
concludes that both the schemes leave the communal question unsolved. 
In his opinion all such schemes and plans advocated so far fail because 
of their wrong approach. They proceed by a method instead of by a 
principle. The ultimate result is constant appeasement of ever-growing 
demands of communal minorities. 


The principle he enunciates is that in India majority being communal 
majority and not a convertible political majority, the majority rule is 
untenable in theory and unjustifiable in practice. The major community 
should be content with relative majority. Even this should not be so 
large as to enable it to secure an absolute majority by coalition with 
a smaller minority to establish its rule. In the same way the major 
minority should also not have the possibility to secure a majority by 
similar combination. The combination of all minorities should however 
have an absolute majority in the legislature. Dr. Ambedkar has set 
out in detail how the application of these principles would reflect 
community-wise in the central and provincial legislatures. 


Dr. Ambedkar’s proposal is mainly for a United India; but 
even if the partition of India eventuates, he expects, the Muslims 
of Pakistan not to deny the benefit of these principles to 


INTRODUCTION XXIII 


non-Muslim residents of their country. Their co-religionists, who 
otherwise would be a helpless minority in India, will have their interests 
safeguarded by the acceptance of these principles. Abandonment of 
the principle of majority rule in politics cannot, in the opinion of Dr. 
Ambedkar, affect the Hindus in other walks of life such as social 
and economic. 


States and Minorities 


States and minorities is a memorandum on the safeguards for the 
minorities in general and the Scheduled Castes in particular drafted 
by Dr. Ambedkar and submitted to the Constituent Assembly on behalf 
of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation in the year 1946. It is 
in the form of draft articles of a constitution, followed by explanatory 
notes and other statistics. 


The memorandum sets out in specific terms fundamental rights of 
citizens, safeguards of the rights of minorities and Scheduled Castes to 
representation in the legislatures, local bodies, executive and services. 
It also provides for special provisions for education and new settlement 
of the Scheduled Castes in separate villages. The very first article is 
allotted to the admission of Indian States into the Union which are 
here classified as Qualified and Unqualified on admission to the 
Union. The qualified State has an obligation to have an internal 
government which is in consonance with the principles Underlying 
the Constitution of the Union. The territory of the Unqualified states 
will be treated as the territory of the Union. 


The memorandum not only prescribes the rights and privileges of 
the Scheduled Castes but also lays down the remedies in the event 
of encroachment upon them. For this the author draws heavily from 
his own memorandum submitted to the minorities of the Round 
Table Conference in 1931. They are derived from the United States 
statutes and amendments passed in the interest of the Negroes after 
their emancipation and from the Burma Anti-boycott Act. One of the 
novel features of the memorandum is the provision for the election of 
the Prime Minister — Union and provincial — by the whole house 
of the legislature, of the representatives of the different minorities in 


XXIV INTRODUCTION 


the cabinet by members of each minority in the house and of the 
representatives of the majority community in the executive again by 
the whole house. 


Another unique feature is the provision of remedies against invasion 
of the fundamental rights of citizens of freedom from economic 
exploitation and from want and fear. This is sought to be accomplished 
by constitutional provision enforceable within ten years of the passing of 
the constitution for alteration of the economic structure of the country. 
In short by adopting state socialism, it envisages state ownership and 
management of all key and basic industries and insurance. Agriculture 
which is included in the key industries is to be organised on collectivised 
method. Owners of the nationalised industries and land are to be 
compensated in the form of debentures. The debenture-holders are 
entitled to receive interest at such rates as defined by the law. 


Small Holdings in India 


The subjects of Dr. Ambedkar's Doctoral thesis were in the disciplines 
of economics only. The present paper was one of his articles dealing 
with the problem of agricultural economy of the Country. Amongst 
several problems of agricultural economy dealing with agricultural 
production, Dr. Ambedkar chose the subject of the size of holdings as 
it affects the productivity of agriculture. 


Dr. Ambedkar in his paper points out that the holdings of 
land in India are not small but they are also scattered. This 
feature of Indian agriculture has caused great anxiety 
regarding agriculture which Dr. Ambedkar designates as an industry. 
The problems of these holdings are two-fold—(1) How to con- 
solidate the holdings and (2) after consolidation, how to perpe- 
tuate the said consolidation. The heirs of deceased in India desire 
to secure share from each survey number of the deceased rather 
than distributing complete holdings amongst themselves. This 
has resulted into rendering the farming most inefficient and 
causing several problems. Dr. Ambedkar discusses methods 
for consolidation e.g., restripping, restricted sale of the occupancy 
of the fragmented land to the contagious holder and the right of 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


pre-emption. In this connection Dr. Ambedkar discusses the report 
of the Baroda Committee and the proposals of Prof. Jeuons and 
Mr. Keatinge, and points out that the consolidation may obuiate the 
evils of scattered holdings, but it will not obviate the eutls of small 
holdings unless the consolidated holding becomes an economic holdings. 


While discussing the terms of economic holding, Dr. Ambedkar 
obserues, “Mere size of land is empty of all economic connotation............. 
It is the right or wrong proportion of other factors of production to 
a suit of land that renders the latter economic or uneconomic”. Thus 
a small farm may be economic as well as a large farm. Verifying 
the statistics at length, he concludes that “the existing holdings are 
uneconomic, not, however, in the sense that they are too small but 
that they are too large” as against the inadequacy of other factors of 
production. He therefore suggests that the remedy lies in not enlarging 
the holding but in the matter of increasing capital and capital goods. 


According to Dr. Ambedkar, the evil of small holding is the product 
of mal-adjustment of the Indian social economy. A large part of 
population of superfluous and idle labour exerts high pressure on 
agriculture. He tries to analyse how to remedy the ills of agriculture 
and suggests that industrialization of India is the soundest remedy 
for the agricultural problems of India. 


Mr. Russell and the Reconstruction of Society 


While reviewing the book “Principles of Social Reconstruction” 
by the Honourable Mr. Bertrand Russell, Dr. Ambedkar deals 
only with the analysis of the institution of Property and the modi- 
fications it is alleged to produce in human nature. Commenting 
on the observations of Mr. Russell on the philosophy of war, 
Dr. Ambedkar opines that Mr. Russell is against war but is not 
for quieticism. Quieticism is another name of death. Activity 
leads to growth. He suggests that to achieve anything we must use 
force ; only we must use it constructively as energy and not destructively 
as violence. The pacifist Mr. Russell, according to Dr. Ambedkar, 
thinks that even war is an activity leading to the growth 


XXVI INTRODUCTION 


of the individual and condemns it only because it results in death and 
destruction. He therefore thinks that Russell would welcome milder 
forms of war. 


Dr. Ambedkar further discusses the analysis of effects of property 
as propounded by Mr. Russell. Regarding the mental effects of 
property, he finds that Russell's discussion on this aspect is marked 
by certain misconceptions. Criticising the statement about “love of 
money” as interpreted by Mr. Russell, Dr. Ambedkar points out that 
there is genuine difference in the outlook of the ‘haves’ and ‘have nots’. 
Hence their attitude about money will be different. According to him, 
Mr. Russell failed to inquire into the purpose of the love of money 
which has given rise to wrong conception. Dr. Ambedkar feels that 
this thesis is shaky from the production side of our life. 


He further proceeds to discuss and prove how the above proposition 
is also untenable from the consumption side of life. Here the learned 
Doctor enters into a psychological discussion of the desires and 
pleasures. We leave this interesting discussion to be read by the readers 
in original without taking their much time. 


The editors do not claim to have covered all the main features of 
the closely reasoned arguments of the learned Doctor in the present 
volume. 


Members of the Editorial Board are deeply indebted to the Hon’ble 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra State, Shri Sharad Pawar and Hon’ble 
Minister for Education, Shri Sadanand Varde, for their valuable 
help, guidance and co-operation in bringing out this volume. We are 
also grateful to Shri Sapre, the Director of Government Printing and 
Stationery, and his staff for having helped us in bringing out this 
book in record time. 


MEMBERS 
EDITORIAL BOARD 


CONTENTS 


FOREWARD 
PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 
PART I 
ON CASTE 
1 CASTES IN INDIA 
2 ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 
PART II 


10 


11 
12 


ON LINGUISTIC STATES 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 
NEED FOR CHECKS AND BALANCES 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 
PART III 
ON HERO AND HERO-WORSHIP 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 
PART IV 
ON CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMS 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 
COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A Way TO SOLVE IT 
STATES AND MINORITIES 
PART V 
ON ECONOMIC PROBLEMS 
SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA 
Mr. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 


INDEX 


23 


205 


243 
279 
355 
381 


453 
481 
493 


PART I 


ON CASTE 


CASTES IN INDIA 


Their Mechanism, Genesis and 
Development 


Paper read before 
the Anthropology Seminar 
of 
Dr. A. A. Goldenweizer 
qt 
The Columbia University, New York, U.S.A. 
on 
9th May 1916 


From : Indian Antiquary, May 1917, Vol. XLI 


CASTES IN INDIA 


Many of us, I dare say, have witnessed local, national or international 
expositions of material objects that make up the sum total of human 
civilization. But few can entertain the idea of there being such a thing as 
an exposition of human institutions. Exhibition of human institutions is a 
strange idea; some might call it the wildest of ideas. But as students of 
Ethnology I hope you will not be hard on this innovation, for it is not so, 
and to you at least it should not be strange. 


You all have visited, I believe, some historic place like the ruins of Pompeii, 
and listened with curiosity to the history of the remains as it flowed from the 
glib tongue of the guide. In my opinion a student of Ethnology, in one sense 
at least, is much like the guide. Like his prototype, he holds up (perhaps 
with more seriousness and desire of self-instruction) the social institutions 
to view, with all the objectiveness humanly possible, and inquires into their 
origin and function. 


Most of our fellow students in this Seminar, which concerns itself with 
primitive uersus modern society, have ably acquitted themselves along 
these lines by giving lucid expositions of the various institutions, modern 
or primitive, in which they are interested. It is my turn now, this evening, 
to entertain you, as best I can, with a paper on “Castes in India: Their 
mechanism, genesis and development” 


I need hardly remind you of the complexity of the subject I intend to 
handle. Subtler minds and abler pens than mine have been brought to the 
task of unravelling the mysteries of Caste ; but unfortunately it still remains 
in the domain of the “unexplained”, not to say of the “un-understood” I am 
quite alive to the complex intricacies of a hoary institution like Caste, but I 
am not so pessimistic as to relegate it to the region of the unknowable, for 
I believe it can be known. The caste problem is a vast one, both theoretically 
and practically. Practically, it is an institution that portends tremendous 
consequences. It is a local problem, but one capable of much wider mischief, 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


for “as long as caste in India does exist, Hindus will hardly intermarry or 
have any social intercourse with outsiders ; and if Hindus migrate to other 
regions on earth, Indian caste would become a world problem.”! Theoretically, 
it has defied a great many scholars who have taken upon themselves, as 
a labour of love, to dig into its origin. Such being the case, I cannot treat 
the problem in its entirety. Time, space and acumen, I am afraid, would 
all fail me, if I attempted to do otherwise than limit myself to a phase of 
it, namely, the genesis, mechanism and spread of the caste system. I will 
strictly observe this rule, and will dwell on extraneous matters only when 
it is necessary to clarify or support a point in my thesis. 


To proceed with the subject. According to well-known ethnologists, the 
population of India is a mixture of Aryans, Dravidians, Mongolians and 
Scythians. All these stocks of people came into India from various directions 
and with various cultures, centuries ago, when they were in a tribal state. 
They all in turn elbowed their entry into the country by fighting with their 
predecessors, and after a stomachful of it settled down as peaceful neighbours. 
Through constant contact and mutual intercourse they evolved a common 
culture that superseded their distinctive cultures. It may be granted that 
there has not been a thorough amalgamation of the various stocks that make 
up the peoples of India, and to a traveller from within the boundaries of 
India the East presents a marked contrast in physique and even in colour 
to the West, as does the South to the North. But amalgamation can never 
be the sole criterion of homogeneity as predicated of any people. Ethnically 
all people are heterogeneous. It is the unity of culture that is the basis of 
homogeneity. Taking this for granted, I venture to say that there is no country 
that can rival the Indian Peninsula with respect to the unity of its culture. 
It has not only a geographic unity, but it has over and above all a deeper 
and a much more fundamental unity—the indubitable cultural unity that 
covers the land from end to end. But it is because of this homogeneity that 
Caste becomes a problem so difficult to be explained. If the Hindu Society 
were a mere federation of mutually exclusive units, the matter would be 
simple enough. But Caste is a parcelling of an already homogeneous unit, 
and the explanation of the genesis of Caste is the explanation of this process 
of parcelling. 


Before launching into our field of enquiry, it is better to advise ourselves 
regarding the nature of a caste I will therefore draw upon a few of the best 
students of caste for their definitions of it: 


(1) Mr. Senart, a French authority, defines a caste as “a close corporation, 
in theory at any rate rigorously hereditary : equipped with a certain 
traditional and independent organisation, including a chief and a 
council, meeting on occasion in assemblies of more or less plenary 


1. Ketkar, Caste, p. 4. 


CASTES IN INDIA 7 


authority and joining together at certain festivals : bound together 
by common occupations, which relate more particularly to marriage 
and to food and to questions of ceremonial pollution, and ruling its 
members by the exercise of jurisdiction, the extent of which varies, 
but which succeeds in making the authority of the community more 
felt by the sanction of certain penalties and, above all, by final 
irrevocable exclusion from the group”. 


(2) Mr. Nesfield defines a caste as “a class of the community which disowns 
any connection with any other class and can neither intermarry nor 
eat nor drink with any but persons of their own community”. 


(3) According to Sir H. Risley, “a caste may be defined as a collection of 
families or groups of families bearing a common name which usually 
denotes or is associated with specific occupation, claiming common 
descent from a mythical ancestor, human or divine, professing to 
follow the same professional callings and are regarded by those who 
are competent to give an opinion as forming a single homogeneous 
community”. 


(4) Dr. Ketkar defines caste as “a social group having two characteristics : 
G) membership is confined to those who are born of members and 
includes all persons so born; (ii) the members are forbidden by an 
inexorable social law to marry outside the group”. 


To review these definitions is of great importance for our purpose. It will 
be noticed that taken individually the definitions of three of the writers 
include too much or too little : none is complete or correct by itself and all 
have missed the central point in the mechanism of the Caste system. Their 
mistake lies in trying to define caste as an isolated unit by itself, and not 
as a group within, and with definite relations to, the system of caste as a 
whole. Yet collectively all of them are complementary to one another, each 
one emphasising what has been obscured in the other. By way of criticism, 
therefore, I will take only those points common to all Castes in each of the 
above definitions which are regarded as peculiarities of Caste and evaluate 
them as such. 


To start with Mr. Senart. He draws attention to the “idea of pollution” 
as a characteristic of Caste. With regard to this point it may be safely said 
that it is by no means a peculiarity of Caste as such. It usually originates 
in priestly ceremonialism and is a particular case of the general belief in 
purity. Consequently its necessary connection with Caste may be completely 
denied without damaging the working of Caste. The “idea of pollution” has 
been attached to the institution of Caste, only because the Caste that enjoys 
the highest rank is the priestly Caste : while we know that priest and purity 
are old associates. We may therefore conclude that the “idea of pollution” 
is a characteristic of Caste only in so far as Caste has a religious flavour. 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Nesfield in his way dwells on the absence of messing with those outside 
the Caste as one of its characteristics. In spite of the newness of the point 
we must say that Mr. Nesfield has mistaken the effect for the cause. Caste, 
being a self-enclosed unit naturally limits social intercourse, including 
messing etc. to members within it. Consequently this absence of messing 
with outsiders is not due to positive prohibition, but is a natural result of 
Caste, i.e. exclusiveness. No doubt this absence of messing originally due to 
exclusiveness, acquired the prohibitory character of a religious injunction, 
but it may be regarded as a later growth. Sir H. Risley, makes no new point 
deserving of special attention. 


We now pass on to the definition of Dr. Ketkar who has done much 
for the elucidation of the subject. Not only is he a native, but he has also 
brought a critical acumen and an open mind to bear on his study of Caste. 
His definition merits consideration, for he has defined Caste in its relation 
to a system of Castes, and has concentrated his attention only on those 
characteristics which are absolutely necessary for the existence of a Caste 
within a system, rightly excluding all others as being secondary or derivative 
in character. With respect to his definition it must, however, be said that 
in it there is a slight confusion of thought, lucid and clear as otherwise it 
is. He speaks of Prohibition of Intermarriage and Membership by Autogeny 
as the two characteristics of Caste. I submit that these are but two aspects 
of one and the same thing, and not two different things as Dr. Ketkar 
supposes them to be. If you prohibit intermarriage the result is that you 
limit membership to those born within the group. Thus the two are the 
obverse and the reverse sides of the same medal. 


This critical evaluation of the various characteristics of Caste leave no doubt 
that prohibition, or rather the absence of intermarriage—endogamy, to be 
concise—is the only one that can be called the essence of Caste when rightly 
understood. But some may deny this on abstract anthropological grounds, for 
there exist endogamous groups without giving rise to the problem of Caste. In 
a general way this may be true, as endogamous societies, culturally different, 
making their abode in localities more or less removed, and having little to 
do with each other are a physical reality. The Negroes and the Whites and 
the various tribal groups that go by name of American Indians in the United 
States may be cited as more or less appropriate illustrations in support of 
this view. But we must not confuse matters, for in India the situation is 
different. As pointed out before, the peoples of India form a homogeneous 
whole. The various races of India occupying definite territories have more or 
less fused into one another and do possess cultural unity, which is the only 
criterion of a homogeneous population. Given this homogeneity as a basis, 
Caste becomes a problem altogether new in character and wholly absent in 
the situation constituted by the mere propinquity of endogamous social or 


CASTES IN INDIA 9 


tribal groups. Caste in India means an artificial chopping off of the population 
into fixed and definite units, each one prevented from fusing into another 
through the custom of endogamy. Thus the conclusion is inevitable that 
Endogamy is the only characteristic that is peculiar to caste, and if we 
succeed in showing how endogamy is maintained, we shall practically have 
proved the genesis and also the mechanism of Caste. 


It may not be quite easy for you to anticipate why I regard endogamy as 
a key to the mystery of the Caste system. Not to strain your imagination 
too much, I will proceed to give you my reasons for it. 


It may not also be out of place to emphasize at this moment that no 
civilized society of today presents more survivals of primitive times than does 
the Indian society. Its religion is essentially primitive and its tribal code, in 
spite of the advance of time and civilization, operates in all its pristine vigour 
even today. One of these primitive survivals, to which I wish particularly to 
draw your attention is the Custom of Exogamy. The prevalence of exogamy 
in the primitive worlds is a fact too wellknown to need any explanation. 
With the growth of history, however, exogamy has lost its efficacy, and 
excepting the nearest blood-kins, there is usually no social bar restricting 
the field of marriage. But regarding the peoples of India the law of exogamy 
is a positive injunction even today. Indian society still savours of the clan 
system, even though there are no clans; and this can be easily seen from 
the law of matrimony which centres round the principle of exogamy, for it is 
not that Sapindas (blood-kins) cannot marry, but a marriage even between 
Sagotras (of the same class) is regarded as a sacrilege. 


Nothing is therefore more important for you to remember than the fact 
that endogamy is foreign to the people of India. The various Gotras of 
India are and have been exogamous: so are the other groups with totemic 
organization. It is no exaggeration to say that with the people of India 
exogamy is a creed and none dare infringe it, so much so that, in spite of 
the endogamy of the Castes within them, exogamy is strictly observed and 
that there are more rigorous penalties for violating exogamy than there are 
for violating endogamy. You will, therefore, readily see that with exogamy 
as the rule there could be no Caste, for exogamy means fusion. But we have 
castes ; consequently in the final analysis creation of Castes, so far as India 
is concerned, means the superposition of endogamy on exogamy. However, 
in an originally exogamous population an easy working out of endogamy 
(which is equivalent to the creation of Caste) is a grave problem, and it is 
in the consideration of the means utilized for the preservation of endogamy 
against exogamy that we may hope to find the solution of our problem. 


Thus the superposition of endogamy on exogamy means the creation of caste. 
But this is not an easy affair. Let us take an imaginary group that desires 
to make itself into a Caste and analyse what means it will have to adopt to 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


make itself endogamous. If a group desires to make itself endogamous a 
formal injunction against intermarriage with outside groups will be of no 
avail, especially if prior to the introduction of endogamy, exogamy had been 
the rule in all matrimonial relations. Again, there is a tendency in all groups 
lying in close contact with one another to assimilate and amalgamate, and 
thus consolidate into a homogeneous society. If this tendency is to be strongly 
counteracted in the interest of Caste formation, it is absolutely necessary 
to circumscribe a circle outside which people should not contract marriages. 


Nevertheless, this encircling to prevent marriages from without creates 
problems from within which are not very easy of solution. Roughly speaking, 
in a normal group the two sexes are more or less evenly distributed, and 
generally speaking there is an equality between those of the same age. 
The equality is, however, never quite realized in actual societies. At the 
same time to the group that is desirous of making itself into a caste the 
maintenance of equality between the sexes becomes the ultimate goal, for 
without it. endogamy can no longer subsist. In other words, if endogamy 
1s to be preserved conjugal rights from within have to be provided for, 
otherwise members of the group will be driven out of the circle to take care 
of themselves in any way they can. But in order that the conjugal rights be 
provided for from within, 1t is absolutely necessary to maintain a numerical 
equality between the marriageable units of the two sexes within the group 
desirous of making itself into a Caste. It is only through the maintenance 
of such an equality that the necessary endogamy of the group can be kept 
intact, and a very large disparity is sure to break it. 


The problem of Caste, then, ultimately resolves itself into one of repairing 
the disparity between the marriageable units of the two sexes within it. Left 
to nature, the much needed parity between the units can be realized only 
when a couple dies simultaneously. But this is a rare contingency. The 
husband may die before the wife and create a surplus woman, who must be 
disposed of, else through intermarriage she will violate the endogamy of the 
group. In like manner the husband may survive his wife and be surplus man, 
whom the group, while it may sympathise with him for the sad bereavement, 
has to dispose of, else he will marry outside the Caste and will break the 
endogamy. Thus both the surplus man and the surplus woman constitute a 
menace to the Caste if not taken care of, for not finding suitable partners 
inside their prescribed circle (and left to themselves they cannot find any, 
for if the matter be not regulated there can only be just enough pairs to 
go round) very likely they will transgress the boundary, marry outside and 
import offspring that is foreign to the Caste. 


Let us see what our imaginary group is likely to do with this surplus man 
and surplus woman. We will first take up the case of the surplus woman. 


CASTES IN INDIA 11 


She can be disposed of in two different ways so as to preserve the endogamy 
of the Caste. 


First: burn her on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband and get 
rid of her. This, however, is rather an impracticable way of solving the 
problem of sex disparity. In some cases 1t may work, in others it may not. 
Consequently every surplus woman cannot thus be disposed of, because it 
is an easy solution but a hard realization. And so the surplus woman (= 
widow), if not disposed of, remains in the group : but in her very existence 
lies a double danger. She may marry outside the Caste and violate endogamy, 
or she may marry within the Caste and through competition encroach upon 
the chances of marriage that must be reserved for the potential brides in 
the Caste. She is therefore a menance in any case, and something must 
be done to her if she cannot be burned along with her deceased husband. 


The second remedy is to enforce widowhood on her for the rest of her life. 
So far as the objective results are concerned, burning is a better solution 
than enforcing widowhood. Burning the widow eliminates all the three evils 
that a surplus woman is fraught with. Being dead and gone she creates no 
problem of remarriage either inside or outside the Caste. But compulsory 
widowhood is superior to burning because it is more practicable. Besides 
being comparatively humane it also guards against the evils of remarriage 
as does burning; but it fails to guard the morals of the group. No doubt 
under compulsory widowhood the woman remains, and just because she is 
deprived of her natural right of being a legitimate wife in future, the incentive 
to immoral conduct is increased. But this is by no means an insuperable 
difficulty. She can be degraded to a condition in which she is no longer a 
source of allurement. 


The problem of surplus man (= widower) is much more important and 
much more difficult than that of the surplus woman in a group that desires 
to make itself into a Caste. From time immemorial man as compared with 
woman has had the upper hand. He is a dominant figure in every group 
and of the two sexes has greater prestige. With this traditional superiority 
of man over woman his wishes have always been consulted. Woman, on the 
other hand, has been an easy prey to all kinds of iniquitous injunctions, 
religious, social or economic. But man as a maker of injunctions is most 
often above them all. Such being the case, you cannot accord the same kind 
of treatment to a surplus man as you can to a surplus woman in a Caste. 


The project of burning him with his deceased wife is hazardous in two 
ways : first of all it cannot be done, simply because he is a man. Secondly, 
if done, a sturdy soul is lost to the Caste. There remain then only two 
solutions which can conveniently dispose of him. I say conveniently, because 
he is an asset to the group. 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Important as he is to the group, endogamy is still more important, and 
the solution must assure both these ends. Under these circumstances he 
may be forced or I should say induced, after the manner of the widow, to 
remain a widower for the rest of his life. This solution is not altogether 
difficult, for without any compulsion some are so disposed as to enjoy self- 
imposed celibacy, or even to take a further step of their own accord and 
renounce the world and its joys. But, given human nature as it is, this 
solution can hardly be expected to be realized. On the other hand, as is 
very likely to be the case, if the surplus man remains in the group as an 
active participator in group activities, he is a danger to the morals of the 
group. Looked at from a different point of view celibacy, though easy in 
cases where it succeeds, is not so advantageous even then to the material 
prospects of the Caste. If he observes genuine celibacy and renounces the 
world, he would not be a menace to the preservation of Caste endogamy or 
Caste morals as he undoubtedly would be if he remained a secular person. 
But as an ascetic celibate he is as good as burned, so far as the material 
well-being of his Caste is concerned. A Caste, in order that it may be large 
enough to afford a vigorous communal life, must be maintained at a certain 
numerical strength. But to hope for this and to proclaim celibacy is the same 
as trying to cure atrophy by bleeding. 


Imposing celibacy on the surplus man in the group, therefore, fails both 
theoretically and practically. It is in the interest of the Caste to keep him 
as a Grahastha (one who raises a family), to use a Sanskrit technical term. 
But the problem is to provide him with a wife from within the Caste. At 
the outset this is not possible, for the ruling ratio in a caste has to be one 
man to one woman and none can have two chances of marriage, for in a 
Caste thoroughly self-enclosed there are always just enough marriageable 
women to go round for the marriageable men. Under these circumstances 
the surplus man can be provided with a wife only by recruiting a bride 
from the ranks of those not yet marriageable in order to tie him down to 
the group. This is certainly the best of the possible solutions in the case 
of the surplus man. By this, he is kept within the Caste. By this means 
numerical depletion through constant outflow is guarded against, and by 
this endogamy morals are preserved. 


It will now be seen that the four means by which numerical disparity 
between the two sexes is conveniently maintained are : (1) burning the widow 
with her deceased husband; (2) compulsory widowhood—a milder form of 
burning ; (3) imposing celibacy on the widower and (4) wedding him to a girl 
not yet marriageable. Though, as I said above, burning the widow and imposing 
celibacy on the widower are of doubtful service to the group in its endeavour 
to preserve its endogamy, all of them operate as means. But means, as forces, 
when liberated or set in motion create an end. What then is the end that 
these means create ? They create and perpetuate endogamy, while caste and 


CASTES IN INDIA 13 


endogamy, according to our analysis of the various definitions of caste, are 
one and the same thing. Thus the existence of these means is identical with 
caste and caste involves these means. 


This, in my opinion, is the general mechanism of a caste in a system of 
castes. Let us now turn from these high generalities to the castes in Hindu 
Society and inquire into their mechanism. I need hardly premise that there 
are a great many pitfalls im the path of those who try to unfold the past, 
and caste in India to be sure is a very ancient institution. This is especially 
true where there exist no authentic or written records or where the people, 
like the Hindus, are so constituted that to them writing history is a folly, 
for the world is an illusion. But institutions do live, though for a long time 
they may remain unrecorded and as often as not customs and morals are 
like fossils that tell their own history. If this is true, our task will be amply 
rewarded if we scrutinize the solution the Hindus arrived at to meet the 
problems of the surplus man and surplus woman. 


Complex though it be in its general working the Hindu Society, even to 
a superficial observer, presents three singular uxorial customs, namely : 


(i) Sati or the burning of the widow on the funeral pyre of her deceased 
husband. 


Gi) Enforced widowhood by which a widow is not allowed to remarry. 
(iii) Girl marriage. 


In addition, one also notes a great hankering after Sannyasa (renunciation) 
on the part of the widower, but this may in some cases be due purely to 
psychic disposition. 


So far as I know, no scientific explanation of the origin of these customs 
is forthcoming even today. We have plenty of philosophy to tell us why these 
customs were honoured, but nothing to tell us the causes of their origin and 
existence. Sati has been honoured (Cf. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Sati: A Defence 
of the Eastern Woman in the British Sociological Review, Vol. VI, 1913) 
because it is a “proof of the perfect unity of body and soul” between husband 
and wife and of “devotion beyond the grave”, because it embodied the ideal 
of wifehood, which is well expressed by Uma when she said, “Devotion to her 
Lord is woman’s honour, it is her eternal heaven: and O Maheshvara”, she 
adds with a most touching human cry, “I desire not paradise itself if thou 
are not satisfied with me !” Why compulsory widowhood is honoured I know 
not, nor have I yet met with any one who sang in praise of it, though there 
are a great many who adhere to it. The eulogy in honour of girl marriage is 
reported by Dr. Ketkar to be as follows: “A really faithful man or woman 
ought not to feel affection for a woman or a man other than the one with 
whom he or she is united. Such purity is compulsory not only after marriage, 
but even before marriage, for that is the only correct ideal of chastity. No 
maiden could be considered pure if she feels love for a man other than the one 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to whom she might be married. As she does not know to whom she is going 
to be married, she must not feel affection for any man at all before marriage. 
If she does so, it is a sin. So it is better for a girl to know whom she has 
to love before any sexual consciousness has been awakened in her.” Hence 
gir] marriage. 


This high-flown and ingenious sophistry indicates why these institutions 
were honoured, but does not tell us why they were practised. My own 
interpretation is that they were honoured because they were practised. 
Any one slightly acquainted with rise of individualism in the 18th century 
will appreciate my remark. At all times, it is the movement that is most 
important; and the philosophies grow around it long afterwards to Justify it 
and give it a moral support. In like manner I urge that the very fact that 
these customs were so highly eulogized proves that they needed eulogy for 
their prevalence. Regarding the question as to why they arose, I submit 
that they were needed to create the structure of caste and the philosophies 
in honour of them were intended to popularize them, or to gild the pill, 
as we might say, for they must have been so abominable and shocking to 
the moral sense of the unsophisticated that they needed a great deal of 
sweetening. These customs are essentially of the nature of means, though they 
are represented as ideals. But this should not blind us from understanding 
the results that flow from them. One might safely say that idealization of 
means is necessary and in this particular case was perhaps motivated to 
endow them with greater efficacy. Calling a means an end does no harm, 
except that it disguises its real character ; but it does not deprive it of its 
real nature, that of a means. You may pass a law that all cats are dogs, 
just as you can call a means an end. But you can no more change the 
nature of means thereby than you can turn cats into dogs; consequently I 
am justified in holding that, whether regarded as ends or as means, Sati, 
enforced widowhood and girl marriage are customs that were primarily 
intended to solve the problem of the surplus man and surplus woman in a 
caste and to maintain its endogamy. Strict endogamy could not be preserved 
without these customs, while caste without endogamy is a fake. 


Having explained the mechanism of the creation and preservation of 
Caste in India, the further question as to its genesis naturally arises. The 
question or origin is always an annoying question and in the study of Caste 
it is sadly neglected ; some have connived at it, while others have dodged it. 
Some are puzzled as to whether there could be such a thing as the origin 
of caste and suggest that “if we cannot control our fondness for the word 
‘origin’, we should better use the plural form, viz. ‘origins of caste’ ”. As for 
myself I do not feel puzzled by the Origin of Caste in India for, as I have 
established before, endogamy is the only characteristic of Caste and when 
I say Origin of Caste I mean The Origin of the Mechanism for Endogamy. 


2. History of Caste in India, 1909, pp. 2-33. 


CASTES IN INDIA 15 


The atomistic conception of individuals in a Society so greatly popularised— 
I was about to say vulgarized—in political orations is the greatest humbug. 
To say that individuals make up society is trivial; society is always composed 
of classes. It may be an exaggeration to assert the theory of class-conflict, 
but the existence of definite classes in a society is a fact. Their basis may 
differ. They may be economic or intellectual or social, but an individual in 
a soclety is always a member of a class. This is a universal fact and early 
Hindu society could not have been an exception to this rule, and, as a matter 
of fact, we know it was not. If we bear this generalization in mind, our study 
of the genesis of caste would be very much facilitated, for we have only to 
determine what was the class that first made itself into a caste, for class 
and caste, so to say, are next door neighbours, and it is only a span that 
separates the two. A Caste is an Enclosed Class. 


The study of the origin of caste must furnish us with an answer to the 
question—what is the class that raised this “enclosure” around itself? The 
question may seem too inquisitorial, but it is pertinent, and an answer to 
this will serve us to elucidate the mystery of the growth and development 
of castes all over India. Unfortunately a direct answer to this question is 
not within my power. I can answer it only indirectly. I said just above that 
the customs in question were current in the Hindu society. To be true to 
facts it is necessary to qualify the statement, as it connotes universality of 
their prevalence. These customs in all their strictness are obtainable only in 
one caste, namely the Brahmins, who occupy the highest place in the social 
hierarchy of the Hindu society ; and as their prevalence in non-Brahmin castes 
is derivative of their observance is neither strict nor complete. This important 
fact can serve as a basis of an important observation. If the prevalence of 
these customs in the non-Brahmin Castes is derivative, as can be shown 
very easily, then it needs no argument to prove what class is the father of 
the institution of caste. Why the Brahmin class should have enclosed itself 
into a caste is a different question, which may be left as an employment 
for another occasion. But the strict observance of these customs and the 
social superiority arrogated by the priestly class in all ancient civilizations 
are sufficient to prove that they were the originators of this “unnatural 
institution” founded and maintained through these unnatural means. 


I now come to the third part of my paper regarding the question of the 
growth and spread of the caste system all over India. The question I have 
to answer is : How did the institution of caste spread among the rest of the 
non-Brahmin population of the country ? The question of the spread of the 
castes all over India has suffered a worse fate than the question of genesis. 
And the main cause, as it seems to me, is that the two questions of spread 
and of origin are not separated. This is because of the common belief among 
scholars that the caste system has either been imposed upon the docile 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


population of India by a law-giver as a divine dispensation, or that it has 
grown according to some law of social growth peculiar to the Indian people. 


I first propose to handle the law-giver of India. Every country has its 
law-giver, who arises as an incarnation (avatar) in times of emergency to set 
right a sinning humanity and give it the laws of justice and morality. Manu, 
the law-giver of India, if he did exist, was certainly an audacious person. If 
the story that he gave the law of caste be credited, then Manu must have 
been a dare-devil fellow and the humanity that accepted his dispensation 
must be a humanity quite different from the one we are acquainted with. It 
is unimaginable that the law of caste was given. It is hardly an exaggeration 
to say that Manu could not have outlived his law, for what is that class that 
can submit to be degraded to the status of brutes by the pen of a man, and 
suffer him to raise another class to the pinnacle ? Unless he was a tyrant 
who held all the population in subjection it cannot be imagined that he 
could have been allowed to dispense his patronage in this grossly unjust 
manner, as may be easily seen by a mere glance at his “Institutes”. I may 
seem hard on Manu. but I am sure my force is not strong enough to kill 
his ghost. He lives, like a disembodied spirit and is appealed to, and I am 
afraid will yet live long. One thing I want to impress upon you is that Manu 
did not give the law of Caste and that he could not do so. Caste existed 
long before Manu. He was an upholder of it and therefore philosophised 
about it, but certainly he did not and could not ordain the present order of 
Hindu Society. His work ended with the codification of existing caste rules 
and the preaching of Caste Dharma. The spread and growth of the Caste 
system is too gigantic a task to be achieved by the power or cunning of an 
individual or of a class. Similar in argument is the theory that the Brahmins 
created the Caste. After what I have said regarding Manu, I need hardly 
say anything more, except to point out that it is incorrect in thought and 
malicious in intent. The Brahmins may have been guilty of many things, 
and I dare say they were, but the imposing of the caste system on the non- 
Brahmin population was beyond their mettle. They may have helped the 
process by their glib philosophy, but they certainly could not have pushed 
their scheme beyond their own confines. To fashion society after one's own 
pattern ! How glorious ! How hard ! One can take pleasure and eulogize 
its furtherance, but cannot further it very far. The vehemence of my attack 
may seem to be unnecessary ; but I can assure you that it is not uncalled 
for. There is a strong belief in the mind of orthodox Hindus that the Hindu 
Society was somehow moulded into the framework of the Caste System and 
that it is an organization consciously created by the Shastras. Not only does 
this belief exist, but it is being justified on the ground that it cannot but 
be good, because it is ordained by the Shastras and the Shastras cannot 
be wrong. I have urged so much on the adverse side of this attitude, not 
because the religious sanctity is grounded on scientific basis, nor to help 
those reformers who are preaching against it. Preaching did not make 


CASTES IN INDIA 17 


the caste system neither will it unmake it. My aim is to show the falsity of 
the attitude that has exalted religious sanction to the position of a scientific 
explanation. 


Thus the great man theory does not help us very far in solving the spread 
of castes in India. Western scholars, probably not much given to hero- 
worship, have attempted other explanations. The nuclei, round which have 
“formed” the various castes in India, are, according to them : (1) occupation; 
(2) survivals of tribal organizations etc. ; (3) the rise of new belief; (4) cross- 
breeding and (5) migration. 


The question may be asked whether these nuclei do not exist in other 
societies and whether they are peculiar to India. If they are not peculiar to 
India, but are common to the world, why is it that they did not “form” caste 
on other parts of this planet ? Is it because those parts are holier than the 
land of the Vedas, or that the professors are mistaken ? I am afraid that 
the latter is the truth. 


In spite of the high theoretic value claimed by the several authors for 
their respective theories based on one or other of the above nuclei, one 
regrets to say that on close examination they are nothing more than filling 
illustrations— what Matthew Arnold means by “the grand name without 
the grand thing in it”. Such are the various theories of caste advanced by 
Sir Denzil Ibbetson, Mr. Nesfield, Mr. Senart and Sir H. Risley. To criticise 
them in a lump would be to say that they are a disguised form of the Petitio 
Principii of formal logic. To illustrate : Mr. Nesfield says that “function and 
function only. .. was the foundation upon which the whole system of Castes 
in India was built up”. But he may rightly be reminded that he does not very 
much advance our thought by making the above statement, which practically 
amounts to saying that castes in India are functional or occupational, which 
is a very poor discovery ! We have yet to know from Mr. Nesfield why is it 
that an occupational group turned into an occupational caste ? I would very 
cheerfully have undertaken the task of dwelling on the theories of other 
ethnologists, had it not been for the fact that Mr. Nesfield's is a typical one. 


Without stopping to criticize those theories that explain the caste system 
as a natural phenomenon occurring in obedience to the law of disintegration, 
as explained by Herbert Spencer in his formula of evolution, or as natural 
as “the structural differentiation within an organism”—to employ the 
phraseology of orthodox apologists—, or as an early attempt to test the laws 
of eugenics—as all belonging to the same class of fallacy which regards the 
caste system as inevitable, or as being consciously imposed in anticipation 
of these laws on a helpless and humble population, I will now lay before 
you my own view on the subject. 


We shall be well advised to recall at the outset that the Hindu society, in 
common with other societies, was composed of classes and the earliest known 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


are the (1) Brahmins or the priestly class; (2) the Kshatriya, or the 
military class ; (3) the Vaishya, or the merchant class and (4) the Shudra, 
or the artisan and menial class. Particular attention has to be paid to the 
fact that this was essentially a class system, in which individuals, when 
qualified, could change their class, and therefore classes did change their 
personnel. At some time in the history of the Hindus, the priestly class 
socially detached itself from the rest of the body of people and through 
a closed-door policy became a caste by itself. The other classes being 
subject to the law of social division of labour underwent differentiation, 
some into large, others into very minute groups. The Vaishya and Shudra 
classes were the original inchoate plasm, which formed the sources of 
the numerous castes of today. As the military occupation does not very 
easily lend itself to very minute sub-division, the Kshatriya class could 
have differentiated into soldiers and administrators. 


This sub-division of a society is quite natural. But the unnatural thing 
about these sub-divisions is that they have lost the open-door character 
of the class system and have become self-enclosed units called castes. 
The question is: were they compelled to close their doors and become 
endogamous, or did they close them of their own accord ? I submit that 
there is a double line of answer: Some closed the door: Others found it 
closed against them. The one is a psychological interpretation and the 
other is mechanistic, but they are complementary and both are necessary 
to explain the phenomena of caste-formation in its entirety. 


I will first take up the psychological interpretation. The question we 
have to answer in this connection is: Why did these sub-divisions or 
classes, if you please, industrial, religious or otherwise, become self- 
enclosed or endogamous ? My answer is because the Brahmins were so. 
Endogamy or the closed-door system, was a fashion in the Hindu society, 
and as it had originated from the Brahmin caste it was whole-heartedly 
imitated by all the non-Brahmin sub-divisions or classes, who, in their 
turn, became endogamous castes. It is “the infection of imitation” that 
caught all these sub-divisions on their onward march of differentiation 
and has turned them into castes. The propensity to imitate is a deep- 
seated one in the human mind and need not be deemed an inadequate 
explanation for the formation of the various castes in India. It is so 
deep-seated that Walter Bagehot argues that, “We must not think of 

. imitation as voluntary, or even conscious. On the contrary it has 
its seat mainly in very obscure parts of the mind, whose notions, so far 
from being consciously produced, are hardly felt to exist; so far from 
being conceived beforehand, are not even felt at the time. The main 
seat of the imitative part of our nature is our belief, and the causes 
predisposing us to believe this or disinclining us to believe that are 
among the obscurest parts of our nature. But as to the imitative nature 


CASTES IN INDIA 19 


of credulity there can be no doubt.” This propensity to imitate has been made 
the subject of a scientific study by Gabriel Tarde, who lays down three laws 
of imitation. One of his three laws is that imitation flows from the higher to 
the lower or, to quote his own words, “Given the opportunity, a nobility will 
always and everywhere imitate its leaders, its kings or sovereigns, and the 
people likewise, given the opportunity, its nobility.”* Another of Tarde’s laws 
of imitation is: that the extent or intensity of imitation varies inversely in 
proportion to distance, or in his own words “The thing that is most imitated 
is the most superior one of those that are nearest. In fact, the influence 
of the model’s example is efficacious inversely to its distance as well as 
directly to its superiority. Distance is understood here in its sociological 
meaning. However distant in space a stranger may be, he is close by, from 
this point of view, if we have numerous and daily relations with him and 
if we have every facility to satisfy our desire to imitate him. This law of 
the imitation of the nearest, of the least distant, explains the gradual and 
consecutive character of the spread of an example that has been set by the 
higher social ranks.” 


In order to prove my thesis—which really needs no proof—that some castes 
were formed by imitation, the best way, it seems to me, is to find out whether 
or not the vital conditions for the formation of castes by imitation exist in 
the Hindu Society. The conditions for imitation, according to this standard 
authority are : (1) that the source of imitation must enjoy prestige in the group 
and (2) that there must be “numerous and daily relations” among members 
of a group. That these conditions were present in India there is little reason 
to doubt. The Brahmin is a semi-god and very nearly a demi-god. He sets 
up a mode and moulds the rest. His prestige is unquestionable and is the 
fountain-head of bliss and good. Can such a being, idolised by scriptures and 
venerated by the priest-ridden multitude, fail to project his personality on 
the suppliant humanity ? Why, if the story be true, he is believed to be the 
very end of creation. Such a creature is worthy of more than mere imitation, 
but at least of imitation ; and if he lives in an endogamous enclosure, should 
not the rest follow his example ? Frail humanity! Be it embodied in a grave 
philosopher or a frivolous housemaid, it succumbs. It cannot be otherwise. 
Imitation is easy and invention is difficult. 


Yet another way of demonstrating the play of imitation in the formation 
of castes is to understand the attitude of non-Brahmin classes towards those 
customs which supported the structure of caste in its nascent days until, in 
the course of history, it became embedded in the Hindu mind and hangs there 
to this day without any support—for now it needs no prop but belief—like 


3. Physics and Politics, 1915, p. 60. 
4. Laws of Imitation, Tr. by E.C. Parsons, 2nd edition, p. 217. 
5. Ibid., p. 224. 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a weed on the surface of a pond. In a way, but only in a way, the status of a 
caste in the Hindu Society varies directly with the extent of the observance of 
the customs of Sati, enforced widowhood, and girl marriage. But observance 
of these customs varies directly with the distance (I am using the word in 
the Tardian sense) that separates the caste. Those castes that are nearest 
to the Brahmins have imitated all the three customs and insist on the strict 
observance thereof. Those that are less near have imitated enforced widowhood 
and girl marriage; others, a little further off, have only girl marriage and 
those furthest off have imitated only the belief in the caste principle. This 
imperfect imitation, I dare say, is due partly to what Tarde calls “distance” 
and partly to the barbarous character of these customs. This phenomenon 
is a complete illustration of Tarde’s law and leaves no doubt that the whole 
process of caste-formation in India is a process of imitation of the higher by 
the lower. At this juncture I will turn back to support a former conclusion 
of mine, which might have appeared to you as too sudden or unsupported. 
I said that the Brahmin class first raised the structure of caste by the 
help of those three customs in question. My reason for that conclusion was 
that their existence in other classes was derivative. After what I have said 
regarding the role of imitation in the spread of these customs among the 
non-Brahmin castes, as means or as ideals, though the imitators have not 
been aware of it, they exist among them as derivatives; and, if they are 
derived, there must have been prevalent one original caste that was high 
enough to have served as a pattern for the rest. But in a theocratic society, 
who could be the pattern but the servant of God ? 


This completes the story of those that were weak enough to close their 
doors. Let us now see how others were closed in as a result of being closed out. 
This I call the mechanistic process of the formation of caste. It is mechanistic 
because it is inevitable. That this line of approach, as well as the psychological 
one, to the explanation of the subject has escaped my predecessors is entirely 
due to the fact that they have conceived caste as a unit by itself and not as 
one within a System of Caste. The result of this oversight or lack of sight has 
been very detrimental to the proper understanding of the subject matter and 
therefore its correct explanation. I will proceed to offer my own explanation 
by making one remark which I will urge you to bear constantly in mind. It 
is this: that caste in the singular number is an unreality. Castes exist only 
in the plural number. There is no such thing as a caste: There are always 
castes. To illustrate my meaning: while making themselves into a caste, the 
Brahmins, by virtue of this, created non-Brahmin caste; or, to express it in my 
own way, while closing themselves in they closed others out. I will clear my 
point by taking another illustration. Take India as a whole with its various 
communities designated by the various creeds to which they owe allegiance, 
to wit, the Hindus, Mohammedans, Jews, Christians and Parsis. Now, 
barring the Hindus, the rest within themselves are non-caste communities. 


CASTES IN INDIA 21 


But with respect to each other they are castes. Again, if the first four enclose 
themselves, the Parsis are directly closed out, but are indirectly closed in. 
Symbolically, if Group A wants to be endogamous, Group B has to be so by 
sheer force of circumstances. 


Now apply the same logic to the Hindu society and you have another 
explanation of the “fissiparous” character of caste, as a consequence of the 
virtue of self-duplication that is inherent in it. Any innovation that seriously 
antagonises the ethical, religious and social code of the Caste is not likely 
to be tolerated by the Caste, and the recalcitrant members of a Caste are in 
danger of being thrown out of the Caste, and left to their own fate without 
having the alternative of being admitted into or absorbed by other Castes. 
Caste rules are inexorable and they do not wait to make nice distinctions 
between kinds of offence. Innovation may be of any kind, but all kinds 
will suffer the same penalty. A novel way of thinking will create a new 
Caste for the old ones will not tolerate it. The noxious thinker respectfully 
called Guru (Prophet) suffers the same fate as the sinners in illegitimate 
love. The former creates a caste of the nature of a religious sect and the 
latter a type of mixed caste. Castes have no mercy for a sinner who has 
the courage to violate the code. The penalty is excommunication and the 
result is a new caste. It is not peculiar Hindu psychology that induces 
the excommunicated to form themselves into a caste; far from it. On the 
contrary, very often they have been quite willing to be humble members of 
some caste (higher by preference) if they could be admitted within its fold. 
But castes are enclosed units and 1t is their conspiracy with clear conscience 
that compels the excommunicated to make themselves into a caste. The logic 
of this obdurate circumstance is merciless, and it is in obedience to its force 
that some unfortunate groups find themselves enclosed, because others in 
enclosing, themselves have closed them out, with the result that new groups 
(formed on any basis obnoxious to the caste rules) by a mechanical law are 
constantly being converted into castes to a bewildering multiplicity. Thus is 
told the second tale in the process of Caste formation in India. 


Now to summarise the main points of my thesis. In my opinion there 
have been several mistakes committed by the students of Caste, which have 
misled them in their investigations. European students of Caste have unduly 
emphasised the role of colour in the Caste system. Themselves impregnated 
by colour prejudices, they very readily imagined it to be the chief factor in the 
Caste problem. But nothing can be farther from the truth, and Dr. Ketkar 
is correct when he insists that “All the princes whether they belonged to the 
so-called Aryan race, or the so-called Dravidian race, were Aryas. Whether 
a tribe or a family was racially Aryan or Dravidian was a question which 
never troubled the people of India, until foreign scholars came in and began 
to draw the line. The colour of the skin had long ceased to be a matter of 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


importance.”* Again, they have mistaken mere descriptions for explanation 
and fought over them as though they were theories of origin. There are 
occupational, religious etc., castes, it is true, but it is by no means an 
explanation of the origin of Caste. We have yet to find out why occupational 
groups are castes; but this question has never even been raised. Lastly 
they have taken Caste very lightly as though a breath had made it. On the 
contrary, Caste, as I have explained it, is almost impossible to be sustained : 
for the difficulties that it involves are tremendous. It is true that Caste 
rests on belief, but before belief comes to be the foundation of an institution, 
the institution itself needs to be perpetuated and fortified. My study of the 
Caste problem involves four main points: (1) that in spite of the composite 
make-up of the Hindu population, there is a deep cultural unity; (2) that 
caste is a parcelling into bits of a larger cultural unit; (8) that there was 
one caste to start with and (4) that classes have become Castes through 
imitation and excommunication. 


Peculiar interest attaches to the problem of Caste in India today; as 
persistent attempts are being made to do away with this unnatural institution. 
Such attempts at reform, however, have aroused a great deal of controversy 
regarding its origin, as to whether it is due to the conscious command of 
a Supreme Authority, or is an unconscious growth in the life of a human 
society under peculiar circumstances. Those who hold the latter view will, 
I hope, find some food for thought in the standpoint adopted in this paper. 
Apart from its practical importance the subject of Caste is an all absorbing 
problem and the interest aroused in me regarding its theoretic foundations 
has moved me to put before you some of the conclusions, which seem to me 
well founded, and the grounds upon which they may be supported. I am not, 
however, so presumptuous as to think them in any way final, or anything 
more than a contribution to a discussion of the subject. It seems to me that 
the car has been shunted on wrong lines, and the primary object of the 
paper is to indicate what I regard to be the right path of investigation, with 
a view to arrive at a serviceable truth. We must, however, guard against 
approaching the subject with a bias. Sentiment must be outlawed from the 
domain of science and things should be judged from an objective standpoint. 
For myself I shall find as much pleasure in a positive destruction of my own 
idealogy, as in a rational disagreement on a topic, which, notwithstanding 
many learned disquisitions is likely to remain controversial forever. To 
conclude, while I am ambitious to advance a Theory of Caste, if it can be 
shown to be untenable I shall be equally willing to give it up. 


6. History of Caste, p. 82. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 
WITH 
A Reply to Mahatma Gandhi 


“Know Truth as Truth and Untruth as Untruth” 
— BUDDHA 


“He that WILL NOT reason is a bigot 
He that CANNOT reason is a fool 
He that DARE NOT reason is a slave” 


—H. DRUMMOND 


Printed from the third edition of 1944 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


The speech prepared by me for the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore has 
had an astonishingly warm reception from the Hindu public for whom it 
was primarily intended. The English edition of one thousand five hundred 
was exhausted within two months of its publication. It is translated into 
Gujarati and Tamil. It is being translated in Marathi, Hindi, Punjabi and 
Malayalam. The demand for the English text still continues unabated. To 
satisfy this demand it has become necessary to issue a Second Edition. 
Considerations of history and effectiveness of appeal have led me to retain 
the original form of the essay—namely the speech form—although I was 
asked to recast it in the form of a direct narrative. To this edition I have 
added two appendices. I have collected in Appendix I the two articles 
written by Mr. Gandhi by way of review of my speech in the Harijan, 
and his letter to Mr. Sant Ram, a member of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal. 
In Appendix II, I have printed my views in reply to the articles of Mr. 
Gandhi collected in Appendix I. Besides Mr. Gandhi many others have 
adversely criticised my views as expressed in my speech. But I have felt 
that in taking notice of such adverse comments I should limit myself to 
Mr. Gandhi. This I have done not because what he has said is so weighty 
as to deserve a reply but because to many a Hindu he is an oracle, so 
great that when he opens his lips it is expected that the argument must 
close and no dog must bark. But the world owes much to rebels who 
would dare to argue in the face of the pontiff and insist that he is not 
infallible. I do not care for the credit which every progressive society 


26 PREFACE 


must give to its rebels. I shall be satisfied if I make the Hindus realize 
that they are the sick men of India and that their sickness is causing 
danger to the health and happiness of other Indians. 


B. R. AMBEDKAR 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


The Second edition of this Essay appeared in 1937, and was exhausted 
within a very short period. A new edition has been in demand for a 
long time. It was my intention to recast the essay so as to incorporate 
into it another essay of mine called “Castes in India, their Origin and 
their Mechanism”, which appeared in the issue of the Indian Antiquary 
Journal for May 1917. But as I could not find time, and as there is very 
little prospect of my being able to do so and as the demand for it from 
the public is very insistent, I am content to let this be a mere reprint 
of the Second edition. 


I am glad to find that this essay has become so popular, and I hope 
that it will serve the purpose for which it was intended. 


22, Prithwiraj Road B. R. AMBEDKAR 
New Delhi 
1st December 1944 


PROLOGUE 


On December 12, 1935, I received the following letter from 
Mr. Sant Ram, the Secretary of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal: 


My dear Doctor Saheb, 


Many thanks for your kind letter of the 5th December. I have released 
it for press without your permission for which I beg your pardon, as I 
saw no harm in giving it publicity. You are a great thinker, and it is my 
well-considered opinion that none else has studied the problem of Caste so 
deeply as you have. I have always benefited myself and our Mandal from 
your ideas. I have explained and preached it in the Kranti many times and 
I have even lectured on it in many Conferences. I am now very anxious to 
read the exposition of your new formula—“It is not possible to break Caste 
without annihilating the religious notions on which it, the Caste system, 
is founded.” Please do explain it at length at your earliest convenience, so 
that we may take up the idea and emphasise it from press and platform. 
At present, it is not fully clear to me. 

* * * * * 


Our Executive Committee persists in having you as our President for 
our Annual Conference. We can change our dates to accommodate your 
convenience. Independent Harijans of Punjab are very much desirous to meet 
you and discuss with you their plans. So if you kindly accept our request and 
come to Lahore to preside over the Conference it will serve double purpose. 
We will invite Harijan leaders of all shades of opinion and you will get an 
opportunity of giving your ideas to them. 

The Mandal has deputed our Assistant Secretary, Mr. Indra Singh, to 
meet you at Bombay in Xmas and discuss with you the whole situation with 
a view to persuade you to please accept our request. 

* * * * * 


The Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal, I was given to understand, to be an 
organization of Caste Hindu Social Reformers, with the one and 
only aim, namely to eradicate the Caste System from amongst the 
Hindus. As a rule, I do not like to take any part in a movement 
which is carried on by the Caste Hindus. Their attitude towards 
social reform is so different from mine that I have found it 
difficult to pull on with them. Indeed, I find their company quite 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


uncongenial to me on account of our differences of opinion. Therefore 
when the Mandal first approached me [ declined their invitation to 
preside. The Mandal, however, would not take a refusal from me and 
sent down one of its members to Bombay to press me to accept the 
invitation. In the end I agreed to preside. The Annual Conference 
was to be held at Lahore, the headquarters of the Mandal. The 
Conference was to meet in Easter but was subsequently postponed 
to the middle of May 1936. The Reception Committee of the Mandal 
has now cancelled the Conference. The notice of cancellation came 
long after my Presidential address had been printed. The copies of 
this address are now lying with me. As I did not get an opportunity 
to deliver the address from the presidential chair the public has not 
had an opportunity to know my views on the problems created by 
the Caste System. To let the public know them and also to dispose of 
the printed copies which are lying on my hand, I have decided to put 
the printed copies of the address in the market. The accompanying 
pages contain the text of that address. 


The public will be curious to know what led to the cancellation 
of my appointment as the President of the Conference. At the start, 
a dispute arose over the printing of the address. I desired that the 
address should be printed in Bombay. The Mandal wished that it 
should be printed in Lahore on the ground of economy. I did not agree 
and insisted upon having it printed in Bombay. Instead of agreeing 
to my proposition I received a letter signed by several members of 
the Mandal from which I give the following extract : 

27-3-36 


Revered Dr. Ji, 

Your letter of the 24th instant addressed to Sjt. Sant Ram has been 
shown to us. We were a little disappointed to read it. Perhaps you are not 
fully aware of the situation that has arisen here. Almost all the Hindus in 
the Punjab are against your being invited to this province. The Jat-Pat- 
Todak Mandal has been subjected to the bitterest criticism and has received 
censorious rebuke from all quarters. All the Hindu leaders among whom 
being Bhai Parmanand, ML.A. (Ex-President, Hindu Maha Sabha), Mahatma 
Hans Raj, Dr. Gokal Chand Narang, Minister for Local Self-Government, 
Raja Narendra Nath, M.L.C. etc., have dissociated themselves from this 
step of the Mandal. 

Despite all this the runners of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal (the leading figure 
being Sjt. Sant Ram) are determined to wade through thick and thin but 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 29 


would not give up the idea of your presidentship. The Mandal has earned a 
bad name. 
* * * * * 
Under the circumstances it becomes your duty to co-operate with the Mandal. 
On the one hand, they are being put to so much trouble and hardship by the 
Hindus and if on the other hand you too augment their difficulties it will be a 
most sad coincidence of bad luck for them. 


We hope you will think over the matter and do what is good for us all. 


* * * * * 


This letter puzzled me greatly. I could not understand why the Mandal 
should displease me for the sake of a few rupees in the matter of printing 
the address. Secondly, I could not believe that men like Sir Gokal Chand 
Narang had really resigned as a protest against my selection as President 
because I had received the following letter from Sir Gokal Chand himself : 

5 Montgomery Road 
Lahore, 7-2-36 


Dear Doctor Ambedkar, 

I am glad to learn from the workers of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal that you 
have agreed to preside at their next anniversary to be held at Lahore during 
the Easter holidays. It will give me much pleasure if you stay with me while 
you are at Lahore. More when we meet. 

Yours sincerely, 
G. C. NARANG 


Whatever be the truth I did not yield to this pressure. But even when 
the Mandal found that I was insisting upon having my address printed 
in Bombay instead of agreeing to my proposal the Mandal sent me a 
wire that they were sending Mr. Har Bhagwan to Bombay to “talk over 
matters personally” Mr. Har Bhagwan came to Bombay on the 9th of 
April. When I met Mr. Har Bhagwan I found that he had nothing to say 
regarding the issue. Indeed, he was so unconcerned regarding the printing 
of the address, whether it should be printed in Bombay or in Lahore, 
that he did not even mention it in the course of our conversation. All 
that he was anxious for was to know the contents of the address. I was 
then convinced that in getting the address printed in Lahore the main 
object of the Mandal was not to save money but to get at the contents 
of the address. I gave him a copy. He did not feel very happy with some 
parts of it. He returned to Lahore. From Lahore, he wrote to me the 
following letter : 

Lahore, dated April 14, 1986 
My dear Doctor Sahib, 


Since my arrival from Bombay, on the 12th, I have been indisposed owing 
to my having not slept continuously for 5 or 6 nights, which were spent in the 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


train. Reaching here I came to know that you had come to Amritsar. I 
would have seen you there if I were well enough to go about. I have made 
over your address to Mr. Sant Ram for translation and he has liked it very 
much, but he is not sure whether it could be translated by him for printing 
before the 25th. In any case, it woud have a wide publicity and we are sure 
1t would wake the Hindus up from their slumber. 


The passage I pointed out to you at Bombay has been read by some of 
our friends with a little misgiving, and those of us who would like to see 
the Conference terminate without any untoward incident would prefer that 
at least the word “Veda” be left out for the time being. I leave this to your 
good sense. I hope, however, in your concluding paragraphs you will make 
1t clear that the views expressed in the address are your own and that the 
responsibility does not lie on the Mandal. I hope, you will not mind this 
statement of mine and would let us have 1,000 copies of the address, for 
which we shall, of course, pay. To this effect I have sent you a telegram 
today. A cheque of Rs. 100 is enclosed herewith which kindly acknowledge, 
and send us your bills in due time. 


I have called a meeting of the Reception Committee and shall communicate 
their decision to you immediately. In the meantime kindly accept my heartfelt 
thanks for the kindness shown to me and the great pains taken by you in 
the preparation of your address. You have really put us under a heavy debt 
of gratitude. 


Yours sincerely, 
Har BHAGWAN 


P.S.—Kindly send the copies of the address by passenger train as soon 
as it is printed, so that copies may be sent to the Press for publication. 


Accordingly I handed over my manuscript to the printer with an 
order to print 1,000 copies. Eight days later, I received another letter 
from Mr. Har Bhagwan which I reproduce below: 


Lahore, 22-4-36 
Dear Dr. Ambedkar, 


We are in receipt of your telegram and letter, for which kindly accept 
our thanks. In accordance with your desire, we have again postponed our 
Conference, but feel that it would have been much better to have it on the 
25th and 26th, as the weather is growing warmer and warmer every day 
in the Punjab. In the middle of May it would be fairly hot, and the sittings 
in the day time would not be very pleasant and comfortable. However, we 
shall try our best to do all we can to make things as comfortable as possible, 
if it is held in the middle of May. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 31 


There is, however, one thing that we have been compelled to bring to 
your kind attention. You will remember that when I pointed out to you the 
misgivings entertained by some of our people regarding your declaration on 
the subject of change of religion, you told me that it was undoubtedly outside 
the scope of the Mandal and that you had no intention to say anything from 
our platform in that connection. At the same time when the manuscript of 
your address was handed to me you assured me that that was the main 
portion of your address and that there were only two or three concluding 
paragraphs that you wanted to add. On receipt of the second instalment 
of your address we have been taken by surprise, as that would make it so 
lengthy, that we are afraid, very few people would read the whole of it. 
Besides that you have more than once stated in your address that you had 
decided to walk out of the fold of the Hindus and that that was your last 
address as a Hindu. You have also unnecessarily attacked the morality and 
reasonableness of the Vedas and other religious books of the Hindus, and 
have at length dwelt upon the technical side of Hindu religion, which has 
absolutely no connection with the problem at issue, so much so that some 
of the passages have become irrelevant and off the point. We would have 
been very pleased if you had confined your address to that portion given 
to me, or if an addition was necessary, it would have been limited to what 
you had written on Brahminism etc. The last portion which deals with 
the complete annihilation of Hindu religion and doubts the morality of the 
sacred books of the Hindus as well as a hint about your intention to leave 
the Hindu fold does not seem to me to be relevant. 


I would therefore most humbly request you on behalf of the people 
responsible for the Conference to leave out the passages referred to above, 
and close the address with what was given to me or add a few paragraphs 
on Brahminism. We doubt the wisdom of making the address unnecessarily 
provocative and pinching. There are several of us who subscribe to your 
feelings and would very much want to be under your banner for remodelling 
of the Hindu religion. If you had decided to get together persons of your cult 
I can assure you a large number would have joined your army of reformers 
from the Punjab. 


In fact, we thought you would give us a lead in the destruction of the evil 
of caste system, especially when you have studied the subject so thoroughly, 
and strengthen our hands by bringing about a revolution and making yourself 
as a nucleus in the gigantic effort, but declaration of the nature made by 
you when repeated loses its power, and becomes a hackneyed term. Under 
the circumstances, I would request you to consider the whole matter and 
make your address more effective by saying that you would be glad to take a 
leading part in the destruction of the caste system if the Hindus are willing 
to work in right earnest toward that end, even if they had to forsake their 
kith and kin and the religious notions. In case you do so, I am sanguine 
that you would find a ready response from the Punjab in such an endeavour. 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I shall be grateful if you will help us at this Juncture as we have already 
undergone much expenditure and have been put to suspence, and let us know 
by the return of post that you have condescended to limit your address as 
above. In case, you still insist upon the printing of the address ¿n toto, we 
very much regret it would not be possible—rather advisable for us to hold 
the Conference, and would prefer to postpone it sine die, although by doing 
so we shall be losing the goodwill of the people because of the repeated 
postponements. We should, however, like to point out that you have carved 
a niche in our hearts by writing such a wonderful treatise on the caste 
system, which excels all other treatises so far written and will prove to be a 
valuable heritage, so to say. We shall be ever indebted to you for the pains 
taken by you in its preparation. 


Thanking you very much for your kindness and with best wishes. 


I am, yours sincerely, 
HAR BHAGWAN 


To this letter I sent the following reply: 
27th April 1936 
Dear Mr. Har Bhagwan, 


I am in receipt of your letter of the 22nd April. I note with regret that the 
Reception Committee of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal “would prefer to postpone 
the Conference sine die” if I insisted upon printing the address in toto. In 
reply I have to inform you that I also would prefer to have the Conference 
cancelled—I do not like to use vague terms—if the Mandal insisted upon 
having my address pruned to suit its circumstances. You may not like 
my decision. But I cannot give up, for the sake of the honour of presiding 
over the Conference, the liberty which every President must have in the 
preparation of the address. I cannot give up for the sake of pleasing the 
Mandal the duty which every President owes to the Conference over which 
he presides to give it a lead which he thinks right and proper. The issue is 
one of principle and I feel I must do nothing to compromise it in any way. 


I would not have entered into any controversy as regards the propriety 
of the decision taken by the Reception Committee. But as you have given 
certain reasons which appear to throw the blame on me. I am bound to 
answer them. In the first place, I must dispel the notion that the views 
contained in that part of the address to which objection has been taken by 
the Committee have come to the Mandal as a surprise. Mr. Sant Ram, I am 
sure, will bear me out when I say that in reply to one of his letters I had 
said that the real method of breaking up the Caste System was not to bring 
about inter-caste dinners and inter-caste marriages but to destroy the religious 
notions on which Caste was founded and that Mr. Sant Ram in return asked 
me to explain what he said was a novel point of view. It was in response to 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 33 


this invitation from Mr. Sant Ram that I thought I ought to elaborate 
in my address what I had stated in a sentence in my letter to him. You 
cannot, therefore, say that the views expressed are new. At any rate, they 
are not new to Mr. Sant Ram who is the moving spirit and the leading 
light of your Mandal. But I go further and say that I wrote this part of my 
address not merely because I felt it desirable to do so. I wrote it because 
I thought that it was absolutely necessary to complete the argument. I am 
amazed to read that you characterize the portion of the speech to which 
your Committee objects as “irrelevant and off the point”. You will allow me 
to say that I am a lawyer and I know the rules of relevancy as well as any 
member of your Committee. I most emphatically maintain that the portion 
objected to is not only most relevant but is also important. It is in that part 
of the address that I have discussed the ways and means of breaking up 
the Caste System. It may be that the conclusion I have arrived at as to the 
best method of destroying Caste is startling and painful. You are entitled 
to say that my analysis is wrong. But you cannot say that in an address 
which deals with the problem of Caste it is not open to me to discuss how 
Caste can be destroyed. 


Your other complaint relates to the length of the address. I have pleaded 
guilty to the charge in the address itself. But, who is really responsible for 
this ? I fear you have come rather late on the scene. Otherwise you would 
have known that originally I had planned to write a short address for my 
own convenience as I had neither the time nor the energy to engage myself 
in the preparation of an elaborate thesis. It was the Mandal who asked me 
to deal with the subject exhaustively and it was the Mandal which sent 
down to me a list of questions relating to the Caste System and asked me 
to answer them in the body of my address as they were questions which 
were often raised in the controversy between the Mandal and its opponents 
and which the Mandal found difficult to answer satisfactorily. It was in 
trying to meet the wishes of the Mandal in this respect that the address has 
grown to the length to which it has. In view of what I have said I am sure 
you will agree that the fault respecting length of the address is not mine. 


I did not expect that your Mandal would be so upset because I have 
spoken of the destruction of Hindu Religion. I thought it was only fools who 
were afraid of words. But lest there should be any misapprehension in the 
minds of the people I have taken great pains to explain what I mean by 
religion and destruction of religion. I am sure that nobody on reading my 
address could possibly misunderstand me. That your Mandal should have 
taken a fright at mere words as “destruction of religion etc.” notwithstanding 
the explanation that accompanies, them does not raise the Mandal in my 
estimation. One cannot have any respect or regard for men who take the 
position of the Reformer and then refuse even to see the logical consequences 
of that position, let alone following them out in action. 


You will agree that I have never accepted to be limited in any way in the 
preparation of my address and the question as to what the address should or 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


should not contain was never even discussed between myself and the Mandal. 
I had always taken for granted that I was free to express in the address such 
views as I held on the subject. Indeed until, you came to Bombay on the 9th 
April the Mandal did not know what sort of an address I was preparing. 
It was when you came to Bombay that I voluntarily told you that I had 
no desire to use your platform from which to advocate my views regarding 
change of religion by the Depressed Classes. I think I have scrupulously kept 
that promise in the preparation of the address. Beyond a passing reference 
of an indirect character where I say that “I am sorry I will not be here... 
etc.” I have said nothing about the subject in my address. When I see you 
object even to such a passing and so indirect a reference, I feel bound to 
ask ; did you think that in agreeing to preside over your Conference I would 
be agreeing to suspend or to give up my views regarding change of faith by 
the Depressed Classes ? If you did think so I must tell you that I am in no 
way responsible for such a mistake on your part. If any of you had even 
hinted to me that in exchange for the honour you were doing me by electing 
as President, I was to abjure my faith in my programme of conversion, I 
would have told you in quite plain terms that I cared more for my faith 
than for any honour from you. 


After your letter of the 14th, this letter of yours comes as a surprize to 
me. I am sure that any one who reads them will feel the same. I cannot 
account for this sudden volte face on the part of the Reception Committee. 
There is no difference in substance between the rough draft which was before 
the Committee when you wrote your letter of the 14th and the final draft 
on which the decision of the Committee communicated to me in your letter 
under reply was taken. You cannot point out a single new idea in the final 
draft which is not contained in the earlier draft. The ideas are the same. 
The only difference is that they have been worked out in greater detail im 
the final draft. If there was anything to object to in the address you could 
have said so on the 14th. But you did not. On the contrary you asked me 
to print off 1,000 copies leaving me the liberty to accept or not the verbal 
changes which you suggested. Accordingly I got 1,000 copies printed which 
are now lying with me. Eight days later you write to say that you object to 
the address and that if it is not amended the Conference will be cancelled. 
You ought to have known that there was no hope of any alteration being 
made in the address. I told you when you were in Bombay that I would 
not alter a comma, that I would not allow any censorship over my address 
and that you would have to accept the address as 1t came from me. I also 
told you that the responsibility for the views expressed in the address was 
entirely mine and if they were not liked by the Conference I would not mind 
at all if the Conference passed a resolution condemning them. So anxious 
was I to relieve your Mandal from having to assume responsibility for my 
views and also with the object of not getting myself entangled by too intimate 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 35 


an association with your Conference, I suggested to you that I desired to 
have my address treated as a sort of an inaugural address and not as a 
Presidential address and that the Mandal should find some one else to 
preside over the Conference, and deal with the resolutions. Nobody could 
have been better placed to take a decision on the 14th than your Committee. 
The Committee failed to do that and in the meantime cost of printing has 
been incurred which, I am sure, with a little more firmness on the part of 
your Committee could have been saved. 


I feel sure that the views expressed in my address have little to do with 
the decision of your Committee. I have reasons to believe that my presence 
at the Sikh Prachar Conference held at Amritsar has had a good deal to do 
with the decision of the Committee. Nothing else can satisfactorily explain 
the sudden volte face shown by the Committee between the 14th and the 
22nd April. I must not however prolong this controversy and must request 
you to announce immediately that the Session of the Conference which 
was to meet under my Presidentship is cancelled. All the grace has by now 
run out and I shall not consent to preside even if your Committee agreed 
to accept my address as it is in toto. I thank you for your appreciation of 
the pains I have taken in the preparation of the address. I certainly have 
profited by the labour if no one else does. My only regret is that I was put 
to such hard labour at a time when my health was not equal to the strain 
1t has caused. 


Yours sincerely, 
B. R. AMBEDKAR 


This correspondence will disclose the reasons which have led to the 
cancellation by the Mandal of my appointment as President and the 
reader will be in a position to lay the blame where it ought properly 
to belong. This is I believe the first time when the appointment of a 
President is cancelled by the Reception Committee because it does 
not approve of the views of the President. But whether that is so or 
not, this is certainly the first time in my life to have been invited 
to preside over a Conference of Caste Hindus. I am sorry that it has 
ended in a tragedy. But what can any one expect from a relationship 
so tragic as the relationship between the reforming sect of Caste 
Hindus and the self-respecting sect of Untouchables where the former 
have no desire to alienate their orthodox fellows and the latter have 
no alternative but to insist upon reform being carried out ? 


Rajgriha, Dadar, Bombay 14 
15th May 1936 B. R. AMBEDKAR 


SPEECH PREPARED 


BY 


Dr. B.R. AMBEDKAR 


FOR 


The 1936 Annual Conference of 
the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore 


BUT 


NOT DELIVERED 


Owing to the cancellation of the Conference by 

the Reception Committee on the ground that 

the views expressed in the Speech would be 
unbearable to the Conference 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 37 


Friends, 


I am really sorry for the members of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal who 
have so very kindly invited me to preside over this Conference. I am 
sure they will be asked many questions for having selected me as the 
President. The Mandal will be asked to explain as to why it has imported 
a man from Bombay to preside over a function which is held in Lahore. 
I believe the Mandal could easily have found some one better qualified 
than myself to preside on the occasion. I have criticised the Hindus. I 
have questioned the authority of the Mahatma whom they revere. They 
hate me. To them I am a snake in their garden. The Mandal will no 
doubt be asked by the politically-minded Hindus to explain why it has 
called me to fill this place of honour. It is an act of great daring. I shall 
not be surprised if some political Hindus regard it as an insult. This 
selection of mine cannot certainly please the ordinary religiously-minded 
Hindus. The Mandal may be asked to explain why it has disobeyed the 
Shastric injunction in selecting the President. Accoding to the Shastras 
the Brahmin is appointed to be the Guru for the three Varnas, T99 
Jam Te, is a direction of the Shastras. The Mandal therefore knows 
from whom a Hindu should take his lessons and from whom he should 
not. The Shastras do not permit a Hindu to accept any one as his Guru 
merely because he is well-versed. This is made very clear by Ramdas, a 
Brahmin saint from Maharashtra, who is alleged to have inspired Shivaji 
to establish a Hindu Raj. In his Dasbodh, a socio-politico-religious treatise 
in Marathi verse Ramdas asks, addressing the Hindus, can we accept an 
Antyaja to be our Guru because he is a Pandit (i.e. learned) and gives 
an answer in the negative. What replies to give to these questions is a 
matter which I must leave to the Mandal. The Mandal knows best the 
reasons which led it to travel to Bombay to select a president, to fix upon 
a man so repugnant to the Hindus and to descend so low in the scale 
as to select an Antyaja— an untouchable—to address an audience of the 
Savarnas. As for myself you will allow me to say that I have accepted the 
invitation much against my will and also against the will of many of my 
fellow untouchables. I know that the Hindus are sick of me. I know that 
I am not a persona grata with them. Knowing all this I have deliberately 
kept myself away from them. I have no destre to inflict myself upon them. 
I have been giving expression to my views from my own platform. This 
has already caused a great deal of heartburning and irritation. I have 
no desire to ascend the platform of the Hindus to do within their sight 
what I have been doing within their hearing. If I am here it is because 
of your choice and not because of my wish. Yours is a cause of social 
reform. That cause has always made an appeal to me and it is because 
of this that I felt I ought not to refuse an opportunity of helping the 
cause especially when you think that I can help it. Whether what I am 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


going to say today will help you in any way to solve the problem you are 
grappling with is for you to judge. All I hope to do is to place before you 
my views on the problem. 


II 


The path of social reform like the path to heaven at any rate in India, 
is strewn with many difficulties. Social reform in India has few friends and 
many critics. The critics fall into two distinct classes. One class consists of 
political reformers and the other of the socialists. 


It was at one time recognized that without social efficiency no permanent 
progress in the other fields of activity was possible, that owing to mischief 
wrought by the evil customs, Hindu Society was not in a state of efficiency 
and that ceaseless efforts must be made to eradicate these evils. It was due 
to the recognition of this fact that the birth of the National Congress was 
accompanied by the foundation of the Social Conference. While the Congress 
was concerned with defining the weak points in the political organisation of 
the country, the Social Conference was engaged in removing the weak points 
in the social organisation of the Hindu Society. For some time the Congress 
and the Conference worked as two wings of one common activity and they 
held their annual sessions in the same pandal. But soon the two wings 
developed into two parties, a Political Reform Party and a Social Reform 
Party, between whom there raged a fierce controversy. The Political Reform 
Party supported the National Congress and Social Reform Party supported 
the Social Conference. The two bodies thus became two hostile camps. The 
point at issue was whether social reform should precede political reform. 
For a decade the forces were evenly balanced and the battle was fought 
without victory to either side. It was however evident that the fortunes of 
the Social Conference were ebbing fast. The gentlemen who presided over 
the sessions of the Social Conference lamented that the majority of the 
educated Hindus were for political advancement and indifferent to social 
reform and that while the number of those who attended the Congress was 
very large and the number who did not attend but who sympathized with 
it even larger, the number of those who attended the Social Conference was 
very much smaller. This indifference, this thinning of its ranks was soon 
followed by active hostility from the politicians. Under the leadership of 
the late Mr. Tilak, the courtesy with which the Congress allowed the Social 
Conference the use of its pandal was withdrawn and the spirit of enmity 
went to such a pitch that when the Social Conference desired to erect its 
own pandal a threat to burn the pandal was held out by its opponents. Thus 
in course of time the party in favour of political reform won and the Social 
Conference vanished and was forgotten. The speech, delivered by Mr. W.C. 
Bonnerji in 1892 at Allahabad as President of the eighth session of the 
Congress, sounds like a funeral oration at the death of the Social Conference 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 39 


and is so typical of the Congress attitude that I venture to quote from it 
the following extract. Mr. Bonnerji said : 


“I for one have no patience with those who say we shall not be fit for political 
reform until we reform our social system. I fail to see any connection between 
the two. . .Are we not fit (for political reform) because our widows remain 
unmarried and our girls are given in marriage earlier than in other countries ? 
because our wives and daughters do not drive about with us visiting our friends ? 
because we do not send our daughters to Oxford and Cambridge ?” (Cheers) 


I have stated the case for political reform as put by Mr. Bonnerji. There 
were many who are happy that the victory went to the Congress. But those 
who believe in the importance of social reform may ask, is the argument 
such as that of Mr. Bonnerji final ? Does it prove that the victory went to 
those who were in the right ? Does it prove conclusively that social reform 
has no bearing on political reform ? It will help us to understand the matter 
if I state the other side of the case. I will draw upon the treatment of the 
untouchables for my facts. 


Under the rule of the Peshwas in the Maratha country the untouchable 
was not allowed to use the public streets if a Hindu was coming along lest 
he should pollute the Hindu by his shadow. The untouchable was required 
to have a black thread either on his wrist or in his neck as a sign or a mark 
to prevent the Hindus from getting themselves polluted by his touch through 
mistake. In Poona, the capital of the Peshwa, the untouchable was required 
to carry, strung from his waist, a broom to sweep away from behind the 
dust he treaded on lest a Hindu walking on the same should be polluted. 
In Poona, the untouchable was required to carry an earthen pot, hung in 
his neck wherever he went, for holding his spit lest his spit falling on earth 
should pollute a Hindu who might unknowingly happen to tread on it. Let 
me take more recent facts. The tyranny practised by the Hindus upon the 
Balais, an untouchable community in Central India, will serve my purpose. 
You will find a report of this in the Times of India of 4th January 1928. 
The correspondent of the Times of India reported that high caste Hindus, 
viz. Kalotas, Rajputs and Brahmins including the Patels and Patwaris of 
villages of Kanaria, Bicholi-Hafsi, Bicholi-Mardana and of about 15 other 
villages in the Indore district (of the Indore State) informed the Balais of 
their respective villages that if they wished to live among them they must 
conform to the following rules : 


(1) Balais must not wear gold-lace-bordered pugrees. 
(2) They must not wear dhotis with coloured or fancy borders. 


(3) They must convey intimation of the death of any Hindu to relatives 
of the deceased—no matter how far away these relatives may be 
living. 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(4) In all Hindu marriages, Balais must play music before the processions 
and during the marriage. 

(5) Balai women must not wear gold or silver ornaments; they must not 
wear fancy gowns or jackets. 

(6) Balai women must attend all cases of confinement of Hindu women. 

(7) Balais must render services without demanding remuneration and 
must accept whatever a Hindu is pleased to give. 

(8) If the Balais do not agree to abide by these terms they must clear 


out of the villages. The Balais refused to comply; and the Hindu 
element proceeded against them. Balais were not allowed to get water 
from the village wells; they were not allowed to let go their cattle 
to graze. Balais were prohibited from passing through land owned 
by a Hindu, so that if the field of a Balai was surrounded by fields 
owned by Hindus, the Balai could have no access to his own field. 
The Hindus also let their cattle graze down the fields of Balais. The 
Balais submitted petitions to the Darbar against these persecutions ; 
but as they could get no timely relief, and the oppression continued, 
hundreds of Balais with their wives and children were obliged to 
abandon their homes in which their ancestors lived for generations 
and to migrate to adjoining States, viz. to villages in Dhar, Dewas, 
Bagli, Bhopal, Gwalior and other States. What happened to them in 
their new homes may for the present be left out of our consideration. 
The incident at Kavitha in Gujarat happened only last year. The 
Hindus of Kavitha ordered the untouchables not to insist upon 
sending their children to the common village school maintained by 
Government. What sufferings the untouchables of Kavitha had to 
undergo for daring to exercise a civic right against the wishes of 
the Hindus is too well known to need detailed description. Another 
instance occurred in the village of Zanu in the Ahmedabad district 
of Gujarat. In November 1935 some untouchable women of well-to-do 
families started fetching water in metal pots. The Hindus looked upon 
the use of metal pots by untouchables as an affront to their dignity 
and assaulted the untouchable women for their impudence. A most 
recent event is reported from the village Chakwara in Jaipur State. 
It seems from the reports that have appeared in the newspapers that 
an untouchable of Chakwara who had returned from a pilgrimage had 
arranged to give a dinner to his fellow untouchables of the village 
as an act of religious piety. The host desired to treat the guests to 
a sumptuous meal and the items served included ghee (butter) also. 
But while the assembly of untouchables was engaged in partaking of 
the food, the Hindus in their hundreds, armed with lathis, rushed to 
the scene, despoiled the food and belaboured the untouchables who 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 41 


left the food they were served with and ran away for their lives. 
And why was this murderous assault committed on defenceless 
untouchables ? The reason given is that the untouchable host was 
impudent enough to serve ghee and his untouchable guests were 
foolish enough to taste it. Ghee is undoubtedly a luxury for the rich. 
But no one would think that consumption of ghee was a mark of 
high social status. The Hindus of Chakwara thought otherwise and 
in righteous indignation avenged themselves for the wrong done to 
them by the untouchables, who insulted them by treating ghee as 
an item of their food which they ought to have known could not be 
theirs, consistently with the dignity of the Hindus. This means that 
an untouchable must not use ghee even if he can afford to buy it, 
since it is an act of arrogance towards the Hindus. This happened 
on or about the 1st of April 1936 ! 


Having stated the facts, let me now state the case for social reform. 
In doing this, I will follow Mr. Bonnerji, as nearly as I can and ask the 
political-minded Hindus “Are you fit for political power even though you do 
not allow a large class of your own countrymen like the untouchables to 
use public school? Are you fit for political power even though you do not 
allow them the use of public wells? Are you fit for political power even 
though you do not allow them the use of public streets? Are you fit for 
political power even though you do not allow them to wear what apparel 
or ornaments they like? Are you fit for political power even though you 
do not allow them to eat any food they like ?” I can ask a string of such 
questions. But these will suffice. I wonder what would have been the reply 
of Mr. Bonnerji. I am sure no sensible man will have the courage to give an 
affirmative answer. Every Congressman who repeats the dogma of Mill that 
one country is not fit to rule another country must admit that one class is 
not fit to rule another class. 


How is it then that the Social Reform Party lost the battle ? To understand 
this correctly it is necessary, to take note of the kind of social reform 
which the reformers were agitating for. In this connection it is necessary 
to make a distinction between social reform in the sense of the reform of 
the Hindu Family and social reform in the sense of the reorganization 
and reconstruction of the Hindu Society. The former has relation to widow 
remarriage, child marriage etc., while the latter relates to the abolition of 
the Caste System. The Social Conference was a body which mainly concerned 
itself with the reform of the high caste Hindu Family. It consisted mostly of 
enlightened high caste Hindus who did not feel the necessity for agitating 
for the abolition of caste or had not the courage to agitate for it. They felt 
quite naturally a greater urge to remove such evils as enforced widowhood, 
child marriages etc., evils which prevailed among them and which were 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


personally felt by them. They did not stand up for the reform of the Hindu 
soclety. The battle that was fought centered round the question of the reform 
of the family. It did not relate to the social reform in the sense of the break- 
up of the caste system. It was never put in issue by the reformers. That is 
the reason why the Social Reform Party lost. 


I am aware that this argument cannot alter the fact that political reform 
did in fact galn precedence over social reform. But the argument has this 
much value if not more. It explains why social reformers lost the battle. It 
also helps us to understand how limited was the victory which the Political 
Reform Party obtained over the Social Reform Party and that the view 
that social reform need not precede political reform is a view which may 
stand only when by social reform is meant the reform of the family. That 
political reform cannot with impunity take precedence over social reform in 
the sense of reconstruction of society is a thesis which, I am sure, cannot be 
controverted. That the makers of political constitutions must take account of 
social forces is a fact which is recognized by no less a person than Ferdinand 
Lassalle, the friend and co-worker of Karl Marx. In addressing a Prussian 
audience in 1862 Lassalle said : 


“The constitutional questions are in the first instance not questions of right 
but questions of might. The actual constitution of a country has its existence 
only in the actual condition of force which exists in the country : hence political 
constitutions have value and permanence only when they accurately express those 
conditions of forces which exist in practice within a society.” 


But it is not necessary to go to Prussia. There is evidence at home. What 
is the significance of the Communal Award with its allocation of political 
power in defined proportions to diverse classes and communities? In my 
view, its significance lies in this that political constitution must take note of 
social organisation. It shows that the politicians who denied that the social 
problem in India had any bearing on the political problem were forced to 
reckon with the social problem in devising the constitution. The Communal 
Award is so to say the nemesis following upon the indifference and neglect 
of social reform. It is a victory for the Social Reform Party which shows that 
though defeated they were in the right in insisting upon the importance of 
social reform. Many, I know, will not accept this finding. The view is current, 
and it is pleasant to believe in it, that the Communal Award is unnatural 
and that it is the result of an unholy alliance between the minorities 
and the bureaucracy. I do not wish to rely on the Communal Award as a 
piece of evidence to support my contention if it is said that it is not good 
evidence. Let us turn to Ireland. What does the history of Irish Home Rule 
show ? It is well-known that in the course of the negotiations between 
the representatives of Ulster and Southern Ireland, Mr. Redmond, the 
representative Ireland, in order to bring Ulster in a Home Rule Constitution 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 43 


common to the whole of Ireland said to the representatives of Ulster: 
“Ask any political safeguards you like and you shall have them” What was 
the reply that Ulstermen gave? Their reply was “Damn your safeguards, 
we don't want to be ruled by you on any terms.” People who blame the 
minorities in India ought to consider what would have happened to the 
political aspirations of the majority if the minorities had taken the attitude 
which. Ulster took. Judged by the attitude of Ulster to Irish Home Rule, is 
1t nothing that the minorities agreed to be ruled by the majority which has 
not shown much sense of statesmanship, provided some safeguards were 
devised for them ? But this is only incidental. The main question is why did 
Ulster take this attitude? The only answer I can give is that there was a 
soclal problem between Ulster and Southern Ireland the problem between 
Catholics and Protestants, essentially a problem of Caste. That Home Rule 
in Ireland would be Rome Rule was the way in which the Ulstermen had 
framed their answer. But that is only another way of stating that it was 
the social problem of Caste between the Catholics and Protestants, which 
prevented the solution of the political problem. This evidence again is sure 
to be challenged. It will be urged that here too the hand of the Imperialist 
was at work. But my resources are not exhausted. I will give evidence 
from the History of Rome. Here no one can say that any evil genius was 
at work. Any one who has studied the History of Rome will know that the 
Republican Constitution of Rome bore marks having strong resemblance to 
the Communal Award. When the kingship in Rome was abolished, the Kingly 
power or the Imperium was divided between the Consuls and the Pontifex 
Maximus. In the Consuls was vested the secular authority of the King, 
while the latter took over the religious authority of King. This Republican 
Constitution had provided that, of the two Consuls one was to be Patrician 
and the other Plebian. The same constitution had also provided that, of the 
Priests under the Pontifex Maximus, half were to be Plebians and the other 
half Patricians. Why is it that the Republican Constitution of Rome had 
these provisions which, as I said, resemble so strongly the provisions of the 
Communal Award ? The only answer one can get is that the Constitution 
of Republican Rome had to take account of the social division between the 
Patricians and the Plebians, who formed two distinct castes. To sum up, 
let political reformers turn to any direction they like, they will find that in 
the making of a constitution, they cannot ignore the problem arising out of 
the prevailing social order. 


The illustrations which I have taken in support of the proposition that 
social and religious problems have a bearing on political constitutions seem 
to be too particular. Perhaps they are. But it should not be supposed that 
the bearing of the one on the other is limited. On the other hand one can 
say that generally speaking History bears out the proposition that political 
revolutions have always been preceded by social and religious revolutions. 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The religious Reformation started by Luther was the precursor of the political 
emancipation of the European people. In England Puritanism led to the 
establishment of political liberty. Puritanism founded the new world. It was 
Puritanism which won the war of American Independence and Puritanism 
was a religious movement. The same is true of the Muslim Empire. Before 
the Arabs became a political power they had undergone a thorough religious 
revolution started by the Prophet Mohammad. Even Indian History supports 
the same conclusion. The political revolution led by Chandragupta was 
preceded by the religious and social revolution of Buddha. The political 
revolution led by Shivaji was preceded by the religious and social reform 
brought about by the saints of Maharashtra. The political revolution of the 
Sikhs was preceded by the religious and social revolution led by Guru Nanak. 
It is unnecessary to add more illustrations. These will suffice to show that 
the emancipation of the mind and the soul is a necessary preliminary for 
the political expansion of the people. 


HI 


Let me now turn to the Socialists. Can the Socialists ignore the problem 
arising out of the social order ? The Socialists of India following their fellows 
in Europe are seeking to apply the economic interpretation of history to 
the facts of India. They propound that man is an economic creature, that 
his activities and aspirations are bound by economic facts, that property is 
the only source of power. They, therefore, preach that political and social 
reforms are but gigantic illusions and that economic reform by equalization 
of property must have precedence over every other kind of reform. One may 
join issue on every one of these premises on which rests the Socialists' case 
for economic reform having priority over every other kind of reform. One 
may contend that economic motive is not the only motive by which man 
is actuated. That economic power is the only kind of power no student of 
human society can accept. That the social status of an individual by itself 
often becomes a source of power and authority is made clear by the sway 
which the Mahatmas have held over the common man. Why do millionaires 
in India obey penniless Sadhus and Fakirs ? Why do millions of paupers in 
India sell their trifling trinckets which constitute their only wealth and go 
to Benares and Mecca ? That, religion is the source of power is illustrated 
by the history of India where the priest holds a sway over the common man 
often greater than the magistrate and where everything, even such things 
as strikes and elections, so easily take a religious turn and can so easily be 
given a religious twist. Take the case of the Plebians of Rome as a further 
illustration of the power of religion over man. It throws great light on this 
point. The Plebs had fought for a share in the supreme executive under 
the Roman Republic and had secured the appointment of a Plebian Consul 
elected by a separate electorate constituted by the Commitia Centuriata, 
which was an assembly of Plebians. They wanted a Consul of their own 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 45 


because they felt that the Patrician Consuls used to discriminate against the 
Plebians in carrying on the administration. They had apparently obtained a 
great gain because under the Republican Constitution of Rome one Consul 
had the power of vetoing an act of the other Consul. But did they in fact 
gain anything? The answer to this question must be in the negative. The 
Plebians never could get a Plebian Consul who could be said to be a strong 
man and who could act independently of the Patrician Consul. In the ordinary 
course of things the Plebians should have got a strong Plebian Consul in view 
of the fact that his election was to be by a separate electorate of Plebians. 
The question is why did they fail in getting a strong Plebian to officiate 
as their Consul? The answer to this question reveals the dominion which 
religion exercises over the minds of men. It was an accepted creed of the 
whole Roman populus that no official could enter upon the duties of his office 
unless the Oracle of Delphi declared that he was acceptable to the Goddess. 
The priests who were in charge of the temple of the Goddess of Delphi were 
all Patricians. Whenever therefore the Plebians elected a Consul who was 
known to be a strong party man opposed to the Patricians or “communal” to 
use the term that is current in India, the Oracle invariably declared that he 
was not acceptable to the Goddess. This is how the Plebians were cheated 
out of their rights. But what is worthy of note is that the Plebians permitted 
themselves to be thus cheated because they too like the Patricians, held firmly 
the belief that the approval of the Goddess was a condition precedent to the 
taking charge by an official of his duties and that election by the people 
was not enough. If the Plebians had contended that election was enough 
and that the approval by the Goddess was not necessary they would have 
derived the fullest benefit from the political right which they had obtained. 
But they did not. They agreed to elect another, less suitable to themselves 
but more suitable to the Goddess which in fact meant more amenable to 
the Patricians. Rather than give up religion, the Plebians give up material 
gain for which they had fought so hard. Does this not show that religion can 
be a source of power as great as money if not greater? The fallacy of the 
Socialists les in supposing that because in the present stage of European 
Society property as a source of power is predominant, that the same is true 
of India or that the same was true of Europe in the past. Religion, social 
status and property are all sources of power and authority, which one man 
has, to control the liberty of another. One is predominant at one stage, the 
other is predominant at another stage. That is the only difference. If liberty 
is the ideal, if liberty means the destruction of the dominion which one man 
holds over another then obviously it cannot be insisted upon that economic 
reform must be the one kind of reform worthy of pursuit. If the source of 
power and dominion is at any given time or in any given society social and 
religious then social reform and religious reform must be accepted as the 
necessary sort of reform. 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


One can thus attack the doctrine of Economic Interpretation of History 
adopted by the Socialists of India. But I recognize that economic interpretation 
of history is not necessary for the validity of the Socialist contention that 
equalization of property is the only real reform and that it must precede 
everything else. However, what I like to ask the Socialists is this : Can you 
have economic reform without first bringing about a reform of the social 
order ? The Socialists of India do not seem to have considered this question. 
I do not wish to do them an injustice. I give below a quotation from a letter 
which a prominent Socialist wrote a few days ago to a friend of mine in 
which he said, “I do not believe that we can build up a free society in India 
so long as there is a trace of this ill-treatment and suppression of one class 
by another. Believing as I do im a socialist ideal, inevitably I believe in 
perfect equality in the treatment of various classes and groups. I think that 
Socialism offers the only true remedy for this as well as other problems.” 
Now the question that I like to ask is: Is it enough for a Socialist to say, “I 
believe in perfect equality in the treatment of the various classes ?” To say 
that such a belief is enough is to disclose a complete lack of understanding 
of what is involved in Socialism. If Socialism is a practical programme and 
is not merely an ideal, distant and far off, the question for a Socialist is not 
whether he believes in equality. The question for him is whether he minds 
one class ill-treating and suppressing another class as a matter of system, as 
a matter of principle and thus allow tyranny and oppression to continue to 
divide one class from another. Let me analyse the factors that are involved 
in the realization of Socialism in order to explain fully my point. Now it is 
obvious that the economic reform contemplated by the Socialists cannot come 
about unless there is a revolution resulting in the seizure of power. That 
seizure of power must be by a proletariat. The first question I ask is: Will 
the proletariat of India combine to bring about this revolution ? What will 
move men to such an action ? It seems to me that other things being equal 
the only thing that will move one man to take such an action is the feeling 
that other man with whom he is acting are actuated by feeling of equality 
and fraternity and above all of justice. Men will not join in a revolution for 
the equalization of property unless they know that after the revolution is 
achieved they will be treated equally and that there will be no discrimination 
of caste and creed. The assurance of a socialist leading the revolution that 
he does not believe in caste, I am sure, will not suffice. The assurance 
must be the assurance proceeding from much deeper foundation, namely, 
the mental attitude of the compatriots towards one another in their spirit 
of personal equality and fraternity. Can it be said that the proletariat of 
India, poor as it is, recognise no distinctions except that of the rich and the 
poor ? Can it be said that the poor in India recognize no such distinctions of 
caste or creed, high or low ? If the fact is that they do, what unity of front 
can be expected from such a proletariat in its action against the rich ? How 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 47 


can there be a revolution if the proletariat cannot present a united front? 
Suppose for the sake of argument that by some freak of fortune a revolution 
does take place and the Socialists come in power, will they not have to deal 
with the problems created by the particular social order prevalent in India ? 
I can’t see how a Socialist State in India can function for a second without 
having to grapple with the problems created by the prejudices which make 
Indian people observe the distinctions of high and low, clean and unclean. 
If Socialists are not to be content with the mouthing of fine phrases, if the 
Socialists wish to make Socialism a definite reality then they must recognize 
that the problem of social reform is fundamental and that for them there 
is no escape from it. That, the social order prevalent in India is a matter 
which a Socialist must deal with, that unless he does so he cannot achieve 
his revolution and that if he does achieve it as a result of good fortune he 
will have to grapple with it if he wishes to realize his ideal, is a proposition 
which in my opinion is incontrovertible. He will be compelled to take account 
of caste after revolution if he does not take account of it before revolution. 
This is only another way of saying that, turn in any direction you like, caste 
is the monster that crosses your path. You cannot have political reform, you 
cannot have economic reform, unless you kill this monster. 


IV 


It is a pity that Caste even today has its defenders. The defences are 
many. It is defended on the ground that the Caste System is but another 
name for division of labour and if division of labour is a necessary feature 
of every civilized society then it is argued that there is nothing wrong in 
the Caste System. Now the first thing is to be urged against this view is 
that Caste System is not merely division of labour. It is also a division 
of labourers. Civilized society undoubtedly needs division of labour. But 
in no civilized society is division of labour accompanied by this unnatural 
division of labourers into water-tight compartments. Caste System is 
not merely a division of labourers which is quite different from division 
of labour—it is an heirarchy in which the divisions of labourers are 
graded one above the other. In no other country is the division of labour 
accompanied by this gradation of labourers. There is also a third point of 
criticism against this view of the Caste System. This division of labour is 
not spontaneous, it is not based on natural aptitudes. Social and individual 
efficiency requires us to develop the capacity of an individual to the point 
of competency to choose and to make his own career. This principle is 
violated in the Caste System in so far as it involves an attempt to appoint 
tasks to individuals in advance, selected not on the basis of trained original 
capacities, but on that of the social status of the parents. Looked at from 
another point of view this stratification of occupations which is the result 
of the Caste System is positively pernicious. Industry is never static. It 
undergoes rapid and abrupt changes. With such changes an individual must 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


be free to change his occupation. Without such freedom to adjust himself to 
changing circumstances 1t would be impossible for him to gain his livelihood. 
Now the Caste System will not allow Hindus to take to occupations where 
they are wanted if they do not belong to them by heredity. If a Hindu is 
seen to starve rather than take to new occupations not assigned to his 
Caste, the reason is to be found in the Caste System. By not permitting 
readjustment of occupations, caste becomes a direct cause of much of the 
unemployment we see in the country. As a form of division of labour the 
Caste system suffers from another serious defect. The division of labour 
brought about by the Caste System is not a division based on choice. 
Individual sentiment, individual preference has no place in it. It is based on 
the dogma of predestination. Considerations of social efficiency would compel 
us to recognize that the greatest evil in the industrial system is not so much 
poverty and the suffering that it involves as the fact that so many persons 
have callings which make no appeal to those who are engaged in them. Such 
callings constantly provoke one to aversion, ill-will and the desire to evade. 
There are many occupations in India which on account of the fact that they 
are regarded as degraded by the Hindus provoke those who are engaged in 
them to aversion. There is a constant desire to evade and escape from such 
occupations which arises solely because of the blighting effect which they 
produce upon those who follow them owing to the slight and stigma cast 
upon them by the Hindu religion. What efficiency can there be in a system 
under which neither men’s hearts nor their minds are in their work? As 
an economic organization Caste is therefore a harmful institution, inasmuch 
as, it involves the subordination of man's natural powers and inclinations 
to the exigencies of social rules 


Vv 


Some have dug a biological trench in defence of the Caste System. It is 
said that the object of Caste was to preserve purity of race and purity of 
blood. Now ethnologists are of opinion that men of pure race exist nowhere 
and that there has been a mixture of all races in all parts of the world. 
Especially is this the case with the people of India. Mr. D. R. Bhandarkar 
in his paper on Foreign Elements in the Hindu Population has stated that 
“There is hardly a class, or Caste in India which has not a foreign strain 
in it. There is an admixture of alien blood not only among the warrior 
classes—the Rajputs and the Marathas—but also among the Brahmins who 
are under the happy delusion that they are free from all foreign elements.” 
The Caste system cannot be said to have grown as a means of preventing the 
admixture of races or as a means of maintaining purity of blood. As a matter 
of fact Caste system came into being long after the different races of India 
had commingled in blood and culture. To hold that distinctions of Castes or 
really distinctions of race and to treat different Castes as though they were 
so many different races is a gross perversion of facts. What racial affinity 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 49 


is there between the Brahmin of the Punjab and the Brahmin of Madras ? 
What racial affinity is there between the untouchable of Bengal and the 
untouchable of Madras? What racial difference is there between the Brahmin 
of the Punjab and the Chamar of the Punjab ? What racial difference is there 
between the Brahmin of Madras and the Pariah of Madras ? The Brahmin 
of the Punjab is racially of the same stock as the Chamar of the Punjab and 
the Brahmin of Madras is of the same race as the Pariah of Madras. Caste 
system does not demarcate racial division. Caste system is a social division of 
people of the same race. Assuming it, however, to be a case of racial divisions 
one may ask: What harm could there be if a mixture of races and of blood 
was permitted to take place in India by intermarriages between different 
Castes ? Men are no doubt divided from animals by so deep a distinction 
that science recognizes men and animals as two distinct species. But even 
scientists who believe in purity of races do not assert that the different races 
constitute different species of men. They are only varieties of one and the 
same species. As such they can interbreed and produce an offspring which 
is capable of breeding and which is not sterile. An immense lot of nonsense 
is talked about heredity and eugenics in defence of the Caste System. Few 
would object to the Caste System if it was in accord with the basic principle 
of eugenics because few can object to the improvement of the race by judicious 
mating. But one fails to understand how the Caste System secures judicious 
mating. Caste System is a negative thing. It merely prohibits persons 
belonging to different Castes from intermarrying. It is not a positive method 
of selecting which two among a given Caste should marry. If Caste is eugenic 
in origin then the origin of sub-Castes must also be eugenic. But can any one 
seriously maintain that the origin of sub-Castes is eugenic ? I think it would 
be absurd to contend for such a proposition and for a very obvious reason. 
If Caste means race then differences of sub-Castes cannot mean differences 
of race because sub-Castes become ex hypothesia sub-divisions of one and 
the same race. Consequently the bar against intermarrying and interdining 
between sub-Castes cannot be for the purpose of maintaining purity of race 
or of blood. If sub-Castes cannot be eugenic in origin there cannot be any 
substance in the contention that Caste is eugenic in origin. Again if Caste 
is eugenic in origin one can understand the bar against intermarriage. But 
what is the purpose of the interdict placed on interdining between Castes 
and sub-Castes alike ? Interdining cannot infect blood and therefore cannot 
be the cause either of the improvement or of deterioration of the race. This 
shows that Caste has no scientific origin and that those who are attempting 
to give it an eugenic basis are trying to support by science what is grossly 
unscientific. Even today eugenics cannot become a practical possibility unless 
we have definite knowledge regarding the laws of heredity. Prof. Batcson in 
his Mendel’s Principles of Heredity says, “There is nothing in the descent of 
the higher mental qualities to suggest that they follow any single system of 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


transmission. It is likely that both they and the more marked developments 
of physical powers result rather from the coincidence of numerous factors 
than from the possession of any one genetic element.” To argue that the 
Caste System was eugenic in its conception is to attribute to the forefathers 
of present-day Hindus a knowledge of heredity which even the modern 
scientists do not possess. A tree should be judged by the fruits it yields. 
If caste is eugenic what sort of a race of men it should have produced ? 
Physically speaking the Hindus are a C, people. They are a race of Pygmies 
and dwarfs stunted in stature and wanting in stamina. It is a nation 9/10ths 
of which is declared to be unfit for military service. This shows that the 
Caste System does not embody the eugenics of modern scientists. It is a 
social system which embodies the arrogance and selfishness of a perverse 
section of the Hindus who were superior enough in social status to set it in 
fashion and who had authority to force it on their inferiors. 


VI 


Caste does not result in economic efficiency. Caste cannot and has not 
improved the race. Caste has however done one thing. It has completely 
disorganized and demoralized the Hindus. 


The first and foremost thing that must be recognized is that Hindu Society 
is a myth. The name Hindu is itself a foreign name. It was given by the 
Mohammedans to the natives for the purpose of distinguishing themselves. 
It does not occur in any Sanskrit work prior to the Mohammedan invasion. 
They did not feel the necessity of a common name because they had no 
conception of their having constituted a community. Hindu society as such 
does not exist. It is only a collection of castes. Each caste is conscious of its 
existence. Its survival is the be all and end all of its existence. Castes do not 
even form a federation. A caste has no feeling that it is affiliated to other 
castes except when there is a Hindu-Muslim riot. On all other occasions each 
caste endeavours to segregate itself and to distinguish itself from other castes. 
Each caste not only dines among itself and marries among itself but each 
caste prescribes its own distinctive dress. What other explanation can there 
be of the innumerable styles of dress worn by the men and women of India 
which so amuse the tourists ? Indeed the ideal Hindu must be like a rat living 
in his own hole refusing to have any contact with others. There is an utter 
lack among the Hindus of what the sociologists call “consciousness of kind”. 
There is no Hindu consciousness of kind. In every Hindu the consciousness 
that exists is the consciousness of his caste. That is the reason why the 
Hindus cannot be said to form a society or a nation. There are however many 
Indians whose patriotism does not permit them to admit that Indians are 
not a nation, that they are only an amorphous mass of people. They have 
insisted that underlying the apparent diversity there is a fundamental unity 
which marks the life of the Hindus in as much as there is a similarity of 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 51 


habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts which obtain all over the continent 
of India. Similarity in habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts there is. 
But one cannot accept the conclusion that therefore, the Hindus constitute 
a society. To do so is to misunderstand the essentials which go to make up 
a society. Men do not become a society by living in physical proximity any 
more than a man ceases to be a member of his society by living so many 
miles away from other men. Secondly similarity in habits and customs, 
beliefs and thoughts is not enough to constitute men into society. Things 
may be passed physically from one to another like bricks. In the same way 
habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts of one group may be taken over 
by another group and there may thus appear a similarity between the two. 
Culture spreads by diffusion and that is why one finds similarity between 
various primitive tribes in the matter of their habits and customs, beliefs 
and thoughts, although they do not live in proximity. But no one could say 
that because there was this similarity the primitive tribes constituted one 
society. This is because similarly in certain things is not enough to constitute 
a society. Men constitute a society because they have things which they 
possess in common. To have similar thing is totally different from possessing 
things in common. And the only way by which men can come to possess 
things in common with one another is by being in communication with one 
another. This is merely another way of saying that Society continues to exist 
by communication indeed in communication. To make it concrete, it is not 
enough if men act in a way which agrees with the acts of others. Parallel 
activity, even if similar, is not sufficient to bind men into a society. This is 
proved by the fact that the festivals observed by the different Castes amongst 
the Hindus are the same. Yet these parallel performances of similar festivals 
by the different castes have not bound them into one integral whole. For 
that purpose what is necessary is for a man to share and participate in a 
common activity so that the same emotions are aroused in him that animate 
the others. Making the individual a sharer or partner in the associated 
activity so that he feels its success as his success, its failure as his failure 
is the real thing that binds men and makes a society of them. The Caste 
System prevents common activity and by preventing common activity it 
has prevented the Hindus from becoming a society with a unified life and 
a consciousness of its own being. 


Vil 


The Hindus often complain of the isolation and exclusiveness of a gang or 
a clique and blame them for anti-social spirit. But they conveniently forget 
that this anti-social spirit is the worst feature of their own Caste System. 
One caste enjoys singing a hymn of hate against another caste as much as 
the Germans did in singing their hymn of hate against the English during 
the last war. The literature of the Hindus is full of caste genealogies in which 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


an attempt is made to give a noble origin to one caste and an ignoble origin 
to other castes. The Sahyadrikhand is a notorious instance of this class of 
literature. This anti-social spirit is not confined to caste alone. It has gone 
deeper and has poisoned the mutual relations of the sub-castes as well. In 
my province the Golak Brahmins, Deorukha Brahmins, Karada Brahmins, 
Palshe Brahmins and Chitpavan Brahmins, all claim to be sub-divisions of 
the Brahmin Caste. But the anti-social spirit that prevails between them is 
quite as marked and quite as virulent as the anti-social spirit that prevails 
between them and other non-Brahmin castes. There is nothing strange in 
this. An anti-social spirit is found wherever one group has “interests of its 
own” which shut it out from full interaction with other groups, so that its 
prevailing purpose is protection of what it has got. This anti-social spirit, 
this spirit of protecting its own interests is as much a marked feature of the 
different castes in their isolation from one another as it is of nations in their 
isolation. The Brahmin's primary concern is to protect “his interest” against 
those of the non-Brahmins and the non-Brahmin's primary concern is to 
protect their interests against those of the Brahmins. The Hindus, therefore, 
are not merely an assortment of castes but they are so many warring groups 
each living for itself and for its selfish ideal. There is another feature of 
caste which is deplorable. The ancestors of the present-day English fought 
on one side or the other in the wars of the Roses and the Cromwellian War. 
But the decendents of those who fought on the one side do not bear any 
animosity—any grudge against the descendents of those who fought on the 
other side. The feud is forgotten. But the present-day non-Brahmins cannot 
forgive the present-day Brahmins for the insult their ancestors gave to Shivaji. 
The present-day Kayasthas will not forgive the present-day Brahmins for 
the infamy cast upon their forefathers by the forefathers of the latter. To 
what is this difference due ? Obviously to the Caste System. The existence 
of Caste and Caste Consciousness has served to keep the memory of past 
feuds between castes green and has prevented solidarity. 


VIII 


The recent discussion about the excluded and partially included areas has 
served to draw attention to the position of what are called the aboriginal 
tribes in India. They number about 13 millions if not more. Apart from the 
questions whether their exclusion from the new Constitution is proper or 
improper, the fact still remains that these aborigines have remained in their 
primitive uncivilized State in a land which boasts of a civilization thousands 
of years old. Not only are they not civilized but some of them follow pursuits 
which have led to their being classified as criminals. Thirteen millions of 
people living in the midst of civilization are still in a savage state and are 
leading the life of hereditary criminals ! ! But the Hindus have never felt 
ashamed of it. This is a phenomenon which in my view is quite unparalleled. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 53 


What is the cause of this shameful state of affairs? Why has no attempt 
been made to civilize these aborigines and to lead them to take to a more 
honourable way of making a living ? The Hindus will probably seek to account 
for this savage state of the aborigines by attributing to them congenital 
stupidity. They will probably not admit that the aborigines have remained 
savages because they had made no effort to civilize them, to give them 
medical aid, to reform them, to make them good citizens. But supposing 
a Hindu wished to do what the Christian missionary is doing for these 
aborigines, could he have done it? I submit not. Civilizing the aborigines 
means adopting them as your own, living in their midst, and cultivating 
fellow-feeling, in short loving them. How is it possible for a Hindu to do 
this? His whole life is one anxious effort to preserve his caste. Caste is 
his precious possession which he must save at any cost. He cannot consent 
to lose it by establishing contact with the aborigines the remnants of the 
hateful Anaryas of the Vedic days. Not that a Hindu could not be taught 
the sense of duty to fallen humanity, but the trouble is that no amount of 
sense of duty can enable him to overcome his duty to preserve his caste. 
Caste is, therefore, the real explanation as to why the Hindu has let the 
savage remain a savage in the midst of his civilization without blushing 
or without feeling any sense of remorse or repentance. The Hindu has not 
realized that these aborigines are a source of potential danger. If these 
savages remain savages they may not do any harm to the Hindus. But if 
they are reclaimed by non-Hindus and converted to their faiths they will 
swell the ranks of the enemies of the Hindus. If this happens the Hindu 
will have to thank himself and his Caste System. 


IX 


Not only has the Hindu made no effort for the humanitarian cause of 
civilizing the savages but the higher-caste Hindus have deliberately prevented 
the lower castes who are within the pale of Hinduism from rising to the 
cultural level of the higher castes. I will give two instances, one of the Sonars 
and the other of the Pathare Prabhus. Both are communities quite well-known 
in Maharashtra. Like the rest of the communities desiring to raise their 
status these two communities were at one time endeavouring to adopt some 
of the ways and habits of the Brahmins. The Sonars were styling themselves 
Daivadnya Brahmins and were wearing their “dhotis” with folds on and using 
the word namaskar for salutation. Both, the folded way of wearing the “dhoti” 
and the namaskar were special to the Brahmins. The Brahmins did not like 
this imitation and this attempt by Sonars to pass off as Brahmins. Under the 
authority of the Peshwas the Brahmins successfully put down this attempt 
on the part of the Sonars to adopt the ways of the Brahmins. They even 
got the President of the Councils of the East India Company's settlement in 
Bombay to issue a prohibitory order against the Sonars residing in Bombay. 
At one time the Pathare Prabhus had widow-remarriage as a custom of their 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


caste. This custom of widow-remarriage was later on looked upon as a mark 
of social inferiority by some members of the caste especially because it was 
contrary to the custom prevalent among the Brahmins. With the object of 
raising the status of their community some Pathare Prabhus sought to stop 
this practice of widow-remarriage that was prevalent in their caste. The 
community was divided into two camps, one for and the other against the 
innovation. The Peshwas took the side of those in favour of widow-remarriage 
and thus virtually prohibited the Pathare Prabhus from following the ways 
of the Brahmins. The Hindus criticise the Mohammedans for having spread 
their religion by the use of the sword. They also ridicule Christianity on the 
score of the inquisition. But really speaking who is better and more worthy 
of our respect—the Mohammedans and Christians who attempted to thrust 
down the throats of unwilling persons what they regarded as necessary for 
their salvation or the Hindu who would not spread the light, who would 
endeavour to keep others in darkness, who would not consent to share his 
intellectual and social inheritance with those who are ready and willing to 
make it a part of their own make-up ? I have no hesitation in saying that if 
the Mohammedan has been cruel the Hindu has been mean and meanness 
is worse than cruelty. 


x 


Whether the Hindu religion was or was not a missionary religion has been a 
controversial issue. Some hold the view that it was never a missionary religion. 
Others hold that it was. That the Hindu relision was once a missionary 
religion must be admitted. It could not have spread over the face of India, 
if it was not a missionary religion. That today it is not a missionary religion 
is also a fact which must be accepted. The question therefore is not whether 
or not the Hindu religion was a missionary religion. The real question is 
why did the Hindu religion cease to be a missionary religion ? My answer 
is this. Hindu religion ceased to be a missionary religion when the Caste 
System grew up among the Hindus. Caste is inconsistent with conversion. 
Inculcation of beliefs and dogmas is not the only problem that is involved in 
conversion. To find a place for the convert in the social life of the community 
is another and a much more important problem that arises in connection with 
conversion. That problem is where to place the convert, in what caste? It is 
a problem which must baffle every Hindu wishing to make aliens converts 
to his religion. Unlike the club the membership of a caste is not open to 
all and sundry. The law of caste confines its membership to person bom in 
the caste. Castes are autonomous and there is no authority anywhere to 
compel a caste to admit a new-comer to its social life. Hindu Society being 
a collection of castes and each caste being a close corporation there is no 
place for a convert. Thus it is the caste which has prevented the Hindus from 
expanding and from absorbing other religious communities. So long as caste 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 55 


remain, Hindu religion cannot be made a missionary religion and Shudhi 
will be both a folly and a futility. 


XI 


The reasons which have made Shudhi impossible for Hindus are also 
responsible for making Sanghatan impossible. The idea underlying Sanghatan 
is to remove from the mind of the Hindu that timidity and cowardice which 
so painfully make him off from the Mohammedan and the Sikh and which 
have led him to adopt the low ways of treachery and cunning for protecting 
himself. The question naturally arises: From where does the Sikh or the 
Mohammedan derive his strength which makes him brave and fearless ? I am 
sure it is not due to relative superiority of physical strength, diet or drill. It 
is due to the strength arising out of the feeling that all Sikhs will come to the 
rescue of a Sikh when he is in danger and that all Mohammedans will rush 
to save a Muslim if he is attacked. The Hindu can derive no such strength. 
He cannot feel assured that his fellows will come to his help. Being one and 
fated to be alone he remains powerless, develops timidity and cowardice and 
in a fight surrenders or runs away. The Sikh as well as the Muslim stands 
fearless and gives battle because he knows that though one he will not be 
alone. The presence of this belief in the one helps him to hold out and the 
absence of it in the other makes him to give way. If you pursue this matter 
further and ask what is it that enables the Sikh and the Mohammedan to 
feel so assured and why is the Hindu filled with such despair in the matter 
of help and assistance you will find that the reasons for this difference lie in 
the difference in their associated mode of living. The associated mode of life 
practised by the Sikhs and the Mohammedans produces fellow-feeling. The 
associated mode of life of the Hindus does not. Among Sikhs and Muslims 
there is a social cement which makes them Bhais. Among Hindus there is 
no such cement and one Hindu does not regard another Hindu as his Bhai. 
This explains why a Sikh says and feels that one Sikh, or one Khalsa is 
equal to Sava Lakh men. This explains why one Mohammedan is equal to 
a crowd of Hindus. This difference is undoubtedly a difference due to caste. 
So long as caste remains, there will be no Sanghatan and so long as there 
is no Sanghatan the Hindu will remain weak and meek. The Hindus claim 
to be a very tolerant people. In my opinion this is a mistake. On many 
occasions they can be intolerant and if on some occasions they are tolerant 
that is because they are too weak to oppose or too indifferent to oppose. 
This indifference of the Hindus has become so much a part of their nature 
that a Hindu will quite meekly tolerate an insult as well as a wrong. You 
see amongst them, to use the words of Morris, “The great reading down the 
little, the strong heating down the weak, cruel men fearing not, kind men 
daring not and wise men caring not.” With the Hindu Gods all forbearing, 
it is not difficult to imagine the pitiable condition of the wronged and the 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


oppressed among the Hindus. Indifferentism is the worst kind of disease 
that can infect a people. Why is the Hindu so indifferent ? In my opinion 
this indifferentism is the result of Caste System which has made Sanghatan 
and co-operation even for a good cause impossible. 


XII 


The assertion by the individual of his own opinions and beliefs, his own 
independence and interest as over against group standards, group authority 
and group interests is the beginning of all reform. But whether the reform 
will continue depends upon what scope the group affords for such individual 
assertion. If the group is tolerant and fair-minded in dealing with such 
individuals they will continue to assert and in the end succeed in converting 
their fellows. On the other hand if the group is intolerant and does not 
bother about the means it adopts to stifle such individuals they will perish 
and the reform will die out. New a caste has an unquestioned right to 
excommunicate any man who is guilty of breaking the rules of the caste 
and when it is realized that excommunication involves a complete cesser 
of social intercourse it will be agreed that as a form of punishment there 
is really little to choose between excommunication and death. No wonder 
individual Hindus have not had the courage to assert their independence 
by breaking the barriers of caste. It is true that man cannot get on with 
his fellows. But it is also true that he cannot do without them. He would 
like to have the society of his fellows on his terms. If he cannot get it on 
his terms then he will be ready to have it on any terms even amounting to 
complete surrender. This is because he cannot do without society. A caste is 
ever ready to take advantage of the helplessness of a man and insist upon 
complete conformity to its code in letter and in spirit. A caste can easily 
organize itself into a conspiracy to make the life of a reformer a hell and if 
a conspiracy is a crime I do not understand why such a nefarious act as an 
attempt to excommunicate a person for daring to act contrary to the rules 
of caste should not be made an offence punishable in law. But as it is, even 
law gives each caste an autonomy to regulate its membership and punish 
dissenters with excommunication. Caste in the hands of the orthodox has 
been a powerful weapon for persecuting the reforms and for killing all reform. 


XIII 


The effect of caste on the ethics of the Hindus is simply deplorable. Caste 
has killed public spirit. Caste has destroyed the sense of public charity. 
Caste has made public opinion impossible. A Hindu's public is his caste. His 
responsibility is only to his caste. His loyalty is restricted only to his caste. 
Virtue has become caste-ridden and morality has become caste-bound. There 
is no sympathy to the deserving. There is no appreciation of the meritorious. 
There is no charity to the needy. Suffering as such calls for no response. 
There is charity but it begins with the caste and ends with the caste. There 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 57 


is sympathy but not for men of other caste. Would a Hindu acknowledge 
and follow the leadership of a great and good man? The case of a Mahatma 
apart, the answer must be that he will follow a leader if he is a man of his 
caste. A Brahmin will follow a leader only if he is a Brahmin, a Kayastha 
if he is a Kayastha and so on. The capacity to appreciate merits in a man 
apart from his caste does not exist in a Hindu. There is appreciation of 
virtue but only when the man is a fellow caste-man. The whole morality 
1s as bad as tribal morality. My caste-man, right or wrong; my caste-man, 
good or bad. It is not a case of standing by virtue and not standing by 
vice. It is a case of standing or not standing by the caste. Have not Hindus 
committed treason against their country in the interests of their caste ? 


XIV 


I would not be surprised if some of you have grown weary listening 
to this tiresome tale of the sad effects which caste has produced. There 
is nothing new in it. I will therefore turn to the constructive side of the 
problem. What is your ideal society if you do not want caste is a question 
that is bound to be asked of you. If you ask me, my ideal would be a 
society based on Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. And why not? What 
objection can there be to Fraternity ? I cannot imagine any. An ideal society 
should be mobile, should be full of channels for conveying a change taking 
place in one part to other parts. In an ideal society there should be many 
interests consciously communicated and shared. There should be varied 
and free points of contact with other modes of association. In other words 
there must be social endosmosis. This is fraternity, which is only another 
name for democracy. Democracy is not merely a form of Government. 
It is primarily a mode of associated living, of conjoint communicated 
experience. It is essentially an attitude of respect and reverence towards 
fellowmen. Any objection to Liberty ? Few object to liberty in the sense of 
a right to free movement, in the sense of a right to life and limb. There 
is no objection to liberty in the sense of a right to property, tools and 
materials as being necessary for earning a living to keep the body in 
due state of health. Why not allow liberty to benefit by an effective and 
competent use of a person's powers ? The supporters of caste who would 
allow liberty in the sense of a right to life, limb and property, would not 
readily consent to liberty in this sense, inasmuch as it involves liberty to 
choose one’s profession. But to object to this kind of liberty is to perpetuate 
slavery. For slavery does not merely mean a legalized form of subjection. 
It means a state of society in which some men are forced to accept from 
other the purposes which control their conduct. This condition obtains even 
where mere is no slavery in the legal sense. It is found where, as in the 
Caste System, some persons are compelled to carry on certain prescribed 
callings which are not of their choice. Any objection to equality ? This 
has obviously been the most contentious part of the slogan of the French 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Revolution. The objections to equality may be sound and one may have 
to admit that all men are not equal. But what of that ? Equality may be 
a fiction but nonetheless one must accept it as the governing principle. A 
man’s power is dependent upon (1) physical heredity, (2) social inheritance 
or endowment in the form of parental care, education, accumulation of 
scientific knowledge, everything which enables him to be more efficient 
than the savage, and finally, (3) on his own efforts. In all these three 
respects men are undoubtedly unequal. But the question is, shall we 
treat them as unequal because they are unequal? This is a question 
which the opponents of equality must answer. From the standpoint of the 
individualist it may be just to treat men unequally so far as their efforts 
are unequal. It may be desirable to give as much incentive as possible to 
the full development of every one’s powers. But what would happen if men 
were treated unequally as they are, in the first two respects ? It is obvious 
that those individuals also in whose favour there is birth, education, family 
name, business connections and inherited wealth would be selected in the 
race. But selection under such circumstances would not be a selection of 
the able. It would be the selection of the privileged. The reason therefore, 
which forces that in the third respect we should treat men unequally 
demands that in the first two respects we should treat men as equally as 
possible. On the other hand it can be urged that if it is good for the social 
body to get the most out of its members, it can get most out of them only 
by making them equal as far as possible at the very start of the race. 
That is one reason why we cannot escape equality. But there is another 
reason why we must accept equality. A Statesman is concerned with vast 
numbers of people. He has neither the time nor the knowledge to draw fine 
distinctions and to treat each equitably i.e. according to need or according 
to capacity. However desirable or reasonable an equitable treatment of 
men may be, humanity is not capable of assortment and classification. 
The statesman, therefore, must follow some rough and ready rule and that 
rough and ready rule is to treat all men alike not because they are alike 
but because classification and assortment is impossible. The doctrine of 
equality is glaringly fallacious but taking all in all it is the only way a 
statesman can proceed in politics which is a severely practical affair and 
which demands a severely practical test. 


XV 


But there is a set of reformers who hold out a different ideal. They go by 
the name of the Arya Samajists and their ideal of social organization is what 
is called Chaturvarnya or the division of society into four classes instead of 
the four thousand castes that we have in India. To make it more attractive 
and to disarm opposition the protagonists of Chaturvarnya take great care to 
point out that their Chaturvarnya is based not on birth but on guna (worth). 
At the outset, I must confess that notwithstanding the worth-basis of this 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 59 


Chaturvarnya, it is an ideal to which I cannot reconcile myself. In the 
first place, if under the Chaturvarnya of the Arya Samajists an individual 
is to take his place in the Hindu Society according to his worth. I do not 
understand why the Arya Samajists insist upon labelling men as Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. A learned man would be honoured without 
his being labelled a Brahmin. A soldier would be respected without his 
being designated a Kshatriya. If European society honours its soldiers and 
its servants without giving them permanent labels, why should Hindu 
Society find it difficult to do so is a question, which Arya Samajists have 
not cared to consider. There is another objection to the continuance of these 
labels. All reform consists in a change in the notions, sentiment and mental 
attitudes of the people towards men and things. It is common experience 
that certain names become associated with certain notions and sentiments, 
which determine a person's attitude towards men and things. The names, 
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, are names which are associated 
with a definite and fixed notion in the mind of every Hindu. That notion is 
that of a hierarchy based on birth. So long as these names continue, Hindus 
will continue to think of the Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra as 
hierarchical divisions of high and low, based on birth, and act accordingly. 
The Hindu must be made to unlearn all this. But how can this happen if 
the old labels remain and continue to recall to his mind old notions. If new 
notions are to be inculcated in the minds of people it is necessary to give 
them new names. To continue the old name is to make the reform futile. To 
allow this Chaturvarnya, based on worth to be designated by such stinking 
labels of Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, indicative of social divisions 
based on birth, is a snare. 


XVI 


To me this Chaturvarnya with its old labels is utterly repellent and my whole 
being rebels against it. But I do not wish to rest my objection to Chaturvarnya 
on mere grounds of sentiments. There are more solid grounds on which I rely 
for my opposition to it. A close examination of this ideal has convinced me 
that as a system of social organization, Chaturvarnya is impracticable, harmful 
and has turned out to be a miserable failure. From a practical point of view, 
the system of Chaturvarnya raises several difficulties which its protagonists 
do not seem to have taken into account. The principle underlying caste is 
fundamentally different from the principle underlying Varna. Not only are 
they fundamentally different but they are also fundamentally opposed. The 
former is based on worth. How are you going to compel people who have 
acquired a higher status based on birth without reference to their worth 
to vacate that status? How are you going to compel people to recognize 
the status due to a man in accordance with his worth, who is occupying a 
lower status based on his birth ? For this you must first break up the Caste 
System, in order to be able to establish the Varna system. How are you going 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to reduce the four thousand castes, based on birth, to the four Varnas, 
based on worth ? This is the first difficulty which the protagonists of the 
Chaturvarnya must grapple with. There is a second difficulty which the 
protagonists of Chaturvarnya must grapple with, if they wish to make the 
establishment of Chaturvarnya a success. 


Chaturvarnya pre-supposes that you can classify people into four definite 
classes. Is this possible? In this respect, the ideal of Chaturvarnya has, 
as you will see, a close affinity to the Platonic ideal. To Plato, men fell by 
nature into three classes. In some individuals, he believed mere appetites 
dominated. He assigned them to the labouring and trading classes. Others 
revealed to him that over and above appetites, they have a courageous 
disposition. He classed them as defenders in war and guardians of internal 
peace. Others showed a capacity to grasp the universal reason underlying 
things. He made them the law-givers of the people. The criticism to which 
Plato’s Republic is subject, is also the criticism which must apply to the 
system of Chaturvarnya, in so far as it proceeds upon the possibility 
of an accurate classification of men into four distinct classes. The chief 
criticism against Plato is that his idea of lumping of individuals into a 
few sharply marked-off classes is a very superficial view of man and his 
powers. Plato had no perception of the uniqueness of every individual, of 
his incommensurability with others, of each individual forming a class of 
his own. He had no recognition of the infinite diversity of active tendencies 
and combination of tendencies of which an individual is capable. To him, 
there were types of faculties or powers in the individual constitution. All this 
is demonstrably wrong. Modern science has shown that lumping together 
of individuals into a few sharply marked-off classes is a superficial view 
of man not worthy of serious consideration. Consequently, the utilization 
of the qualities of individuals is incompitable with their startification by 
classes, since the qualities of individuals are so variable. Chaturvarnya 
must fail for the very reason for which Plato’s Republic must fail, namely 
that it is not possible to pigeon men into holes, according as he belongs to 
one class or the other. That it is impossible to accurately classify people 
into four definite classes is proved by the fact that the original four classes 
have now become four thousand castes. 


There is a third difficulty in the way of the establishment of the system of 
Chaturvarnya. How are you going to maintain the system of Chaturvarnya, 
supposing it was established ? One important requirement for the successful 
working of Chaturvarnya is the maintenance of the penal system which could 
maintain it by its sanction. The system of Chaturvarnya must perpetually 
face the problem of the transgressor. Unless there is a penalty attached to the 
act of transgression, men will not keep to their respective classes. The whole 
system will break down, being contrary to human nature. Chaturvarnya 
cannot subsist by its own inherent goodness. It must be enforced by law. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 61 


That, without penal sanction the ideal of Chaturvarnya cannot be realized, 
is proved by the story in the Ramayana of Rama killing Shambuka. Some 
people seem to blame Rama because he want only and without reason killed 
Shambuka. But to blame Rama for killing Shambuka is to misunderstand 
the whole situation. Ram Raj was a Raj based on Chaturvarnya. As a king, 
Rama was bound to maintain Chaturvarnya. It was his duty therefore to kill 
Shambuka, the Shudra, who had transgressed his class and wanted to be a 
Brahmin. This is the reason why Rama killed Shambuka. But this also shows 
that penal sanction is necessary for the maintenance of Chaturvarnya. Not 
only penal sanction is necessary, but penalty of death is necessary. That is 
why Rama did not inflict on Shambuka a lesser punishment. That is why 
Manu-Smriti prescribes such heavy sentences as cutting off the tongue or 
pouring of molten lead in the ears of the Shudra, who recites or hears the 
Veda. The supporters of Chaturvarnya must give an assurance that they 
could successfully classify men and they could induce modern society in the 
twentieth century to reforge the penal sanctions of Manu-Smriti. 


The protagonists of Chaturvarnya do not seem to have considered what 
is to happen to women in their system. Are they also to be divided into 
four classes, Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra? Or are they to be 
allowed to take the status of their husbands. If the status of the woman is 
to be the consequence of marriage what becomes of the underlying principle 
of Chaturvarnya, namely, that the status of a person should be based upon 
the worth of that person? If they are to be classified according to their 
worth is their classification to be nominal or real? If it is to be nominal 
then it is useless and then the protagonists of Chaturvarnya must admit 
that their system does not apply to women. If it is real, are the protagonists 
of Chaturvarnya prepared to follow the logical consequences of applying 
it to women? They must be prepared to have women priests and women 
soldiers. Hindu society has grown accustomed to women teachers and women 
barristers. It may grow accustomed to women brewers and women butchers. 
But he would be a bold person, who would say that it will allow women 
priests and women soldiers. But that will be the logical outcome of applying 
Chaturvarnya to women. Given these difficulties, I think no one except a 
congenital idiot could hope and believe in a successful regeneration of the 
Chaturvarnya. 


XVII 


Assuming that Chaturvarnya is practicable, I contend that it is the most 
vicious system. That the Brahmins should cultivate knowledge, that the 
Kshatriya should bear arms, that the Vaishya should trade and that the 
Shudra should serve sounds as though it was a system of division of labour. 
Whether the theory was intended to state that the Shudra need not or that 
whether it was intended to lay down that he must not, is an interesting 
question. The defenders of Chaturvarnya give it the first meaning. They say, 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


why should the Shudra need trouble to acquire wealth, when the three 
Varnas are there to support him ? Why need the Shudra bother to take to 
education, when there is the Brahmin to whom he can go when the occasion 
for reading or writing arises? Why need the Shudra worry to arm himself 
because there is the Kshatriya to protect him ? The theory of Chaturvarnya, 
understood in this sense, may be said to look upon the Shudra as the ward 
and the three Varnas as his guardians. Thus interpreted, it is a simple, 
elevating and alluring theory. Assuming this to be the correct view of the 
underlying conception of Chaturvarnya, it seems to me that the system 
is neither fool-proof nor knave-proof. What is to happen, if the Brahmins, 
Vaishyas and Kshatriyas fail to pursue knowledge, to engage in economic 
enterprise and to be efficient soldiers which are their respective functions ? 
Contrary-wise, suppose that they discharge their functions but flout their 
duty to the Shudra or to one another, what is to happen to the Shudra if 
the three classes refuse to support him on fair terms or combine to keep him 
down ? Who is to safeguard the interests of the Shudra or for the matter of 
that of the Vaishya and Kshatriya when the person, who is trying to take 
advantage of his ignorance is the Brahmin? Who is to defend the liberty 
of the Shudra and for the matter of that, of the Brahmin and the Vaishya 
when the person who is robbing him of it is the Kshatriya ? Inter-dependence 
of one class on another class is inevitable. Even dependence of one class 
upon another may sometimes become allowable. But why make one person 
depend upon another in the matter of his vital needs ? Education everyone 
must have. Means of defence everyone must have. These are the paramount 
requirements of every man for his self-preservation. How can the fact that 
his neighbour is educated and armed help a man who is uneducated and 
disarmed. The whole theory is absurd. These are the questions, which the 
defenders of Chaturvarnya do not seem to be troubled about. But they are 
very pertinent questions. Assuming their conception of Chaturvarnya that 
the relationship between the different classes is that of ward and guardian 
is the real conception underlying Chaturvarnya, it must be admitted that it 
makes no provision to safeguard the interests of the ward from the misdeeds 
of the guardian. Whether the relationship of guardian and ward was the 
real underlying conception, on which Chaturvarnya was based, there is no 
doubt that in practice the relation was that of master and servants. The 
three classes, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas although not very happy 
in their mutual relationship managed to work by compromise. The Brahmin 
flattered the Kshatriya and both let the Vaishya live in order to be able to 
live upon him. But the three agreed to beat down the Shudra. He was not 
allowed to acquire wealth lest he should be independent of the three Varnas. 
He was prohibited from acquiring knowledge lest he should keep a steady 
vigil regarding his interests. He was prohibited from bearing arms lest he 
should have the means to rebel against their authority. That this is how 
the Shudras were treated by the Tryavarnikas is evidenced by the Laws 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 63 


of Manu. There is no code of laws more in famous regarding social rights 
than the Laws of Manu. Any instance from anywhere of social injustice 
must pale before it. Why have the mass of people tolerated the social evils 
to which they have been subjected ? There have been social revolutions in 
other countries of the world. Why have there not been social revolutions 
in India, is a question which has incessantly troubled me. There is only 
one answer, which I can give and it is that the lower classes of Hindus 
have been completely disabled for direct action on account of this wretched 
system of Chaturvarnya. They could not bear arms and without arms 
they could not rebel. They were all ploughmen or rather condemned to be 
ploughmen and they never were allowed to convert their ploughshare into 
swords. They had no bayonets and therefore everyone who chose could and 
did sit upon them. On account of the Chaturvarnya, they could receive no 
education. They could not think out or know the way to their salvation. 
They were condemned to be lowly and not knowing the way of escape 
and not having the means of escape, they became reconciled to eternal 
servitude, which they accepted as their inescapable fate. It is true that 
even in Europe the strong has not shrunk from the exploitation, nay the 
spoliation of the weak. But in Europe, the strong have never contrived to 
make the weak helpless against exploitation so shamelessly as was the 
case in India among the Hindus. Social war has been raging between the 
strong and the weak far more violently in Europe than it has ever been in 
India. Yet, the weak in Europe has had in his freedom of military service 
his physical weapon, in suffering his political weapon and in education his 
moral weapon. These three weapons for emancipation were never withheld 
by the strong from the weak in Europe. All these weapons were, however, 
denied to the masses in India by Chaturvarnya. There cannot be a more 
degrading system of social organization than the Chaturvarnya. It is the 
system which deadens, paralyses and cripples the people from helpful 
activity. This is no exaggeration. History bears ample evidence. There is 
only one period in Indian history which is a period of freedom, greatness 
and glory. That is the period of the Mourya Empire. At all other times the 
country suffered from defeat and darkness. But the Mourya period was a 
period when Chaturvarnya was completely annihilated, when the Shudras, 
who constituted the mass of the people, came into their own and became 
the rulers of the country. The period of defeat and darkness is the period 
when Chaturvarnya flourished to the damnation of the greater part of the 
people of the country. 


XVIII 


Chaturvarnya is not new. It is as old as the Vedas. That is one of the 
reasons why we are asked by the Arya Samajists to consider its claims. 
Judging from the past as a system of social organization, it has been tried 
and it has failed. How many times have the Brahmins annihilated the seed 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of the Kshatriyas ! How many times have the Kshatriyas annihilated the 
Brahmins! The Mahabharata and the Puranas are full of incidents of the 
strife between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. They even quarreled 
over such petty questions as to who should salute first, as to who should 
glve way first, the Brahmins or the Kshatriyas, when the two met in 
the street. Not only was the Brahmin an eyesore to the Kshatriya and 
the Kshatriya an eyesore to the Brahmin, it seems that the Kshatriyas 
had become tyrannical and the masses, disarmed as they were under the 
system of Chaturvarnya, were praying Almighty God for relief from their 
tyranny. The Bhaswat tells us very definitely that Krishna had taken 
Avtar for one sacred purpose and that was to annihilate the Kshatriyas. 
With these instances of rivalry and enmity between the different Varnas 
before us, I do not understand how any one can hold out Chaturvarnya 
as an ideal to be aimed at or as a pattern, on which the Hindu Society 
should be remodelled, 


XIX 


I have dealt with those, who are without you and whose hostility to your 
ideal is quite open. There appear to be others, who are neither without 
you not with you. I was hesitating whether I should deal with their point 
of view. But on further consideration I have come to the conclusion that 
I must and that for two reasons. Firstly, their attitude to the problem of 
caste is not merely an attitude of neutrality, but is an attitude of armed 
neutrality. Secondly, they probably represent a considerable body of people. 
Of these, there is one set which finds nothing peculiar nor odious in the 
Caste System of the Hindus. Such Hindus cite the case of Muslims, Sikhs 
and Christians and find comfort im the fact that they too have castes 
amongst them. In considering, this question you must at the outset bear 
in mind that nowhere is human society one single whole. It is always 
plural. In the world of action, the individual is one limit and society the 
other. Between them lie all sorts of associative arrangements of lesser 
and larger scope, families, friendship, co-operative associations, business 
combines, political parties, bands of thieves and robbers. These small 
groups are usually firmly welded together and are often as exclusive as 
castes. They have a narrow and intensive code, which is often anti-social. 
This is true of every society, in Europe as well as in Asia. The question 
to be asked in determining whether a given society is an ideal society; is 
not whether there are groups in it, because groups exist in all societies. 
The questions to be asked in determining what is an ideal society are: 
How numerous and varied are the interests which are consciously shared 
by the groups? How full and free is the interplay with other forms of 
associations ? Are the forces that separate groups and classes more numerous 
than the forces that unite? What social significance is attached to this 
group life? Is its exclusiveness a matter of custom and convenience or is 
it a matter of religion ? It is in the light of these questions that one must 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 65 


decide whether caste among Non-Hindus is the same as caste among Hindus. 
If we apply these considerations to castes among Mohammedans, Sikhs and 
Christians on the one hand and to castes among Hindus on the other, you 
will find that caste among Non-Hindus is fundamentally different from caste 
among Hindus. First, the ties, which consciously make the Hindus hold 
together, are non-existent, while among Non-Hindus there are many that 
hold them together. The strength of a society depends upon the presence of 
points of contact, possibilities of interaction between different groups which 
exist in it. These are what Carlyle calls “organic filaments” i.e. the elastic 
threads which help to bring the disintegrating elements together and to 
reunite them. There is no integrating force among the Hindus to counteract 
the disintegration caused by caste. While among the Non-Hindus there 
are plenty of these organic filaments which bind them together. Again it 
must be borne in mind that although there are castes among Non-Hindus, 
as there are among Hindus, caste has not the same social significance for 
Non-Hindus as it has for Hindus. Ask Mohammedan or a Sikh, who he is ? 
He tells you that he is a Mohammedan or a Sikh as the case may be. He 
does not tell you his caste although he has one and you are satisfied with 
his answer. When he tells you that he is a Muslim, you do not proceed to 
ask him whether he is a Shiya or a Sunni; Sheikh or Saiyad; Khatik or 
Pinjari. When he tells you he is a Sikh, you do not ask him whether he is 
Jat or Roda; Mazbi or Ramdasi. But you are not satisfied, if a person tells 
you that he is a Hindu. You feel bound to inquire into his caste. Why ? 
Because so essential is caste in the case of a Hindu that without knowing 
it you do not feel sure what sort of a being he is. That caste has not the 
same social significance among Non-Hindus as it has among Hindus is clear 
if you take into consideration the consequences which follow breach of caste. 
There may be castes among Sikhs and Mohammedans but the Sikhs and the 
Mohammedans will not outcast a Sikh or a Mohammedan if he broke his 
caste. Indeed, the very idea of excommunication is foreign to the Sikhs and 
the Mohammedans. But with the Hindus the case is entirely different. He 
is sure to be outcasted if he broke caste. This shows the difference in the 
social significance of caste to Hindus and Non-Hindus. This is the second 
point of difference. But there is also a third and a more important one. Caste 
among the non-Hindus has no religious consecration ; but among the Hindus 
most decidedly it has. Among the Non-Hindus, caste is only a practice, not a 
sacred institution. They, did not originate it. With them it is only a survival. 
They do not regard caste as a religious dogma. Religion compels the Hindus 
to treat isolation and segregation of castes as a virtue. Religion does not 
compel the Non-Hindus to take the same attitude towards caste. If Hindus 
wish to break caste, their religion will come in their way. But it will not be 
so in the case of Non-Hindus. It is, therefore, a dangerous delusion to take 
comfort in the mere existence of caste among Non-Hindus, without caring 
to know what place caste occupies in their life and whether there are other 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“organic filaments”, which subordinate the feeling of caste to the feeling of 
community. The sooner the Hindus are cured of this delusion the better. 


The other set denies that caste presents any problem at all for the Hindus 
to consider. Such Hindus seek comfort in the view that the Hindus have 
survived and take this as a proof of their fitness to survive. This point of 
view is well expressed by Prof. S. Radhakrishnan in his Hindu view of 
Life. Referring to Hinduism he says, “The civilization itself has not been a 
shortlived one. Its historic records date back for over four thousand years 
and even then it had reached a stage of civilization which has continued 
1ts unbroken, though at times slow and static, course until the present day. 
It has stood the stress and strain of more than four or five millenniums 
of spiritual thought and experience. Though peoples of different races and 
cultures have been pouring into India from the dawn of History, Hinduism 
has been able to maintain its supremacy and even the proselytising creeds 
backed by political power have not been able to coerce the large majority 
of Hindus to their views. The Hindu culture possesses some vitality which 
seems to be denied to some other more forceful currents. It is no more 
necessary to dissect Hinduism than to open a tree to see whether the sap 
still runs.” The name of Prof. Radhakrishnan is big enough to invest with 
profundity whatever he says and impress the minds of his readers. But I 
must not hesitate to speak out my mind. For, I fear that, his statement 
may become the basis of a vicious argument that the fact of survival is 
proof of fitness to survive. It seems to me that the question is not whether 
a community lives or dies ; the question is on what plane does it live. There 
are different modes of survival. But all are not equally honourable. For an 
individual as well as for a society, there is a gulf between merely living 
and living worthily. To fight in a battle and to live in glory is one mode. To 
beat a retreat, to surrender and to live the life of a captive is also a mode 
of survival. It is useless for a Hindu to take comfort in the fact that he and 
his people have survived. What he must consider is what is the quality of 
their survival. If he does that, I am sure he will cease to take pride in the 
mere fact of survival. A Hindu's life has been a life of continuous defeat 
and what appears to him to be life everlasting is not living everlastingly 
but is really a life which is perishing everlastingly. It is a mode of survival 
of which every right-minded Hindu, who is not afraid to own up the truth, 
will feel ashamed. 


XX 


There is no doubt, in my opinion, that unless you change your social 
order you can achieve little by way of progress. You cannot mobilize the 
community either for defence or for offence. You cannot build anything on 
the foundations of caste. You cannot build up a nation, you cannot build 
up a morality. Anything that you will build on the foundations of caste will 
crack and will never be a whole. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 67 


The only question that remains to be considered is—Hou to bring about 
the reform of the Hindu social order ? How to abolish caste? This is a 
question of supreme importance. There is a view that in the reform of 
caste, the first step to take, is to abolish sub-castes. This view is based 
upon the supposition that there is a greater similarity in manners and 
status between sub-castes than there is between castes. I think, this is an 
erroneous supposition. The Brahmins of Northern and Central India are 
socially of lower grade, as compared with the Brahmins of the Deccan and 
Southern India. The former are only cooks and water-carriers while the 
latter occupy a high social position. On the other hand, in Northern India, 
the Vaishyas and Kayasthas are intellectually and socially on a par with the 
Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern India. Again, in the matter of food 
there is no similarity between the Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern 
India, who are vegetarians and the Brahmins of Kashmir and Bengal who 
are non-vegetarians. On the other hand, the Brahmins of the Deccan and 
Southern India have more in common so far as food is concerned with such 
non-Brahmins as the Gujaratis, Marwaris, Banias and Jains. There is no 
doubt that from the standpoint of making the transit from one caste to 
another easy, the fusion of the Kayasthas of Northern India and the other 
Non-Brahmins of Southern India with the Non-Brahmins of the Deccan and 
the Dravid country is more practicable than the fusion of the Brahmins of 
the South with the Brahmins of the North. But assuming that the fusion 
of sub-Castes is possible, what guarantee is there that the abolition of sub- 
Castes will necessarily lead to the abolition of Castes ? On the contrary, 
it may happen that the process may stop with the abolition of sub-Castes. 
In that case, the abolition of sub-Castes will only help to strengthen the 
Castes and make them more powerful and therefore more mischievous. 
This remedy is therefore neither practicable nor effective and may easily 
prove to be a wrong remedy. Another plan of action for the abolition of 
Caste is to begin with inter-caste dinners. This also, in my opinion, is an 
inadequate remedy. There are many Castes which allow inter-dining. But 
it is a common experience that inter-dining has not succeeded in killing 
the spirit of Caste and the consciousness of Caste. I am convinced that the 
real remedy is inter-marriage. Fusion of blood can alone create the feeling 
of being kith and kin and unless this feeling of kinship, of being kindred, 
becomes paramount the separatist feeling—the feeling of being aliens— 
created by Caste will not vanish. Among the Hindus inter-marriage must 
necessarily be a factor of greater force in social life than it need be in the 
life of the non-Hindus. Where society is already well-knit by other ties, 
marriage is an ordinary incident of life. But where society cut asunder, 
marriage as a binding force becomes a matter of urgent necessity. The real 
remedy for breaking Caste is inter-marriage. Nothing else will serve as the 
solvent of Caste. Your Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal has adopted this line of attack 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


It is a direct, and frontal attack, and I congratulate you upon a correct 
diagnosis and more upon your having shown the courage to tell the Hindus 
what is really wrong with them. Political tyranny is nothing compared to 
social tyranny and a reformer, who defies society, is a much more courageous 
man than a politician, who defies Government. You are right in holding 
that Caste will cease to be an operative force only when inter-dining and 
inter-marriage have become matters of common course. You have located 
the source of the disease. But is your prescription the right prescription for 
the disease ? Ask yourselves this question; Why is it that a large majority 
of Hindus do not inter-dine and do not inter-marry? Why is it that your 
cause is not popular ? There can be only one answer to this question and 
it is that inter-dining and inter-marriage are repugnant to the beliefs and 
dogmas which the Hindus regard as sacred. Caste is not a physical object 
like a wall of bricks or a line of barbed wire which prevents the Hindus from 
co-mingling and which has, therefore, to be pulled down. Caste is a notion, 
1t is a state of the mind. The destruction of Caste does not therefore mean 
the destruction of a physical barrier. It means a notional change. Caste may 
be bad. Caste may lead to conduct so gross as to be called man’s inhumanity 
to man. All the same, it must be recognized that the Hindus observe Caste 
not because they are inhuman or wrong headed. They observe Caste because 
they are deeply religious. People are not wrong in observing Caste. In my 
view, what is wrong is their religion, which has inculcated this notion of 
Caste. If this is correct, then obviously the enemy, you must grapple with, 
is not the people who observe Caste, but the Shastras which teach them 
this religion of Caste. Criticising and ridiculing people for not inter-dining 
or inter-marrying or occasionally holding inter-caste dinners and celebrating 
inter-caste marriages, is a futile method of achieving the desired end. The 
real remedy is to destroy the belief in the sanctity of the Shastras. How 
do you expect to succeed, if you allow the Shastras to continue to mould 
the beliefs and opinions of the people ? Not to question the authority of the 
Shastras, to permit the people to believe in their sanctity and their sanctions 
and to blame them and to criticise them for their acts as being irrational 
and inhuman is a incongruous way of carrying on social reform. Reformers 
working for the removal of untouchability including Mahatma Gandhi, do 
not seem to realize that the acts of the people are merely the results of 
their beliefs inculcated upon their minds by the Shastras and that people 
will not change their conduct until they cease to believe in the sanctity of 
the Shastras on which their conduct is founded. No wonder that such efforts 
have not produced any results. You also seem to be erring in the same way 
as the reformers working in the cause of removing untouchability. To agitate 
for and to organise inter-caste dinners and inter-caste marriages is like forced 
feeding brought about by artificial means. Make every man and woman free 
from the thraldom of the Shastras, cleanse their minds of the pernicious 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 69 


notions founded on the Shastras, and he or she will inter-dine and inter- 
marry, without your telling him or her to do so. 


It is no use seeking refuge in quibbles. It is no use telling people that 
the Shastras do not say what they are believed to say, grammatically 
read or logically interpreted. What matters is how the Shastras have been 
understood by the people. You must take the stand that Buddha took. You 
must take the stand which Guru Nanak took. You must not only discard 
the Shastras, you must deny their authority, as did Buddha and Nanak. 
You must have courage to tell the Hindus, that what is wrong with them 
is their religion—the religion which has produced in them this notion of the 
sacredness of Caste. Will you show that courage ? 


XXI 


What are your chances of success ? Social reforms fall into different species. 
There is a species of reform, which does not relate to the religious notion of 
people but is purely secular in character. There is also a species of reform, 
which relates to the religious notions of people. Of such a species of reform, 
there are two varieties. In one, the reform accords with the principles of the 
religion and merely invites people, who have departed from it, to revert to 
them and to follow them. The second is a reform which not only touches 
the religious principles but is diametrically opposed to those principles 
and invites people to depart from and to discard their authority and to 
act contrary to those principles. Caste is the natural outcome of certain 
religious beliefs which have the sanction of the Shastras, which are believed 
to contain the command of divinely inspired sages who were endowed with a 
supernatural wisdom and whose commands, therefore, cannot be disobeyed 
without committing sin. The destruction of Caste is a reform which falls 
under the third category. To ask people to give up Caste is to ask them to 
go contrary to their fundamental religious notions. It is obvious that the 
first and second species of reform are easy. But the third is a stupendous 
task, well-nigh impossible. The Hindus hold to the sacredness of the social 
order. Caste has a divine basis. You must therefore destroy the sacredness 
and divinity with which Caste has become invested. In the last analysis, 
this means you must destroy the authority of the Shastras and the Vedas. 


I have emphasized this question of the ways and means of destroying Caste, 
because I think that knowing the proper ways and means is more important 
than knowing the ideal. If you do not know the real ways and means, all 
your shots are sure to be misfires. If my analysis is correct then your task 
is herculean. You alone can say whether you are capable of achieving it. 


Speaking for myself, I see the task to be well-nigh impossible. Perhaps you 
would like to know why I think so. Out of the many reasons, which have led 
me to take this view, I will mention some, which I regard much important. 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


One of these reasons is the attitude of hostility, which the Brahmins have 
shown towards this question. The Brahmins form the vanguard of the 
movement for political reform and in some cases also of economic reform. 
But they are not to be found even as camp-followers in the army raised 
to break down the barricades of Caste. Is there any hope of the Brahmins 
ever taking up a lead in the future in this matter ? I say no. You may ask 
why ? You may argue that there is no reason why Brahmins should continue 
to shun social reform. You may argue that the Brahmins know that the 
bane of Hindu Society is Caste and as an enlightened class could not be 
expected to be indifferent to its consequences. You may argue that there 
are secular Brahmins and priestly Brahmins and if the latter do not take 
up the cudgels on behalf of those who want to break Caste, the former will. 
All this of course sounds very plausible. But in all this it is forgotten that 
the break up of the Caste system is bound to affect adversely the Brahmin 
Caste. Having regard to this, is it reasonable to expect that the Brahmins 
will ever consent to lead a movement the ultimate result of which is to 
destroy the power and prestige of the Brahmin Caste ? Is it reasonable to 
expect the secular Brahmins to take part in a movement directed against 
the priestly Brahmins ? In my judgment, it is useless to make a distinction 
between the secular Brahmins and priestly Brahmins. Both are kith and 
kin. They are two arms of the same body and one bound to fight for the 
existence of the other. In this connection, I am reminded of some very pregnant 
remarks made by Prof. Dicey in his English Constitution. Speaking of the 
actual limitation on the legislative supremacy of Parliament, Dicey says: 
“The actual exercise of authority by any sovereign whatever, and notably 
by Parliament, is bounded or controlled by two limitations. Of these the one 
1s an external, and the other is an internal limitation. The external limit 
to the real power of a sovereign consists in the possibility or certainty that 
his subjects or a large number of them will disobey or resist his laws. . 

The internal limit to the exercise of sovereignty arises from the nature of 
the sovereign power itself. Even a despot exercises his powers in accordance 
with his character, which is itself moulded by the circumstance under which 
he lives, including under that head the moral feelings of the time and the 
society to which he belongs. The Sultan could not, if he would, change the 
religion of the Mohammedan world, but even if he could do so, it is in the 
very highest degree improbable that the head of Mohammedanism should wish 
to overthrow the religion of Mohammed; the internal check on the exercise 
of the Sultan’s power is at least as strong as the external limitation. People 
sometimes ask the idle question, why the Pope does not introduce this or 
that reform ? The true answer is that a revolutionist is not the kind of man 
who becomes a Pope and that a man who becomes a Pope has no wish to 
be a revolutionist.” I think, these remarks apply equally to the Brahmins 
of India and one can say with equal truth that if a man who becomes a 
Pope has no wish to become a revolutionary, a man who is born a Brahmin 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 71 


has much less desire to become a revolutionary. Indeed, to expect a Brahmin 
to be a revolutionary in matters of social reform is as idle as to expect the 
British Parliament, as was said by Leslie Stephen, to pass an Act requiring 
all blue-eyed babies to be murdered. 


Some of you will say that it is a matter of small concern whether the 
Brahmins come forward to lead the movement against Caste or whether 
they do not. To take this view is in my judgment to ignore the part played 
by the intellectual class in the community. Whether you accept the theory 
of the great man as the maker of history or whether you do not, this much 
you will have to concede that in every country the intellectual class is the 
most influential class, if not the governing class. The intellectual class is 
the class which can foresee, it is the class which can advise and give lead. 
In no country does the mass of the people live the life of intelligent thought 
and action. It is largely imitative and follows the intellectual class. There 
is no exaggeration in saying that the entire destiny of a country depends 
upon its intellectual class. If the intellectual class is honest, independent and 
disinterested it can be trusted to take the initiative and give a proper lead 
when a crisis arises. It is true that intellect by itself is no virtue. It is only 
a means and the use of means depends upon the ends which an intellectual 
person pursues. An intellectual man can be a good man but he can easily be 
a rogue. Similarly an intellectual class may be a band of high-souled persons, 
ready to help, ready to emancipate erring humanity or it may easily be a 
gang of crooks or a body of advocates of a narrow clique from which it draws 
its support. You may think it a pity that the intellectual class in India is 
simply another name for the Brahmin caste. You may regret that the two 
are one; that the existence of the intellectual class should be bound with 
one single caste, that this intellectual class should share the interest and the 
aspirations of that Brahmin caste, which has regarded itself the custodian 
of the interest of that caste, rather than of the interests of the country. All 
this may be very regrettable. But the fact remains, that the Brahmins form 
the intellectual class of the Hindus. It is not only an intellectual class but 
it is a class which is held in great reverence by the rest of the Hindus. The 
Hindus are taught that the Brahmins are Bhudevas (Gods on earth) TRA, 
se | TE; The Hindus are taught that Brahmins alone can be their teachers. 
Manu says, “If it be asked how it should be with respect to points of the 
Dharma which have not been specially mentioned, the answer is that which 
Brahmins who are Shishthas propound shall doubtless have legal force.” : 


kang mig pa waf AAA | 
a Rea mem sq: 4 vA: ANAT: | 
When such an intellectual class, which holds the rest of the community 


in its grip, is opposed to the reform of Caste, the chances of success in a 
movement for the break-up of the Caste system appear to me very, very remote. 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The second reason, why I say the task is impossible, will be clear if 
you will bear in mind that the Caste system has two aspects. In one of its 
aspects, it divides men into separate communities. In its second aspect, it 
places these communities in a graded order one above the other in social 
status. Each caste takes its pride and its consolation in the fact that in the 
scale of castes it is above some other caste. As an outward mark of this 
gradation, there is also a gradation of social and religious rights technically 
spoken of an Ashta-dhikaras and Sanskaras. The higher the grade of a caste, 
the greater the number of these rights and the lower the grade, the lesser 
their number. Now this gradation, this scaling of castes, makes it impossible 
to organise a common front against the Caste System. If a caste claims 
the right to inter-dine and inter-marry with another caste placed above it, 
it is frozen, instantly it is told by mischief-mongers, and there are many 
Brahmins amongst such mischief-mongers, that it will have to concede inter- 
dining and inter-marriage with castes below it! All are slaves of the Caste 
System. But all the slaves are not equal in status. To excite the proletariat 
to bring about an economic revolution, Karl Marx told them: “You have 
nothing to lose except your chains.” But the artful way in which the social 
and religious rights are distributed among the different castes whereby 
some have more and some have less, makes the slogan of Karl Marx quite 
useless to excite the Hindus against the Caste System. Castes form a graded 
system of sovereignties, high and low, which are jealous of their status and 
which know that if a general dissolution came, some of them stand to lose 
more of their prestige and power than others do. You cannot, therefore, have 
a general mobilization of the Hindus, to use a military expression, for an 
attack on the Caste System. 


XXII 


Can you appeal to reason and ask the Hindus to discard Caste as being 
contrary to reason ? That raises the question : Is a Hindu free to follow his 
reason ? Manu has laid down three sanctions to which every Hindu must 
conform in the matter of his behaviour 4%: fq: WER: wet a frm: 
Here there is no place for reason to play its part. A Hindu must follow either 
Veda, Smriti or Sadachar. He cannot follow anything else. In the first place 
how are the texts of the Vedas and Smritis to be interpreted whenever any 
doubt arises regarding their meaning ? On this important question the view 
of Manu is quite definite. He says: 


asad Q yet kar, fea: | 
Tmk ar aca: 1 


According to this rule, rationalism as a canon of interpreting the Vedas and 
Smritis, is absolutely condemned. It is regarded to be as wicked as atheism and 
the punishment provided for it is ex-communication. Thus, where a matter is 
covered by the Veda or the Smriti, a Hindu cannot resort to rational thinking. 
Even when there is a conflict between Vedas and Smritis on matters on which 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 73 


they have given a positive injunction, the solution is not left to reason. When 
there is a conflict between two Shrutis, both are to be regarded as of equal 
authority. Either of them may be followed. No attempt is to be made to find 
out which of the two accords with reason. This is made clear by Manu: 


Ii q aa ar satay eal | 
“When there is a conflict between Shruti and Smriti, the Shruti must 


prevail.” But here too, no attempt must be made to find out which of the 
two accords with reason. This is laid down by Manu in the following Shloka : 


a Aa: TA BWI HRT Hee: | 
wate frre: wea hi fe q: a: H 
Again, when there is a conflict between two Smritis, the Manu-Smriti 
must prevail, but no attempt is to be made to find out which of the two 
accords with reason. This is the ruling given by Brihaspati: 
kaka ward fe Hal: yd | 
mafaa q a waft: A A wed i 
It is, therefore, clear that in any matter on which the Shrutis and Smritis 
have given a positive direction, a Hindu is not free to use his reasoning 
faculty. The same rule is laid down in the Mahabharat: 
To Amat sd: ait aii 1 
STTS fi Tak +q exten gg: 1 
He must abide by their directions. The Caste and Varna are matters, 
which are dealt with by the Vedas and the Smritis and consequently, appeal 
to reason can have no effect on a Hindu. So far as Caste and Varna are 
concerned, not only the Shastras do not permit the Hindu to use his reason 
in the decision of the question, but they have taken care to see that no 
occasion is left to examine in a rational way the foundations of his belief 
in Caste and Varna. It must be a source of silent amusement to many 
a Non-Hindu to find hundreds and thousands of Hindus breaking Caste 
on certain occasions, such as railway journey and foreign travel and yet 
endeavouring to maintain Caste for the rest of their lives! The explanation 
of this phenomenon discloses another fetter on the reasoning faculties of 
the Hindus. Man’s life is generally habitual and unreflective. Reflective 
thought, in the sense of active, persistent and careful consideration of any 
belief or supposed form or knowledge in the light of the grounds that support 
it and further conclusions to which it tends, is quite rare and arises only 
in a situation which presents a dilemma—a crisis. Railway journeys and 
foreign travels are really occasions of crisis in the life of a Hindu and it is 
natural to expect a Hindu to ask himself why he should maintain Caste 
at all, if he cannot maintain it at all times. But he does not. He breaks 
Caste at one step and proceeds to observe it at the next without raising 
any question. The reason for this astonishing conduct is to be found in 
the rule of the Shastras, which directs him to maintain Caste as far as 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


possible and to undergo prayaschitta when he cannot. By this theory of 
prayaschitta, the Shastras by following a spirit of compromise have given 
caste a perpetual lease of life and have smothered reflective thought which 
would have otherwise led to the destruction of the notion of Caste. 


There have been many who have worked in the cause of the abolition 
of Caste and Untouchability. Of those, who can be mentioned, Ramanuja, 
Kabir and others stand out prominently. Can you appeal to the acts of these 
reformers and exhort the Hindus to follow them ? It is true that Manu has 
included Sadachar (HSAH) as one of the sanctions along with Shruti and 
Smriti. Indeed, Sadachar has been given a higher place than Shastras : 


werd 4 wef asyeha s | 
ara fed ua kmi 1 
According to this, Sadachar, whether, it is ef or AW in accordance 
with Shastras or contrary to Shastras, must be followed. But what is the 
meaning of Sadachar ? If any one were to suppose that Sadachar means 
right or good acts i.e. acts of good and righteous men he would find himself 
greatly mistaken. Sadachar does not means good acts or acts of good men. 
It means ancient custom good or bad. The following verse makes this clear : 


afar est a ara: Ra: | 
ania faa waar s aera sed I 


As though to warn people against the view that Sadachar means good 
acts or acts of good men and fearing that people might understand it 
that way and follow the acts of good men, the Smritis have commanded 
the Hindus in unmistakable terms not to follow even Gods in their good 
deeds, if they are contrary to Shruti, Smriti and Sadachar. This may 
sound to be most extraordinary, most perverse, but the fact remains that 
4 ad Ad is an injunction, issued to the Hindus by their Shastras. 
Reason and morality are the two most powerful weapons in the armoury 
of a Reformer. To deprive him of the use of these weapons is to disable 
him for action. How are you going to break up Caste, if people are not 
free to consider whether it accords with reason? How are you going to 
break up Caste it people are not free to consider whether it accords with 
morality ? The wall built around Caste is impregnable and the material, 
of which it is built, contains none of the combustible stuff of reason and 
morality. Add to this the fact that inside this wall stands the army of 
Brahmins who form the intellectual class, Brahmins who are the natural 
leaders of the Hindus, Brahmins who are there not as mere mercenary 
soldiers but as an army fighting for its homeland and you will get an 
idea why I think that breaking-up of Caste amongst the Hindus is well- 
nigh impossible. At any rate, it would take ages before a breach is made. 
But whether the doing of the deed takes time or whether it can be done 
quickly, you must not forget that if you wish to bring about a breach 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 75 


in the system then you have got to apply the dynamite to the Vedas and the 
Shastras, which deny any part to reason, to Vedas and Shastras, which deny 
any part to morality. You must destroy the Religion of the Shrutis and the 
Smritis. Nothing else will avail. This is my considered view of the matter. 


XXIII 


Some may not understand what I mean by destruction of Religion ; some 
may find the idea revolting to them and some may find it revolutionary. 
Let me therefore explain my position. I do not know whether you draw 
a distinction between principles and rules. But I do. Not only I make a 
distinction but I say that this distinction is real and important. Rules are 
practical; they are habitual ways of doing things according to prescription. 
But principles are intellectual; they are useful methods of judging things. 
Rules seek to tell an agent Just what course of action to pursue. Principles 
do not prescribe a specific course of action. Rules, like cooking recipes, do 
tell just what to do and how to do it. A principle, such as that of Justice, 
supplies a main head by reference to which he is to consider the bearings 
of his desires and purposes, it guides him in his thinking by suggesting 
to him the important consideration which he should bear in mind. This 
difference between rules and principles makes the acts done in pursuit of 
them different in quality and in content. Doing what is said to be good by 
virtue of a rule and doing good in the light of a principle are two different 
things. The principle may be wrong but the act is conscious and responsible. 
The rule may be right but the act is mechanical. A religious act may not 
be a correct act but must at least be a responsible act. To permit of this 
responsibility, Religion must mainly be a matter of principles only. It cannot 
be a matter of rules. The moment it degenerates into rules it ceases to be 
Religion, as it kills responsibility which is the essence of a truly religious 
act. What is this Hindu Religion ? Is it a set of principles or is it a code 
of rules? Now the Hindu Religion, as contained in the Vedas and the 
Smritis, is nothing but a mass of sacrificial, social, political and sanitary 
rules and regulations, all mixed up. What is called Religion by the Hindus 
is nothing but a multitude of commands and prohibitions. Religion, in the 
sense of spiritual principles, truly universal, applicable to all races, to all 
countries, to all times, is not to be found in them, and if it is, it does not 
form the governing part of a Hinduss life. That for a Hindu, Dharma means 
commands and prohibitions is clear from the way the word Dharma is used 
in Vedas and the Smritis and understood by the commentators. The word 
Dharma as used in the Vedas in most cases means religious ordinances or 
rites. Even Jaimini in his Purva-Mimansa defines Dharma as “a desirable 
goal or result that is indicated by injunctive (Vedic) passages”. To put it 
in plain language, what the Hindus call Religion is really Law or at best 
legalized class-ethics. Frankly, I refuse to call this code of ordinances, as 
Religion. The first evil of such a code of ordinances, misrepresented to the 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


people as Religion, is that it tends to deprive moral life of freedom and 
spontaneity and to reduce it (for the conscientious at any rate) to a more 
or less anxious and servile conformity to externally imposed rules. Under 
it, there is no loyalty to ideals, there is only conformity to commands. But 
the worst evil of this code of ordinances is that the laws it contains must 
be the same yesterday, today and forever. They are iniquitous in that they 
are not the same for one class as for another. But this iniquity is made 
perpetual in that they are prescribed to be the same for all generations. The 
obJectionable part of such a scheme is not that they are made by certain 
persons called Prophets or Law-givers. The objectionable part is that this 
code has been invested with the character of finality and fixity. Happiness 
notoriously varies with the conditions and circumstances of a person, as well 
as with the conditions of different people and epochs. That being the case, 
how can humanity endure this code of eternal laws, without being cramped 
and without being crippled ? I have, therefore, no hesitation in saying that 
such a religion must be destroyed and I say, there is nothing irreligious in 
working for the destruction of such a religion. Indeed I hold that it is your 
bounden duty to tear the mask, to remove the misrepresentation that as 
caused by misnaming this Law as Religion. This is an essential step for you. 
Once you clear the minds of the people of this misconception and enable 
them to realize that what they are told as Religion is not Religion but that 
it is really Law, you will be in a position to urge for its amendment or 
abolition. So long as people look upon it as Religion they will not be ready 
for a change, because the idea of Religion is generally speaking not associated 
with the idea of change. But the idea of law is associated with the idea of 
change and when people come to know that what is called Religion is really 
Law, old and archaic, they will be ready for a change, for people know and 
accept that law can be changed. 


XXIV 


While I condemn a Religion of Rules, I must not be understood to hold 
the opinion that there is no necessity for a religion. On the contrary, I agree 
with Burke when he says that, “True religion is the foundation of society, 
the basis on which all true Civil Government rests, and both their sanction.” 
Consequently, when I urge that these ancient rules of life be annulled, I 
am anxious that its place shall be taken by a Religion of Principles, which 
alone can lay claim to being a true Religion. Indeed, I am so convinced of the 
necessity of Religion that I feel I ought to tell you in outline what I regard as 
necessary items in this religious reform. The following in my opinion should 
be the cardinal items in this reform : (1) There should be one and only one 
standard book of Hindu Religion, acceptable to all Hindus and recognized by 
all Hindus. This of course means that all other books of Hindu religion such as 
Vedas, Shastras and Puranas, which are treated as sacred and authoritative, 
must by law cease to be so and the preaching of any doctrine, religious or 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 77 


social contained in these books should be penalized. (2) It should be better if 
priesthood among Hindus was abolished. But as this seems to be impossible, 
the priesthood must at least cease to be hereditary. Every person who professes 
to be a Hindu must be eligible for being a priest. It should be provided by 
law that no Hindu shall be entitled to be a priest unless he has passed 
an examination prescribed by the State and holds a sanad from the State 
permitting him to practise. (3) No ceremony performed by a priest who does 
not hold a sanad shall be deemed to be valid in law and it should be made 
penal for a person who has no sanad to officiate as a priest. (4) A priest 
should be the servant of the State and should be subject to the disciplinary 
action by the State in the matter of his morals, beliefs and worship, in 
addition to his being subject along with other citizens to the ordinary law 
of the land. (5) The number of priests should be limited by law according to 
the requirements of the State as is done in the case of the I.C.S. To some, 
this may sound radical. But to my mind there is nothing revolutionary in 
this. Every profession in India is regulated. Engineers must show proficiency, 
Doctor must show proficiency, Lawyers must show proficiency, before they 
are allowed to practise their professions. During the whole of their career, 
they must not only obey the law of the land, civil as well as criminal, but 
they must also obey the special code of morals prescribed by their respective 
professions. The priest’s is the only profession where proficiency is not 
required. The profession of a Hindu priest is the only profession which is not 
subject to any code. Mentally a priest may be an idiot, physically a priest 
may be suffering from a foul disease, such as syphilis or gonorrhea, morally 
he may be a wreck. But he is fit to officiate at solemn ceremonies, to enter 
the sanctum sanctorum of a Hindu temple and worship the Hindu God. All 
this becomes possible among the Hindus because for a priest it is enough 
to be born in a priestly caste. The whole thing is abominable and is due to 
the fact that the priestly class among Hindus is subject neither to law nor 
to morality. It recognizes no duties. It knows only of rights and privileges. 
It is a pest which divinity seems to have let loose on the masses for their 
mental and moral degradation. The priestly class must be brought under 
control by some such legislation as I have outlined above. It will prevent it 
from doing mischief and from misguiding people. It will democratise it by 
throwing it open to every one. It will certainly help to kill the Brahminism 
and will also help to kill Caste, which is nothing but Brahminism incarnate. 
Brahminism is the poison which has spoiled Hinduism. You will succeed in 
saving Hinduism if you will kill Brahminism. There should be no opposition 
to this reform from any quarter. It should be welcomed even by the Arya 
Samajists, because this is merely an application of their own doctrine of 
guna-karma. 


Whether you do that or you do not, you must give a new doctrinal basis 
to your Religion—a basis that will be in consonance with Liberty, Equality 
and Fraternity, in short, with Democracy. I am no authority on the subject. 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


But I am told that for such religious principles as will be in consonance 
with Liberty, Equality and Fraternity it may not be necessary for you to 
borrow from foreign sources and that you could draw for such principles on 
the Upanishads. Whether you could do so without a complete remoulding, a 
considerable scraping and chipping off the ore they contain, is more than I 
can say. This means a complete change in the fundamental notions of life. It 
means a complete chanəe in the values of life. I£ means a complete change 
in outlook and in attitude towards men and things. It means conversion ; 
but if you do not like the word, I will say, it means new life. But a new life 
cannot enter a body that is dead. New life can enter only in a new body. 
The old body must die before a new body can come into existence and a new 
life can enter into it. To put it simply, the old must cease to be operative 
before the new can begin to enliven and to pulsate. This is what I meant 
when I said you must discard the authority of the Shastras and destroy the 
religion of the Shastras. 


XXV 


I have kept you too long. It is time I brought this address to a close. 
This would have been a convenient point for me to have stopped. But this 
would probably be my last address to a Hindu audience on a subject vitally 
concerning the Hindus. I would therefore like, before I close, to place before 
the Hindus, if they will allow me, some questions which I regard as vital 
and invite them seriously to consider the same. 


In the first place, the Hindus must consider whether it is sufficient to 
take the placid view of the anthropologist that there is nothing to be said 
about the beliefs, habits, morals and outlooks on life, which obtain among 
the different peoples of the world except that they often differ ; or whether 
it is not necessary to make an attempt to find out what kind of morality, 
beliefs, habits and outlook have worked best and have enabled those who 
possessed them to flourish, to go strong, to people the earth and to have 
dominion over it. As is observed by Prof. Carver, “Morality and religion, as 
the organised expression of moral approval and disapproval, must be regarded 
as factors in the struggle for existence as truly as are weapons for offence 
and defence, teeth and claws, horns and hoofs, furs and feathers. The social 
group, community, tribe or nation, which develops an unworkable scheme of 
morality or within which those social acts which weaken it and unfit it for 
survival, habitually create the sentiment of approval, while those which would 
strengthen and enable it to be expanded habitually create the sentiment 
of disapproval, will eventually be eliminated. It is its habits of approval or 
disapproval (these are the results of religion and morality) that handicap it, 
as really as the possession of two wings on one side with none on the other 
will handicap the colony of flies. It would be as futile in the one case as in 
the other to argue, that one system is just as good as another.” Morality 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 79 


and religion, therefore, are not mere matters of likes and dislikes. You may 
dislike exceedingly a scheme of morality, which, if universally practised 
within a nation, would make that nation the strongest nation on the face 
of the earth. Yet in spite of your dislike such a nation will become strong. 
You may like exceedingly a scheme of morality and an ideal of justice, which 
if universally practised within a nation, would make it unable to hold its 
own in the struggle with other nations. Yet in spite of your admiration this 
nation will eventually disappear. The Hindus must, therefore, examine their 
religion and their morality in terms of their survival value. 


Secondly, the Hindus must consider whether they should conserve the 
whole of their social heritage or select what is helpful and transmit to 
future generations only that much and no more. Prof. John Dewey, who 
was my teacher and to whom I owe so much, has said : “Every society gets 
encumbered with what is trivial, with dead wood from the past, and with 
what is positively perverse... As a society becomes more enlightened, it 
realizes that it is responsible not to conserve and transmit the whole of its 
existing achievements, but only such as make for a better future society.” 
Even Burke, in spite of the vehemence with which he opposed the principle 
of change embodied in the French Revolution, was compelled to admit that 
“a State without the means of some change is without the means of its 
conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of that part 
of the constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve.” What 
Burke said of a State applies equally to a society. 


Thirdly, the Hindus must consider whether they must not cease to worship 
the past as supplying its ideals. The beneful effect of this worship of the past 
are best summed up by Prof. Dewey when he says: “An individual can live 
only in the present. The present is not just something which comes after the 
past; much less something produced by it. It is what life is in leaving the 
past behind it. The study of past products will not help us to understand 
the present. A knowledge of the past and its heritage is of great significance 
when it enters into the present, but not otherwise. And the mistake of making 
the records and remains of the past the main material of education is that 
it tends to make the past a rival of the present and the present a more or 
less futile imitation of the past.” The principle, which makes little of the 
present act of living and growing, naturally looks upon the present as empty 
and upon the future as remote. Such a principle is inimical to progress and 
is an hindrance to a strong and a steady current of life. 


Fourthly, the Hindus must consider whether the time has not come for 
them to recognize that there is nothing fixed, nothing eternal, nothing 
sanatan, that everything is changing, that change is the law of life for 
individuals as well as for society. In a changing society, there must be a 
constant revolution of old values and the Hindus must realize that if there 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


must be standards to measure the acts of men there must also be a readiness 
to revlse those standards. 


XXVI 


I have to confess that this address has become too lengthy. Whether this 
fault is compensated to any extent by breadth or depth is a matter for you 
to judge. All I claim is to have told you candidly my views. I have little to 
recommend them but some study and a deep concern in your destiny. If you 
will allow me to say, these views are the views of a man, who has been no 
tool of power, no flatterer of greatness. They come from one, almost the whole 
of whose public exertion has been one continuous struggle for liberty for the 
poor and for the oppressed and whose only reward has been a continuous 
shower of calumny and abuse from national Journals and national leaders, 
for no other reason except that I refuse to join with them in performing the 
miracle—I will not say trick—of liberating the oppressed with the gold of 
the tyrant and raising the poor with the cash of the rich. All this may not 
be enough to commend my views. I think they are not likely to alter yours. 
But whether they do or do not, the responsibility is entirely yours. You must 
make your efforts to uproot Caste, if not in my way, then in your way. I am 
sorry, I will not be with you. I have decided to change. This is not the place 
for giving reasons. But even when I am gone out of your fold, I will watch 
your movement with active sympathy and you will have my assistance for 
what it may be worth. Yours is a national cause. Caste is no doubt primarily 
the breath of the Hindus. But the Hindus have fouled the air all over and 
everybody is infected, Sikh, Muslim and Christian. You, therefore, deserve 
the support of all those who are suffering from this infection, Sikh, Muslim 
and Christian. Yours is more difficult than the other national cause, namely 
Swaraj. In the fight for Swaraj you fight with the whole nation on your side. 
In this, you have to fight against the whole nation and that too, your own. 
But it is more important than Swaraj. There is no use having Swaraj, if 
you cannot defend it. More important than the question of defending Swaraj 
is the question of defending the Hindus under the Swaraj. In my opinion 
only when the Hindu Society becomes a casteless society that it can hope 
to have strength enough to defend itself. Without such internal strength, 
Swaraj for Hindus may turn out to be only a step towards slavery. Good-bye 
and good wishes for your success. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 81 
APPENDIX I 


A VINDICATION OF CASTE BY MAHATMA GANDHI 
(A Reprint of his Articles in the “Harijan” ) 
Dr. Ambedkar’s Indictment 


I 


The readers will recall the fact that Dr. Ambedkar was to have presided 
last May at the annual conference of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore. 
But the conference itself was cancelled because Dr. Ambedkar’s address was 
found by the Reception Committee to be unacceptable. How far a Reception 
Committee is justified in rejecting a President of its choice because of his 
address that may be objectionable to it is open to question. The Committee 
knew Dr. Ambedkar’s views on casts; and the Hindu scriptures. They 
knew also that he had in unequivocal terms decided to give up Hinduism. 
Nothing less than the address that Dr. Ambedkar had prepared was to be 
expected from him. The committee appears to have deprived the public of an 
opportunity of listening to the original views of a man, who has carved out 
for himself a unique position in society. Whatever label he wears in future, 
Dr. Ambedkar is not the man to allow himself to be forgotten. 


Dr. Ambedkar was not going to be beaten by the Reception Committee. 
He has answered their rejection of him by publishing the address at his 
own expense. He has priced it at 8 annas, I would suggest a reduction to 
2 annas or at least 4 annas. 


No reformer can ignore the address. The orthodox will gain by reading it. 
This is not to say that the address is not open to objection. It has to be read 
only because it is open to serious objection. Dr. Ambedkar is a challenge to 
Hinduism. Brought up as a Hindu, educated by a Hindu potentate, he has 
become so disgusted with the so-called Savarna Hindus for the treatment that 
he and his people have received at their hands that he proposes to leave not 
only them but the very religion that is his and their common heritage. He 
has transferred to that religion, his disgust against a part of its professors. 


But this is not to be wondered at. After all, one can only judge a system 
or an institution by the conduct of its representatives. What is more. 
Dr. Ambedkar found that the vast majority of Savarna Hindus had not only 
conducted themselves inhumanly against those of their fellow religionists, 
whom they classed as untouchables, but they had based their conduct on the 
authority of their scriptures, and when he began to search them he had found 
ample warrant for their beliefs in untouchability and all its implications. 
The author of the address has quoted chapter and verse in proof of his 
three-fold indictment—inhuman conduct itself, the unabashed justification 
for it on the part of the perpetrators, and the subsequent discovery that the 
justification was warranted by their scriptures. 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


No Hindu who prizes his faith above life itself can afford to underrate 
the importance of this indictment. Dr. Ambedkar is not alone in his disgust 
He is its most uncompromising exponent and one of the ablest among them. 
He is certainly the most irreconcilable among them. Thank God, in the front 
rank of the leaders, he is singularly alone and as yet but a representative 
of a very small minority. But what he says is voiced with more or less 
vehemence by many leaders belonging to the depressed classes. Only the 
latter, for instance Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah and Dewan Bahadur Srinivasan, 
not only do not threaten to give up Hinduism but find enough warmth in 
it to compensate for the shameful persecution to which the vast mass of 
Harijans are exposed. 


But the fact of many leaders remaining in the Hindu fold is no warrant 
for disregarding what Dr. Ambedkar has to say. The Savarnas have to correct 
their belief and their conduct. Above all those who are by their learning and 
influence among the Savarnas have to give an authoritative interpretation of 
the scriptures. The questions that Dr. Ambedkar’s indictment suggest are: 


(1) What are the scriptures ? 


(2) Are all the printed texts to be regarded as an integral part of them 
or is any part of them to be rejected as unauthorised interpolations ? 


(3) What is the answer of such accepted and expurgated scriptures on 
the question of untouchability, caste, equality of status, inter-dining 
and intermarriages ? 


(These have been all examined by Dr. Ambedkar in his address.) 


I must reserve for the next issue my own answer to these questions and 
a statement of the (at least some) manifest flaws in Dr. Ambedkar’s thesis, 


(Harijan, July 11, 1936) 
II 


The Vedas, Upanishads, Smritis and Puranas including Ramayana and 
Mahabharata are the Hindu Scriptures. Nor is this a finite list. Every age or 
even generation has added to the list. It follows, therefore, that everything 
printed or even found handwritten is not scripture. The Smritis for instance 
contain much that can never be accepted as the word of God. Thus, many 
of the texts that Dr. Ambedkar quotes from the Smritis cannot be accepted 
as authentic. The scriptures, properly so-called, can only be concerned with 
eternal varieties and must appeal to any conscience i.e. any heart whose eyes 
of understanding are opened. Nothing can be accepted as the word of God 
which cannot be tested by reason or be capable of being spiritually experienced. 
And even when you have an expurgated edition of the scriptures, you will 
need their interpretation. Who is the best interpreter? Not learned men 
surely. Learning there must be. But religion does not live by it. It lives in the 
experiences of its saints and seers, in their lives and sayings. When all the 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 83 


most learned commentators of the scriptures are utterly forgotten, the 
accumulated experience of the sages and saints wil abide and be an 
inspiration for ages to come. 


Caste has nothing to do with religion. It is a custom whose origin I do not 
know and do not need to know for the satisfaction of my spiritual hunger. 
But I do know that it is harmful both to spiritual and national growth. 
Varna and Ashrama are institutions which have nothing to do with castes. 
The law of Varna teaches us that we have each one of us to earn our bread 
by following the ancestral calling. It defines not our rights but our duties. 
It necessarily has reference to callings that are conducive to the welfare 
of humanity and to no other. It also follows that there is no calling too 
low and none too high. All are good, lawful and absolutely equal in status. 
The callings of a Brahmin—spiritual teacher—and a scavenger are equal, 
and their due performance carries equal merit before God and at one time 
seems to have carried identical reward before man. Both were entitled to 
their livelihood and no more. Indeed one traces even now in the villages 
the faint lines of this healthy operation of the law. Living in Segaon with 
its population of 600, I do not find a great disparity between the earnings 
of different tradesmen including Brahmins. I find too that real Brahmins 
are to be found even in these degenerate days who are living on alms freely 
given to them and are giving freely of what they have of spiritual treasures. 
It would be wrong and improper to judge the law of Varna by its caricature 
in the lives of men who profess to belong to a Varna, whilst they openly 
commit a breach of its only operative rule. Arrogation of a superior status by 
and of the Varna over another is a denial of the law. And there is nothing 
in the law of Varna to warrant a belief in untouchability. (The essence of 
Hinduism is contained in its enunciation of one and only God as Truth and 
its bold acceptance of Ahimsa as the law of the human family.) 


I am aware that my interpretation of Hinduism will be disputed by many 
besides Dr. Ambedkar. That does not affect my position. It is an interpretation 
by which I have lived for nearly half a century and according to which I 
have endeavoured to the best of my ability to regulate my life. 


In my opinion the profound mistake that Dr. Ambedkar has made in 
his address is to pick out the texts of doubtful authenticity and value and 
the state of degraded Hindus who are no fit specimens of the faith they so 
woefully misrepresent. Judged by the standard applied by Dr. Ambedkar, 
every known living faith will probably fail. 


In his able address, the learned Doctor has overproved his case- Can a 
religion that was professed by Chaitanya, Jnyandeo, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, 
Ramkrishna Paramahansa, Raja Rain Mohan Roy, Maharshi Devendranath 
Tagore, Vivekanand and host of others who might be easily mentioned, so 
utterly devoid of merit as is made out in Dr. Ambedkar’s address ? A religion 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


has to be Judged not by its worst specimens but by the best it might have 
produced. For that and that alone can be used as the standard to aspire 
to, if not to improve upon. 


(Harijan, July 18, 1936) 
III 
VARNA VERSUS CASTE 


Shri Sant Ramji of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore wants me to 
publish the following : 


“I have read your remarks about Dr. Ambedkar and the Jat-Pat-Todak 
Mandal, Lahore. In that connection I beg to submit as follows: 


“We did not invite Dr. Ambedkar to preside over our conference because 
he belonged to the Depressed Classes, for we do not distinguish between 
a touchable and an untouchable Hindu. On the contrary our choice fell 
on him simply because his diagnosis of the fatal disease of the Hindu 
community was the same as ours, i.e. he too was of the opinion that caste 
system was the root cause of the disruption and downfall of the Hindus. 
The subject of the Doctor's thesis for Doctorate being caste system, he has 
studied the subject thoroughly. Now the object of our conference was to 
pursuade the Hindus to annihilate castes but the advice of a non-Hindu 
in social and religious matters can have no effect on them. The Doctor in 
the supplementary portion of his address insisted on saying that that was 
his last speech as a Hindu, which was irrelevant as well as pernicious 
to the interests of the conference. So we requested him to expunge that 
sentence for he could easily say the same thing on any other occasion. But 
he refused and we saw no utility in making merely a show of our function. 
In spite of all this, I cannot help praising his address which is, as far as 
I know, the most learned thesis on the subject and worth translating into 
every vernacular of India. 


Moreover, I want to bring to your notice that your philosophical 
difference between Caste and Varna is too subtle to be grasped by people 
in general, because for all practical purposes in the Hindu society Caste 
and Varna are one and the same thing, for the function of both of them 
is one and the same i.e. to restrict inter-caste marriages and inter-dining. 
Your theory of Varnavyavastha is impracticable in this age and there 
is no hope of its revival in the near future. But Hindus are slaves of 
caste and do not want to destroy it. So when you advocate your ideal of 
imaginary Varnavyavastha they find justification for clinging to caste. 
Thus you are doing a great disservice to social reform by advocating 
your imaginary utility of division of Varnas, for it creates hindrance in 
our way. To try to remove untouchability without striking at the root of 
Varnavyavastha is simply to treat the outward symptoms of a disease or 
to draw a line on the surface of water. As in the heart of their hearts 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 85 


duijas do not want to give social equality to the so-called touchable and 
untouchable Shudras, so they refuse to break caste, and give liberal donations 
for the removal of untouchability, simply to evade the issue. To seek the help 
of the Shastras for the removal of untouchability and caste is simply to wash 
mud with mud.” 


The last paragraph of the letter surely cancels the first. If the Mandal 
rejects the help of the Shastras, they do exactly what Dr. Ambedkar does, 
i.e. cease to be Hindus. How then can they object to Dr. Ambedkar’s address 
merely because he said that that was his last speech as a Hindu? The 
position appears to be wholly untenable especially when the Mandal, for 
which , Shri Sant Ram claims to speak, applauds the whole argument of 
Dr. Ambedkar's address. 


But it is pertinent to ask what the Mandal believes if it rejects the 
Shastras. How can a Muslim remain one if he rejects the Quran, or a 
Christian remain Christian if he rejects the Bible ? If Caste and Varna are 
convertible terms and if Varna is an integral part of the Shastras which 
define Hinduism, I do not know how a person who rejects Caste i.e. Varna 
can call himself a Hindu. 


Shri Sant Ram likens the Shastras to mud. Dr. Ambedkar has not, so 
far as I remember, given any such pictures que name to the Shastras. I 
have certainly meant when I have said that if Shastras support the existing 
untouchability I should cease to call myself a Hindu. Similarly, if the 
Shastras support caste as we know it today in all its hideousness, I may 
not call myself or remain a Hindu since I have no scruples about interdining 
or intermarriage. I need not repeat my position regarding Shastras and 
their interpretation. I venture to suggest to Shri Sant Ram that it is the 
only rational and correct and morally defensible position and it has ample 
warrant in Hindu tradition. 


(Harijan, August 15, 1936) 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
APPENDIX II 
A REPLY TO THE MAHATMA BY DR. B.R. AMBEDKAR 
I 


I appreciate greatly the honour done me by the Mahatma in taking notice 
in his Harijan of the speech on Caste which I had prepared for the Jat Pat 
Todak Mandal. From a perusal of his review of my speech it is clear that 
the Mahatma completely dissents from the views I have expressed on the 
subject of Caste. I am not in the habit of entering into controversy with 
my opponents unless there are special reasons which compel me to act 
otherwise. Had my opponent been some mean and obscure person I would 
not have pursued him. But my opponent being the Mahatma himself I feel 
I must attempt to meet the case to the contrary which he has sought to 
put forth. While I appreciate the honour he has done me, I must confess to 
a sense of surprize on finding that of all the persons the Mahatma should 
accuse me of a desire to seek publicity as he seems to do when he suggests 
that in publishing the undelivered speech my object was to see that I was 
not “forgotten”. Whatever the Mahatma may choose to say my object in 
publishing the speech was to provoke the Hindus to think and take stock 
of their position. I have never hankered for publicity and if I may say so, I 
have more of it than I wish or need. But supposing it was out of the motive 
of gaining publicity that I printed the speech who could cast a stone at me? 
Surely not those, who like the Mahatma live in glass houses. 


II 


Motive apart, what has the Mahatma to say on the question raised by 
me in the speech ? First of all any one who reads my speech will realize 
that the Mahatma has entirely missed the issues raised by me and that the 
issues be has raised are not the issues that arise out of what he is pleased 
to call my indictment of the Hindus. The principal points which I have tried 
to make out in my speech may be catalogued as follows: (1) That caste has 
ruined the Hindus; (2) That the reorganization of the Hindu society on the 
basis of Chaturvarnya is impossible because the Varnavyavastha is like a 
leaky pot or like a man running at the nose. It is incapable of sustaining 
itself by its own virtue and has an inherent tendency to degenerate into a 
caste system unless there is a legal sanction behind it which can be enforced 
against every one transgressing his Varna ; (3) That the reorganization of the 
Hindu Society on the basis of Chaturvarnya is harmful because the effect of 
the Varnavyavastha is to degrade the masses by denying them opportunity to 
acquire knowledge and to emasculate them by denying them the right to be 
armed; (4) That the Hindu society must be reorganized on a religious basis 
which would recognise the principles of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity; 
(5) That in order to achieve this object the sense of religious sanctity behind 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 87 


Caste and Varna must be destroyed ; (6) That the sanctity of Caste and 
Varna can be destroyed only by discarding the divine authority of the 
Shastras. It will be noticed that the questions raised by the Mahatma 
are absolutely beside the point and show that the main argument of the 
speech was lost upon him. 


HI 


Let me examine the substance of the points made by the Mahatma. The 
first point made by the Mahatma is that the texts cited by me are not 
authentic. I confess I am no authority on this matter. But I should like to 
state that the texts cited by me are all taken from the writings of the late 
Mr. Tilak who was a recognised authority on the Sanskrit language and 
on the Hindu Shastras. His second point is that these Shastras should be 
interpreted not by the learned but the saints and that, as the saints have 
understood them, the Shastras do not support Caste and Untouchability. As 
regards the first point what I like to ask the Mahatma is what does it avail 
to any one if the texts are interpolations and if they have been differently 
interpreted by the saints ? The masses do not make any distinction between 
texts which are genuine and texts which are interpolations. The masses do 
not know what the texts are. They are too illiterate to know the contents 
of the Shastras. They have believed what they have been told and what 
they have been told is that the Shastras do enjoin as a religious duty the 
observance of Caste and Untouchability. 


With regard to the saints, one must admit that howsoever different 
and elevating their teachings may have been as compared to those of 
the merely learned they have been lamentably ineffective. They have 
been ineffective for two reasons. Firstly, none of the saints ever attacked 
the Caste System. On the contrary, they were staunch believers in the 
System of Castes. Most of them lived and died as members of the castes 
which they respectively belonged. So passionately attached was Jnyandeo 
to his status as a Brahmin that when the Brahmins of Paithan would 
not admit him to their fold he moved heaven and earth to get his status 
as a Brahmin recognized by the Brahmin fraternity. And even the saint 
Eknath who now figures in the film “Dharmatma” as a hero for having 
shown courage to touch the untouchables and dine with them, did so not 
because he was opposed to Caste and Untouchability but because he felt 
that the pollution caused thereby could be washed away by a bath in the 
sacred waters of the river Ganges.* The saints have never according to 
my study carried on a campaign against Caste and Untouchability. They 
were not concerned with the struggle between men. They were concerned 
with the relation between man and God. They did not preach that all men 
were equal. They preached that all men were equal in the eyes of God— 


*sonra faeces Set | WIAA ys wet i-—werell aq, A A, A. 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a very different and a very innocuous proposition which nobody can find 
difficult to preach or dangerous to believe in. The second reason why the 
teachings of the saints proved ineffective was because the masses have been 
taught that a saint might break Caste but the common man must not. A 
saint therefore never became an example to follow. He always remained a 
pious man to be honoured. That the masses have remained staunch believers 
in Caste and Untouchability shows that the pious lives and noble sermons 
of the saints have had no effect on their Hfe and conduct as against the 
teachings of the Shastras. Thus it can be a matter of no consolation that 
there were saints or that there is a Mahatma who understands the Shastras 
differently from the learned few or ignorant many. That the masses hold 
different view of the Shastras is fact which should and must be reckoned 
with. How is that to be dealt with except by denouncing the authority of 
the Shastras, which continue to govern their conduct, is a question which 
the Mahatma has not considered. But whatever the plan the Mahatma puts 
forth as an effective means to free the masses from the teachings of the 
Shastras, he must accept that the pious life led by one good Samaritan may 
be very elevating to himself but in India, with the attitude the common man 
has to saints and to Mahatmas—to honour but not to follow—one cannot 
make much out of it. 


IV 


The third point made by the Mahatma is that a religion professed by 
Chaitanya, Jnyandeo, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, Ramkrishna Paramahansa 
etc. cannot be devoid of merit as is made out by me and that a religion 
has to be judged not by its worst specimens but by the best it might have 
produced. I agree with every word of this statement. But I do not quite 
understand what the Mahatma wishes to prove thereby. That religion should 
be judged not by its worst specimens but by its best is true enough but does 
it dispose of the matter ? I say it does not. The question still remains—why 
the worst number so many and the best so few? To my mind there are 
two conceivable answers to this question: (1) That the worst by reason of 
some original perversity of theirs are morally uneducable and are therefore 
incapable of making the remotest approach to the religious ideal. Or (2) That 
the religious ideal is a wholly wrong ideal which has given a wrong moral 
twist to the lives of the many and that the best have become best in spite 
of the wrong ideal—in fact by giving to the wrong twist a turn in the right 
direction. Of these two explanations I am not prepared to accept the first 
and I am sure that even the Mahatma will not insist upon the contrary. To 
my mind the second is the only logical and reasonable explanation unless 
the Mahatma has a third alternative to explain why the worst are so many 
and the best so few. If the second is the only explanation then obviously 
the argument of the Mahatma that a religion should be judged by its best 
followers carries us nowhere except to pity the lot of the many who have 
gone wrong because they have been made to worship wrong ideals. 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 89 


Vv 


The argument of the Mahatma that Hinduism would be tolerable if only 
many were to follow the example of the saints is fallacious for another 
reason.* By citing the names of such illustrious persons as Chaitanya etc. 
what the Mahatma seems to me to suggest in its broadest and simplest 
form is that Hindu society can be made tolerable and even happy without 
any fundamental change in its structure if all the high caste Hindus can be 
persuaded to follow a high standard of morality in their dealings with the 
low caste Hindus. I am totally opposed to this kind of ideology. I can respect 
those of the caste Hindus who try to realize a high social ideal in their life. 
Without such men India would be an uglier and a less happy place to live 
in than itis. But nonetheless anyone who relies on an attempt to turn the 
members of the caste Hindus into better men by improving their personal 
character is in my Judement wasting his energy and hugging an illusion. 
Can personal character make the maker of armaments a good man, i.e. a 
man who will sell shells that will not burst and gas that will not poison ? 
If it cannot, how can you accept personal character to make a man loaded 
with the consciousness of Caste, a good man, i.e. a man who would treat his 
fellows as his friends and equals ? To be true to himself he must deal with 
his fellows either as a superior or inferior according as the case may be; at 
any rate, differently from his own caste fellows. He can never be expected 
to deal with his fellows as his kinsmen and equals. As a matter of fact, a 
Hindu does treat all those who are not of his Caste as though they were 
aliens, who could be discriminated against with impunity and against whom 
any fraud or trick may be practised without shame. This is to say that there 
can be a better or a worse Hindu. But a good Hindu there cannot be. This 
is so not because there is anything wrong with his personal character. In 
fact what is wrong is the entire basis of his relationship to his fellows. The 
best of men cannot be moral if the basis of relationship between them and 
their fellows is fundamentally a wrong relationship. To a slave his master 
may be better or worse. But there cannot be a good master. A good man 
cannot be a master and a master cannot be a good man. The same applies 
to the relationship between high caste and low caste. To a low caste man 
a high caste man can be better or worse as compared to other high caste 
men. A high caste man cannot be a good man in so far as he must have 
a low caste man to distinguish him as high caste man. It cannot be good 
to a low caste man to be conscious that there is a high caste man above 
him. I have argued in my speech that a society based on Varna or Caste 
is a society which is based on a wrong relationship. I had hoped that the 
Mahatma would attempt to demolish my argument. But instead of doing 
that he has merely reiterated his belief in Chaturvarnya without disclosing 
the ground on which it is based 


* In this connection see illuminating article on Morality and the Social Structure by Mr. H. N. 
Brailsford in the Aryan Path for April 1936. 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
VI 


Does the Mahatma practise what he preaches ? One does not like to make 
personal reference in an argument which is general in its application. But 
when one preaches a doctrine and holds it as a dogma there is a curiosity 
to know how far he practises what he preaches. It may be that his failure 
to practise is due to the ideal being too high to be attainable; it may be 
that his failure to practise is due to the innate hypocracy of the man. In 
any case he exposes his conduct to examination and I must not be blamed 
if I asked how far has the Mahatma attempted to realize his ideal in his 
own case. The Mahatma is a Bania by birth. His ancestors had abandoned 
trading in favour of ministership which is a calling of the Brahmins. In 
his own life, before he became a Mahatma, when occasion came for him to 
choose his career he preferred law to scales. On abandoning law he became 
half saint and half politician. He has never touched trading which is his 
ancestral calling. His youngest son—I take one who is a faithful follower 
of his father—born a Vaishya has married a Brahmin's daughter and has 
chosen to serve a newspaper magnate. The Mahatma is not known to have 
condemned him for not following his ancestral calling. It may be wrong 
and uncharitable to judge an ideal by its worst specimens. But surely 
the Mahatma as a specimen has no better and if he even fails to realize 
the ideal then the ideal must be an impossible ideal quite opposed to the 
practical instincts of man. Students of Carlyle know that he often spoke 
on a subject before he thought about it. I wonder whether such has not 
been the case with the Mahatma in regard to the subject matter of Caste. 
Otherwise certain questions which occur to me would not have escaped him. 
When can a calling be deemed to have become an ancestral calling so as 
to make it binding on a man ? Must man follow his ancestral calling even 
if it does not suit his capacities, even when it has ceased to be profitable ? 
Must a man live by his ancestral calling even if he finds it to be immoral ? 
If every one must pursue his ancestral calling then it must follow that a 
man must continue to be a pimp because his grandfather was a pimp and 
a woman must continue to be a prostitute because her grandmother was a 
prostitute. Is the Mahatma prepared to accept the logical conclusion of his 
doctrine ? To me his ideal of following one's ancestral calling is not only an 
impossible and impractical ideal, but it is also morally an indefensible ideal. 


VII 


The Mahatma sees great virtue in a Brahmin remaining a Brahmin all his 
life. Leaving aside the fact there are many Brahmins who do not like to remain 
Brahmins all their lives. What can we say about those Brahmins who have 
clung to their ancestral calling of priesthood ? Do they do so from any faith in 
the virtue of the principle of ancestral calling or do they do so from motives 
of filthy lucre ? The Mahatma does not seem to concern himself with such 
queries. He is satisfied that these are “real Brahmins who are living on alms 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 91 


freely given to them and giving freely what they have of spiritual treasures”. 
This is how a hereditary Brahmin priest appears to the Mahatma—a carrier 
of spiritual treasures. But another portrait of the hereditary Brahmin can 
also be drawn. A Brahmin can be a priest to Vishnu—the God of Love. He 
can be a priest to Shankar—the God of Destruction. He can be a priest at 
Buddha Gaya worshipping Buddha—the greatest teacher of mankind who 
taught the noblest doctrine of Love. He also can be a priest to Kali, the 
Goddess, who must have a daily sacrifice of an animal to satisfy her thirst 
for blood ; He will be a priest of the temple of Rama—the Kshatriya God! He 
will also be a priest of the Temple of Parshuram, the God who took Avatar 
to destroy the Kshatriyas ! He can be a priest to Bramha, the Creator of 
the world. He can be a priest to a Pir whose God Allah will not brook the 
claim of Bramha to share his spiritual dominion over the world! No one can 
say that this is a picture which is not true to life. If this is a true picture 
one does not know what to say of this capacity to bear loyalties to Gods 
and Goddesses whose attributes are so antagonistic that no honest man 
can be a devotee to all of them. The Hindus rely upon this extraordinary 
phenomenon as evidence of the greatest virtue of their religion—namely 
its catholicity, its spirit of toleration. As against this facile view, it can be 
urged that what is toleration and catholicity may be really nothing more 
creditable than indifference or flaccid latitudinarianism. These two attitudes 
are hard to distinguish in their outer seeming. But they are so vitally unlike 
in their real quality that no one who examines them closely can mistake 
one for the other. That a man is ready to render homage to many Gods 
and Goddesses may be cited as evidence of his tolerant spirit. But can it 
not also be evidence of insincerity born of a desire to serve the times ? I am 
sure that this toleration is merely insincerity. If this view is well founded, 
one may ask what spiritual treasure can there be with a person who is 
ready to be a priest and a devotee to any deity which it serves his purpose 
to worship and to adore? Not only must such a person be deemed to be 
bankrupt of all spiritual treasures but for him to practice so elevating a 
profession as that of a priest simply because it is ancestral, without faith, 
without belief, merely as a mechanical process handed down from father to 
son, is not a conservation of virtue; it is really the prostitution of a noble 
profession which is no other than the service of religion. 


VIII 


Why does the Mahatma cling to the theory of every one following his or 
her ancestral calling ? He gives his reasons nowhere. But there must be some 
reason although he does not care to avow it. Years ago writing on “Caste versus 
Class” in his Young India he argued that Caste System was better than Class 
System on the ground that caste was the best possible adjustment of social 
stability. If that be the reason why the Mahatma clings to the theory of every 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


one following his or her ancestral calling, then he is clinging to a false 
view of social life. Everybody wants social stability and some adjustment 
must be made in the relationship between individuals and classes in order 
that stability may be had. But two things, I am sure nobody wants. One 
thing nobody wants is static relationship, something that is unalterable, 
something that is fixed for all times. Stability is wanted but not at the cost 
of change when change is imperative. Second thing nobody wants is mere 
adjustment. Adjustment is wanted but not at the sacrifice of social Justice. 
Can it be said that the adjustment of social relationship on the basis of 
caste ¿e. on the basis of each to his hereditary calling avoids these two 
evils ? I am convinced that it does not. Far from being the best possible 
adjustment I have no doubt that it is of the worst possible kind inasmuch 
as it offends against both the canons of social adjustment—namely fluidity 
and equity. 


IX 


Some might think that the Mahatma has made much progress inasmuch 
as he now only believes in Varna and does not believe in Caste. It is 
true that there was a time when the Mahatma was a full-blooded and a 
blue-blooded Sanatani Hindu. He believed in the Vedas, the Upanishads, 
the Puranas and all that goes by the name of Hindu scriptures and 
therefore in avatars and rebirth. He believed in Caste and defended it 
with the vigour of the orthodox. He condemned the cry for inter-dining, 
inter-drinking and inter-marrying and argued that restraints about inter- 
dining to a great extent “helped the cultivation of will-power and the 
conservation of certain social virtue”. It is good that he has repudiated 
this sanctimonious nonsense and admitted that caste “is harmful both to 
spiritual and national growth,” and may be, his son’s marriage outside 
his caste has had something to do with this change of view. But has the 
Mahatma really progressed ? What is the nature of the Varna for which 
the Mahatma stands ? Is it the Vedic conception as commonly understood 
and preached by Swami Dayanand Saraswati and his followers, the Arya 
Samajists ? The essence of the Vedic conception of Varna is the pursuit of 
a calling which is appropriate to one’s natural aptitude. The essence of the 
Mahatma’s conception of Varna is the pursuit of ancestral calling irrespective 
of natural aptitude. What is the difference between Caste and Varna as 
understood by the Mahatma? I find none. As defined by the Mahatma, 
Varna becomes merely a different name for Caste for the simple reason 
that it is the same in essence—namely pursuit of ancestral calling. Far 
from making progress the Mahatma has suffered retrogression. By putting 
this interpretation upon the Vedic conception of Varna he has really made 
ridiculous what was sublime. While I reject the Vedic Varnavyavastha for 
reasons given in the speech I must admit that the Vedic theory of Varna 
as interpreted by Swami Dayanand and some others is a sensible and an 
inoffensive thing. It did not admit birth as a determining factor in fixing 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 93 


the place of an individual in society. It only recognized worth. The Mahatma's 
view of Varna not only makes nonsense of the Vedic Varna but it makes 
it an abominable thing. Varna and Caste are two very different concepts. 
Varna is based on the principle of each according to his worth-while Caste 
is based on the principle of each according to his birth. The two are as 
distinct as chalk is from cheese. In fact there is an antithesis between 
the two. If the Mahatma believes as he does in every one following his 
or her ancestral calling, then most certainly he is advocating the Caste 
System and that in calling it the Varna System he is not only guilty of 
terminological inexactitude, but he is causing confusion worse confounded. 
I am sure that all his confusion is due to the fact that the Mahatma has 
no definite and clear conception as to what is Varna and what is Caste 
and as to the necessity of either for the conservation of Hinduism. He has 
said and one hopes that he will not find some mystic reason to change his 
view that caste is not the essence of Hinduism. Does he regard Varna as 
the essence of Hinduism ? One cannot as yet give any categorical answer. 
Readers of his article on “Dr. Ambedkar's Indictment” will answer “No”. In 
that article he does not say that the dogma of Varna is an essential part 
of the creed of Hinduism. Far from making Varna the essence of Hinduism 
he says “the essence of Hinduism is contained in its enunciation of one 
and only God as Truth and its bold acceptance of Ahimsa as the law of 
the human family” But the readers of his article in reply to Mr. Sant Ram 
will say “Yes”. In that article he says “How can a Muslim remain one if 
he rejects the Quran, or a Christian remain as Christian if he rejects 
the Bible ? If Caste and Varna are convertible terms and if Varna is an 
integral part of the Shastras which define Hinduism I do not know how a 
person who rejects Caste, i.e. Varna can call himself a Hindu ?” Why this 
prevarication ? Why does the Mahatma hedge? Whom does he want to 
please ? Has the saint failed to sense the truth ? Or does the politician stand 
in the way of the Saint ? The real reason why the Mahatma is suffering 
from this confusion is probably to be traced to two sources. The first is the 
temperament of the Mahatma. He has almost in everything the simplicity 
of the child with the child’s capacity for self-deception. Like a child he can 
believe in anything he wants to believe. We must therefore wait till such 
time as it pleases the Mahatma to abandon his faith in Varna as it has 
pleased him to abandon his faith in Caste. The second source of confusion 
is the double role which the Mahatma wants to play—of a Mahatma and a 
Politician. As a Mahatma he may be trying to spiritualize Politics. Whether 
he has succeeded in it or not Politics have certainly commercialized him. 
A politician must knew that Society cannot bear the whole truth and that 
he must not speak the whole truth; if he is speaking the whole truth it 
is bad for his politics. The reason why the Mahatma is always supporting 
Caste and Varna is because he is afraid that if he opposed them he will 
lose his place in politics. Whatever may be the source of this confusion the 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mahatma must be told that he is deceiving himself and also deceiving the 
people by preaching Caste under the name of Varna. 


x 


The Mahatma says that the standards I have applied to test Hindus and 
Hinduism are too severe and that judged by those standards every known 
living faith will probably fail. The complaint that my standards are high 
may be true. But the question is not whether they are high or whether they 
are low. The question is whether they are the right standards to apply. 
A People and their Religion must be judged by social standards based on 
social ethics. No other standard would have any meaning if religion is held 
to be a necessary good for the well-being of the people. Now I maintain 
that the standards I have applied to test Hindus and Hinduism are the 
most appropriate standards and that I know of none that are better. The 
conclusion that every known religion would fail if tested by my standards 
may be true. But this fact should not give the Mahatma as the champion 
of Hindus and Hinduism a ground for comfort any more than the existence 
of one madman should give comfort to another madman or the existence of 
one criminal should give comfort to another criminal. I like to assure the 
Mahatma that it is not the mere failure of the Hindus and Hinduism which 
has produced in me the feelings of disgust and contempt with which I am 
charged. I realize that the world is a very imperfect world and any one 
who wants to live in it must bear with its imperfections. But while I am 
prepared to bear with the imperfections and shortcomings of the society in 
which I may be destined to labour, I feel I should not consent to live in a 
society which cherishes wrong ideals or a society which having right ideals 
will not consent to bring its social life in conformity with those ideals. If I 
am disgusted with Hindus and Hinduism it is because I am convinced that 
they cherish wrong ideals and live a wrong social life. My quarrel with 
Hindus and Hinduism is not over the imperfections of their social conduct. 
It is much more fundamental. It is over their ideals. 


XI 


Hindu society seems to me to stand in need of a moral regeneration which 
it is dangerous to postpone. And the question is who can determine and 
control this moral regeneration ? Obviously only those who have undergone an 
intellectual regeneration and those who are honest enough to have the courage 
of their convictions born of intellectual emancipation. Judged by this standard 
the Hindu leaders who count are in my opinion quite unfit for the task. It 
is impossible to say that they have undergone the preliminary intellectual 
regeneration. If they had undergone an intellectual regeneration they would 
neither delude themselves in the simple way of the untaught multitude nor 
would they take advantage of the primitive ignorance of others as one sees 
them doing. Notwithstanding the crumbling state of Hindu society these 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 95 


leaders, will nevertheless unblushingly appeal to ideals of the past which 
have in every way ceased to have any connection with the present; which 
however suitable they might have been in the days of their origin have now 
become a warning rather than a guide. They still have a mystic respect 
for the earlier forms which make them disinclined—nay opposed to any 
examination of the foundations of their Society. The Hindu masses are 
of course incredibly heedless in the formation of their beliefs. But so are 
the Hindu leaders. And what is worse is that these Hindu leaders become 
filled with an illicit passion for their beliefs when any one proposes to rob 
them of their companionship. The Mahatma is no exception. The Mahatma 
appears not to believe in thinking. He prefers to follow the saints. Like a 
conservative with his reverence for consecrated notions he is afraid that if 
he once starts thinking, many ideals and institutions to which he clings wilt 
be doomed. One must sympathize with him. For every act of independent 
thinking puts some portion of apparently stable world in peril. But it is 
equally true that dependence on saints cannot lead us to knew the truth. 
The saints are after all only human beings and, as Lord Balfour said, “the 
human mind is no more a truth finding apparatus than the snout of a pig”. 
In so far as he does think, to me he really appears to be prostituting his 
intelligence to find reasons for supporting this archaic social structure of the 
Hindus. He is the most influential apologist of it and therefore the worst 
enemy of the Hindus. 


Unlike the Mahatma there are Hindu leaders who arc not content merely 
to believe and follow. They dare to think, and act in accordance with the 
result of their thinking. But unfortunately they are cither a dishonest lot 
or an indifferent lot when it comes to the question of giving right guidance 
to the mass of the people. Almost every Brahmin has transgressed the 
rule of Caste. The number of Brahmins who sell shoes is far greater than 
those who practise priesthood. Not only have the Brahmins given up their 
ancestral calling of priesthood for trading but they have entered trades 
which are prohibited to them by the Shastras. Yet how many Brahmins who 
break Caste every day will preach against Caste and against the Shastras ? 
For one honest Brahmin preaching against Caste and Shastras because his 
practical instinct and moral conscience cannot support a conviction in them, 
there are hundreds who break Caste and trample upon the Shastras every 
day but who are the most fanatic upholders of the theory of Caste and the 
sanctity of the Shastras. Why this duplicity ? Because they feel that if the 
masses are emancipated from the yoke of Caste they would be a menace to 
the power and prestige of the Brahmins as a class. The dishonesty of this 
intellectual class who would deny the masses the fruits of their thinking is 
a most disgraceful phenomenon. 


The Hindus in the words of Mathew Arnold are “wandering between two 
worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be born”. What are they to do ? The 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mahatma to whom they appeal for guidance does not believe in thinking 
and can therefore give no guidance which can be said to stand the test of 
experience. The intellectual classes to whom the masses look for guidance are 
either too dishonest or too indifferent to educate them in the right direction. 
We are indeed witnesses to a great tragedy. In the face of this tragedy all 
one can do is to lament and say—such be thy Leaders, O! Hindus. 


PART II 


ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC 
PROVINCE 


Statement submitted 
to 
the Linguistic Provinces Commission 


Published : 1948 
Printed from the edition of 1948 


NOTE 


The figures quoted in this memorandum have been taken from various books 
and pamphlets written by various writers on the subject of reconstituting 
Maharashtra on a linguistic basis. I rely upon the writers for their accuracy. 
Similarly, the map of Maharashtra attached to this Memorandum need not 
be taken as accurate or complete. The idea is merely to give a picture of 
how the Province when reconstituted will look like. 


14-10-48 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC 
PROVINCE 


PART I 
THE PROBLEM OF LINGUISTIC PROVINCES 


The question of Linguistic Provinces has not only led to a great deal 
of controversy born out of party prejudices and party interests but it 
has led to a difference of opinion as to the merits thereof. The points of 
controversy relate to claims and counter-claims as between contiguous 
Provinces to territories as well as to the terms of their inclusion. I shall 
deal with them at a later stage in so far as they relate to the creation 
of the Maharashtra Province. I shall first take up the question of the 
merits of the proposal for Linguistic Provinces. 


Purposes behind the demand for Linguistic Provinces 


2. What is the purpose which lies behind the demand for Linguistic 
Provinces ? The generality of those who advocate the creation of Linguistic 
Provinces do so because they believe that the Provinces have different 
languages and cultures. They should therefore have the fullest scope to 
develop their languages and their cultures. In other words, the Provinces 
have all the elements of a distinct nationality and they should be allowed 
the freedom to grow to their fullest in nationhood. 


Difficulties arising out of Linguistic Provinces 


3. In discussing the question of creating such Linguistic Provinces it 
would be very short-sighted to omit from one’s consideration the fact 
that the structure of Government of India of the future is to be cast in 
a dual form: (a) a Central Government and (6) a number of Provincial 
Governments inextricably inter-linked and inter-woven in the discharge 
of their respective Legislative, Executive and Administrative functions. 
Before one could agree to the creation of Linguistic Provinces, one must, 
therefore, consider the effects which Linguistic Provinces would have on 
the working of the Central Government. 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


4. Among the many effects that may be envisaged, the following are obvious : 


(1) Linguistic Provinces will result in creating as many nations as there 
are groups with pride in their race, language and literature. The 
Central Legislature will be a League of Nations and the Central 
Executive may become a meeting of separate and solidified nations 
filled with the consciousness of their being separate in culture and 
therefore in interests. They may develop the mentality of political 
insubordination, 1.e., refusal to obey the majority or of staging walk- 
outs. The development of such a mentality is not to be altogether 
discounted. If such a mentality grows it may easily make the working 
of the Central Government impossible. 


(2) The creation of Linguistic Provinces would be fatal to the maintenance 
of the necessary administrative relations between the Centre and the 
Provinces. If each Province adopts its own language as its official 
language the Central Government will have to correspond in as 
many official languages as there are Linguistic Provinces. This must 
be accepted as an impossible task. How great a deadlock Linguistic 
Provinces will create in the working of the Governmental machine can 
be better understood by studying the effects of Linguistic Provinces 
on the Judiciary. In the new set-up, each Province will have a High 
Court with a series of subordinate courts below it. At the apex of 
these High Courts will be the Supreme Court with the right to 
hear appeals against the decisions of the High Courts. On the basis 
of Linguistic Provinces, Courts of each Province including its High 
Court will conduct their proceedings in the language of the Province. 
What is the Supreme Court to do when its jurisdiction is invoked 
for rectifying a wrong done by the High Court ? The Supreme Court 
will have to close down. For, if it is to function — every judge of 
the Supreme Court — I am omitting for the moment the lawyers 
practising therein — must know the language of every Province — 
which it is impossible to provide for. 


No one can contemplate such a situation with equanimity. It may lead to a 
break-up of India. Instead of remaining united, India may end in becoming 
Europe — faced with the prospect of chaos and disorder. 


Advantages from Linguistic Provinces 


5. While it is true that the proposal of Linguistic Provinces creates a 
problem which goes to the very root of the matter — inasmuch as it affects the 
unity of India — there can be no doubt that the reconstruction of Provinces 
on linguistic basis has certain definite political advantages. 


6. The main advantage of the scheme of Linguistic Provinces which 
appeals to me quite strongly is that Linguistic Provinces would make 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 103 


democracy work better than it would in mixed Provinces. A Linguistic 
Province produces what democracy needs, namely, social homogeneity. 
Now the homogeneity of a people depends upon their having a belief in a 
common origin, in the possession of a common language and literature, in 
their pride in a common historic tradition, community of social customs, 
etc. 1s a proposition which no student of sociology can dispute. The 
absence of a social homogeneity in a State creates a dangerous situation 
especially where such a State is raised on a democratic structure. History 
shows that democracy cannot work in a State where the population is 
not homogeneous. In a heterogeneous population divided into groups 
which are hostile and anti-social towards one another the working of 
democracy is bound to give rise to cases of discrimination, neglect, 
partiality, suppression of the interests of one group at the hands of another 
group which happens to capture political power. The reason why in an 
heterogeneous society, democracy cannot succeed is because power instead 
of being used impartially and on merits and for the benefit of all is used 
for the aggrandisement of one group and to the detriment of another. 
On the other hand, a State which is homogeneous in its population can 
work for the true ends of democracy, for there are no artificial barriers 
or social antipathies which lead to the misuse of political power. 


7. It follows that if democracy is to function properly the subjects of the 
State must be so distributed as to form a single homogeneous group. The 
constitution for the Provinces of India which is on the anvil is designed 
for a democratic form of Government. It follows that each Province must 
be homogeneous in its population if democracy in the Province is to be 
successful. This is simply another way of saying that each Province must 
be a linguistic unit if it is to be fitted to work a democratic constitution. 
Herein lies the justification for Linguistic Provinces. 


Can the creation of Linguistic Provinces be postponed ? 


8. Can the solution of this problem be postponed ? In this connection, 
I would like to place before the Commission the following considerations : 


(i) There is nothing new in the demand for Linguistic Provinces. 
Six Provinces (1) East Punjab, (2) United Provinces, (8) Bihar, 
(4) West Bengal, (5) Assam and (6) Orissa already exist as 
Linguistic Provinces. The Provinces which are clamouring for being 
reconstituted on linguistic basis are: (1) Bombay, (2) Madras and 
(3) Central Provinces. When the principle of Linguistic Provinces 
is accepted in the case of six Provinces, the other Provinces which 
are asking the same principle to be applied to them, cannot be 
asked to wait indefinitely: 


Gi) The situation in the Non-Linguistic Provinces has become 
exasperating if not dangerous and is in no way different from the 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


situation as it existed in the old Turkish Empire or in the old 
Austro-Hungarian Empire. 


(iii) The demand for Linguistic Provinces is an explosive force of the 
same character which was responsible for blowing up the old 
Turkish Empire or Austro-Hungarian Empire. It is better not to 
allow it to get too hot when it may become difficult to prevent an 
explosion. 


(iv) So long as the Provinces were not democratic in their constitutions 
and so long as they did not possess the widest sovereign powers 
which the new constitution gives them the urgency of Linguistic 
Provinces was not very great. But with the new constitution, the 
problem has become very urgent. 


The solution of the difficulties 


9. If the problem must be dealt with immediately what is to be the 
solution ? As has already been pointed out, the solution must satisfy two 
conditions. While accepting the principle of Linguistic Provinces it must 
provide against the break-up of India’s unity. My solution of the problem 
therefore is that, while accepting the demand for the re-constitution of 
Provinces on linguistic basis, the constitution should provide that the 
official language of every Province shall be the same as the official 
language of the Central Government. It is only on that footing that I am 
prepared to accept the demand for Linguistic Provinces. 


10. I am aware of the fact that my suggestion runs counter to the 
conception of Linguistic Provinces which is in vogue. It is that the 
language of the Province shall be its official language. I have no objection 
to Linguistic Provinces. But I have the strongest objection to the language 
of the Province being made its official language where it happens to be 
different from the official language of the Centre. My objection is based 
on the following considerations : 


(1) The idea of having a Linguistic Province has nothing to do with the 
question of what should be its official language. By a Linguistic 
Province, I mean a Province which by the social composition of 
its population is homogeneous and therefore more suited for the 
realization of those social ends which a democratic Government 
must fulfil. In my view, a Linguistic Province has nothing to do with 
the language of the Province. In the scheme of Linguistic Provinces, 
language has necessarily to play its part. But its part can be limited 
to the creation of the Province, i.e., for demarcation of the boundaries 
of the Province. There is no categorical imperative in the scheme 
of Linguistic Provinces which compels us to make the language of 
the Province its official language. Nor is it necessary, for sustaining 
the cultural unity of the Province, to make the language of the 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 105 


Province its official language. For, the cultural unity of the Province, 
which already exists, is capable of being sustained by factors other 
than language such as common historic tradition, community of 
soclal customs, etc. To sustain Provincial cultural unity which 
already exists it does not require the use of the Provincial language 
for official purposes. Fortunately for the Provincialists there 
is no fear of a Maharashtrian not remaining a Maharashtrian 
because he spoke any other language. So also there is no fear of 
a Tamilian or an Andhra or a Bengali ceasing to be a Tamilian, 
Andhra or Bengali if he spoke any other language than his own 
mother-tongue. 


(2) The out-and-out advocates of Linguistic Provinces would no doubt 
protest that they have no intention of converting the Provinces 
into separate nations. Their bona fides need not be doubted. At 
the same time, it often happens that things do take a shape which 
their authors never intended. It is therefore absolutely necessary 
to take from the very beginning every step to prevent things 
taking an evil shape in course of time. There is therefore nothing 
wrong if the loc ening of the ties in one direction is accompanied 
by their being tightened up in another direction. 


(3) We must not allow the Provincial language to become its official 
language even if it was natural that the Provincial language should 
be the official language of the Province. There is no danger in 
creating Linguistic Provinces. Danger lies in creating Linguistic 
Provinces with the language of each Province as its official language. 
The latter would lead to the creation of Provincial nationalities. 
For the use of the Provincial languages as official languages would 
lead Provincial cultures to be isolated crystalized, hardened and 
solidified. It would be fatal to allow this to happen. To allow 
this is to allow the Provinces to become independent nations, 
separate in everything and thus open the road to the ruination of 
United India. In Linguistic Provinces without the language of the 
Province being made its official language the Provincial culture 
would remain fluid with a channel open for give and take. Under 
no circumstances, we must allow the Linguistic Provinces to make 
their Provincial languages their official languages. 


11. The imposition of an All-India official language on a Linguistic 
Province which may happen to be different from the language of the 
Province cannot come in the way of maintaining Provincial culture. Official 
language will be used only in the field occupied by Government. The non- 
official field or what may be the purely cultural field will still remain 
open to the Provincial language to play its part. There may be a healthy 
competition between the official and non-official language. One may try to 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


oust the other. If the official language succeeds in ousting the non-official 
language from the cultural field, nothing like it. If it fails, there cannot 
be much harm. Such a position cannot be said to be intolerable. It is no 
more intolerable than the present position in which we have English as the 
official language and the Provincial language as its non-official language. 
The only difference is that the official language will not be English but 
some other. 


The requirements of a satisfactory solution 


12. I am aware of the fact that my solution is not an ideal solution. It 
makes working of the constitution in the Provinces on democratic lines 
possible. But it does not make possible the democratic working of the 
constitution at the Centre. That is because mere linguistic unity, i.e., the 
facility to speak a common language does not ensure homogeneity which 
is the result of many other factors. As stated before, the representatives 
selected by the Provinces to the Central Legislature will remain what they 
are, namely, Bengalis, Tamilians, Andhras, Maharashtrians, etc., even 
though they may be speaking the official language of the Centre and not 
their mother-tongue. But an ideal solution which can be put into effect 
immediately, I cannot see. We must be content with the next best. The only 
thing we must be sure about is that the solution we adopt immediately 
must satisfy two conditions : 


G) It must be the very next best to the ideal; and 
(ii) It must be capable of developing itself into the ideal. 


Judged in the light of these considerations, I venture to say that the 
solution which I have suggested satisfies these two conditions. 


PART II 
WILL MAHARASHTRA BE A VIABLE PROVINCE ? 
Tests of Viability 


13. Coming to the specific question of Maharashtra Province it is necessary 
to be satisfied that it will be a viable Province. For being declared a viable 
Province, a Province must satisfy certain tests. It must be of a certain size, 
it must have a certain volume of population and a commensurate amount 
of revenue. A Province must not only be self-supporting — which any 
Province can be by choosing to live on a lower plane — but it must have 
sufficient revenue to provide for a minimum standard of administration 
required by efficiency and the needs of social welfare. 


Is Maharashtra Viable ? 


14. Does the Province of Maharashtra satisfy these tests ? The following 
are the figures which show the size and population of the Maharashtra 
Province as constituted on a linguistic basis: 


107 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 


8'94 OOL‘S8°STS GO9'LT'T8°S 99F'88'I [80L PULIO 
A 008 ‘Zr‘T9 L9€‘E8'TS GTS ‘6Y Ig1O L 
GEE 00S ‘SIS 888'EEs‘9 TOL‘ST J1e3segq Jo 9789S 
9°68 000'05'9 000'08'9 VEST Boy 
37819 
OLL 008‘66°CE AKA ‘GP 99L ‘SS peqesiepAy] jo sjormsrq surpeods-1yyere yy] 
6LL OOL‘0S‘TS L0G‘0Z‘LZ FIS TI AouopIsoig Aequiog uruqytA s9784S 
LL 00F°88“9'I 88Z°8°66'1 IST 8 IPL 
LOL 00¢‘88‘E¢ 769'06'01 S98°98 IBIog pue `d `O JO SIOLISIQ Sty 
AouUOpIseld 
SLL OOT‘SP‘00'T VPSEL 6ST V8a‘LP Avquiog oY} JO SJOIIISIT SATOMI, 
uotze[ndod 
T870} 09 
uoryepndod AIOI} ALOJLLIOY 
sutyeods əy} jo uorerndod ay} Jo sejiw 
IY} CIV sulyeods-1yy LILIN uomnmse[ndod əzenbs 
Jo Badru TEIL yeqoL Ul BoIy ALOPIIO J, 


108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Area and population of Maharashtra 


15. The above table gives figures for the Maharashtra Province in its two 
forms (1) abridged and (2) unabridged. In its unabridged form which means 
if all the area occupied by the Marathi-speaking people was constituted 
in one single Province the area and the population of Maharashtra will 
be 1,33,466 square miles with a population of 2,15,85,700. In its abridged 
form which means that if the area and population of the Marathi-speaking 
people comprised within the States was for the moment omitted, even then 
the proposed Maharashtra Province would comprise an area of 84,151 
square miles with a population of 1,54,33,400. 


Revenue of Maharashtra 


16. Turning to the revenue side of the Province, it has been estimated 
that the total annual revenue at the existing rate of taxation which 
will accrue to the abridged Maharashtra Province will be approximately 
Rs. 25,61,51,000. 


Comparison of Maharashtra with other Provinces 


17. Some comparisons are necessary to get an idea if a Province of this 
size, with this population and with so much revenue will be viable. For 
this, I give below figures of the first or the biggest and the forty-seventh or 
the smallest states within the U.S.A. in order of their size and population : 


States Area in 
square miles 


1st Texas 7 s: = 2,67,339 
47th Delaware és st di sz 2,057 
States Population 
1st New York es ee z z 1,26,32,890 
47th Wyoming re 38 z x 2,57,108 


18. It is obvious that Maharashtra whether one takes its abridged 
edition or the unabridged edition of it will be several times bigger than 
Delaware which is the smallest State in U.S.A. in point of area and also 
several times bigger than New York which is the biggest state in U.S.A. 
in point of population. 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 109 


19. Comparison of Maharashtra with the existing and prospective 
Linguistic Provinces of India may also be useful. Their position in point of 
area, population and revenue is as follows : 


Province Area in Population Annual 
sq. miles Revenue 
Rs. 


Existing Linguistic Prouince— 


United Provinces še 106,247 5,50,20,617 32,65,08,000 
Bihar sç s 69,745  3,63,40,151 16,26,78,000 
Orissa s= = 32,198 82,28,544 4,60,62,000 


New Linguistic Provinces— 


Andhra “3 70,000 = 1,90,00,000 
Karnatak s 5 25,000 45,00,000 
Kerala °: T 6,000 35,00,000 


These figures when compared with the figures for Maharashtra leave no 
doubt that Maharashtra will not merely be a viable Province but a strong 
Province in point of area, population and revenue. 


PART III 


SHOULD THE MAHARASHTRA PROVINCE BE 
FEDERAL OR UNITARY? 


20. I will now turn to what are known to be points on which there is 
controversy. There is no controversy regarding the unification of Maharashtra 
into one Province. The controversy relates to the way it should be brought 
about. One view is that the new Maharashtra Province should be a unitary 
Province, with a single legislature and a single executive. The other view 
is that Maharashtra should be a Federation of two sub-Provinces, one 
sub-Province to consist of the Marathi-speaking districts of the Bombay 
Presidency and the other of the Marathi-speaking districts of the present 
Province of the Central Provinces and Berar. The idea of creating sub- 
Provinces has originated from the spokesmen of the Marathi-speaking districts 
of Central Provinces and Berar. I am satisfied that it is only the wish of 
a few high-caste politicians who feel that in a unified Maharashtra their 
political careers will come to an end. It has no backing from the people of 
Central Provinces and Berar. I would not have referred to this point but 
for the fact that it gives me an opportunity to enunciate what I regard as 
a very vital principal. When it is decided to create a Linguistic Province, 
I am definitely of opinion that all areas which are contiguous and which 
speak the same language should be forced to come into it. There should 
be no room for choice nor for self-determination. Every attempt must be 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


made to create larger provincial units. Smaller provincial units will be a 
perpetual burden in normal times and a source of weakness in an emergency. 
Such a situation must be avoided. That is why I insist that all parts of 
Maharashtra should be merged together in a single province. 


PART IV 
MAHARASHTRA AND THE CITY OF BOMBAY 
Controversy over Bombay 


21. Should the City of Bombay be included in Maharashtra or not is 
another point over which there has been a controversy. A meeting was held in 
Bombay in the building of the Indian Merchants Chamber. The meeting was 
attended by no more than sixty. With the exception of one Indian-Christian 
it was attended by only Gujarathi-speaking merchants and industrialists. 
Although it was small and sectional meeting, its proceedings were flashed 
on the front page of every important newspaper in India and the Times of 
India was so impressed by its importance that it wrote an editorial which 
while mildly castigating the vituperative tone which the speakers at the 
meeting adopted against the Maharashtrians, supported the resolutions 
passed at the meeting regarding the future of Bombay. This proves what 
truth there is in the reply given by Lord Birkenhead to the Irish Leader, 
Mr. Redmond, in the course of the Irish controversy when he said that there 
are cases where a minority is a majority. 


My memorandum would be woefully incomplete if I omitted to deal with 
the pros and cons of this controversy. This is because of two reasons: In 
the first place, the meeting has been recognized to be very important and 
secondly because the resolutions of the meeting have been supported by 
eminent University Professors. 


Proposals regarding Bombay 
22. The meeting passed the following resolutions : 


(1) That the question of the creation of Linguistic Provinces should be 
postponed ; or 


(2) That if it is not postponed, Bombay City should be constituted into 
a separate Province. 


There is a third suggestion, namely, that Konkan should be constituted 
into a separate Province with Bombay as its capital. There is hardly any 
support to this plan. There is therefore no necessity to discuss it. 


Decision regarding Bombay must be made now 


23. I have no complaint against that part of the Resolution which 
says the question of Linguistic Provinces be postponed provided the main 
question namely whether Bombay should or should not be included in 
Maharashtra is settled. If this question was settled it did not matter if it 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 111 


took five or ten years to give effect to the Settlement. But the resolution is 
only an escapism. It does not settle the issue. It only adjourns the controversy. 
The main question must therefore be tackled right now. 


Ground for the exclusion of Bombay from Maharashtra 


24. The arguments urged in favour of separating Bombay from Maharashtra 
are set out below : 


(1) Bombay was never a part of Maharashtra.' 
(2) Bombay was never a part of the Maratha Empire.2 


(3) The Marathi-speaking people do not form a majority of the population 
of the City of Bombay.’ 


(4) Gujarathis have been old residents of Bombay.* 


(5) Bombay is a trade centre for vast areas outside Maharashtra. 
Therefore, Bombay cannot be claimed by Maharashtra. It belongs 
to the whole of India.” 


(6) It is the Gujarathi-speaking people of Bombay who have built up the 
trade and industry of Bombay. The Maharashtrians have been only 
clerks and coolies. It would be wrong to place the owners of trade 
and industry under the political dominance of the working classes 
who form the bulk of Maharashtrians.° 


(7) Maharashtra wants Bombay to be included in Maharashtra because 
it wants to live on the surplus of Bombay.’ 


(8) A multi-lingual State is better. It is not so fatal to the liberty of 
smaller people. 


(9) Regrouping of Provinces should be on rational lines and not on 
national lines.° 


Burden of Proof 


25. On an examination of these points it is obvious that points (1) and 
(2) are preliminary in the sense that they help us to decide on whom rests 
the burden of proof. If it is proved that Bombay is part of Maharashtra, 
then the burden of proof for separating it from Maharashtra must fall upon 
those who urge that it should be separated and not upon those who claim 
that it should remain part of Maharashtra. I will therefore deal with these 
two points first. 


1. Prof. Gheewala—Free Press Journal, September 6, 1948, and Prof. Moraes—Free Press Journal, 
September 18, 1948. 

2. Ibid. 

. Prof. C. N. Vakil, Free Press Journal, September 21, 1948. 

Prof. Gheewala, Free Free Press Journal, September 6, 1948. 

Prof. C. N. Vakil, Free Press Journal, September 11, 1948. 

Prof. C. N. Vakil, Bombay Chronicle. 

Prof. C. N. Vakil, at the meeting of India Merchants Chamber. 

Prof. Dantwala, Free Press Journal, September 1, 1948. 

. Prof. Gheewala, Free Press Journal, September 11, 1948. 


ONDA 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Points (1) AND (2) 
Verdict of History 


26. These points can be considered both in the light of history as well 
as of geography. I am, however, convinced that history cannot help us to 
decide the issue. In the first place, how far back must we go to find the 
data on which to base our conclusion. It is obvious that the history of the 
ancient past would be of no use to us in this connection. What could be 
of use to us is the past of the present. One may go further and question 
any reliance being placed upon such a past of the present for drawing 
any conclusion that can have a bearing on the issue before us. Most of 
the contacts between people during historical times have been between 
conquerors and conquered. This is true of India as well as of Europe. But 
the results of such contacts have been quite different in Europe and in India. 
In Europe such contacts have produced assimilation of the conflicting social 
elements. Frequent inter-marriages have confounded the original stocks. 
One language, either the most useful or the most commonly spoken, has 
tended to supplant the other. If one civilization is superior to the others 
in the same country it has automatically supplanted them. This natural 
tendency towards assimilation which we see im Europe is so strong that 
steps have to be taken to counteract it. What is the tendency in India ? It 
is definitely against assimilation. The Musalmans conquered Hindus. But 
the Musalmans remained Musalmans and the Hindus remained Hindus. 
The Gujarathis were conquered by Maharashtrians and were ruled by them 
for some years. What effect has it produced upon the Gujarathis ? Nothing. 
Gujarathis have remained Gujarathis and Maharashtrians have remained 
Maharashtrians. The Chalukyas conquered Maharashtrians and so did the 
Shilahars. But there was no assimilation between them. The Shilahars and 
Chalukyas remained what they were and so did the Maharashtrians. This 
being the case, what help can Indian History give in the decision of the 
issue ? The history of internal upheavals as well as of external aggressions 
has been nothing more than a passing show. Conquest means nothing and 
proves nothing. 


Verdict of Geography 


27. Let us now turn to geography and ask for its verdict. It seems to 
be a better witness than history. For this purpose one must consider the 
location of Bombay in relation to the Province of Maharashtra. The Province 
of Maharashtra once it is created will be triangular in shape. One side of 
this triangle is formed by the Western Coast Line of India between Daman 
in the North and Karwar in the South. The City of Bombay lies in between 
Daman and Karwar. The Province of Gujarat starts from Daman and 
spreads northwards. The Kanada Province starts from Karwar and spreads 
southwards. It is about 85 miles South of Daman which is the starting point 
of Gujarat, and 250 miles North of Karwar, which is the starting point of 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 113 


Karnatak Province. If the unbroken territory between Daman and Karwar is 
geographically part of Maharashtra, how could Bombay be held not to be a 
part of Maharashtra ? This is an incontrovertible fact of nature. Geography 
has made Bombay part of Maharashtra. Let those who want to challenge 
the fact of nature do so. To an unbiassed mind it is conclusive proof that 
Bombay belongs to Maharashtra. 


Bombay and the Maratha Empire 


28. That the Marathas did not care to make it a part of their Empire 
does in no way affect the validity of the conclusion drawn from geography. 
That the Marathas did not care to conquer it does not prove that Bombay 
is not a part of Maharashtra. It only means that the Maratha power was a 
land power and did not therefore care to spend its energy in the conquest 
of a seaport. 


29. With the decision on Points (1) and (2), the burden must now shift on 
those who contended that Bombay should not be included in Maharashtra. 
Have they discharged the burden ? This leads to the consideration of other 
points. 


Point (8) 
Marathi-speaking population—majority or minority 


30. There is no unanimity on this question. Prof. Gadgil speaking for 
the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra asserts that the Marathi-speaking 
population of Bombay according to the census of 1941 is 51 per cent. 
Speaking against the inclusion of Bombay, Prof. Gheewala says that the 
Marathi-speaking population of Bombay is 41 per cent. Prof. Vakil has 
brought it down to 39 per cent, which he regards as a very liberal estimate. 
I have not had time to check up these figures and I understand that the 
Census of Bombay does not render much help in arriving at a precise figure. 
However, if one reads the reasons assigned by Prof. Vakil, one would find 
his conclusion to be speculative if not wishful thinking. But assuming that 
the figures given by Prof. Vakil are correct, what of it? What conclusion 
can be drawn from it? Does it defeat the claim of Maharashtra to include 
Bombay ? Ever since the British became the masters of India, India has been 
one country with a right to free movement from place to place. If people 
from all parts of India were allowed to come to Bombay and settle there, 
why should the Maharashtrians suffer? It is not their fault. The present 
state of the population cannot therefore be a ground for excluding Bombay 
from Maharashtra. 


Point (4) 
Are Gujarathis Natives of Bombay ? 


31. Let us however fully consider the question. Are the Gujarathis 
natives of Bombay ? If they are not, how did they come to Bombay ? What 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is the source of their wealth ? No Gujarathi would claim that the Gujarathis 
are the natives of Bombay. If they are not the natives of Bombay, how 
did they come to Bombay ? Like the Portuguese, the French, the Dutch 
and the English on adventures to fight their way through and willing to 
take any risks? The answers which history gives to these questions are 
quite clear. The Gujarathis did not come to Bombay voluntarily. They 
were brought to Bombay by the officers of the East India Company to 
serve as commercial Adatias or go-betweens. They were brought because 
the East India Company's officers who had their first factory in Surat 
had got used to Surti Banias as their go-betweens in carrying on their 
trade. This explains the entry of Gujarathis in Bombay. Secondly, the 
Gujarathis did not come to Bombay to trade on the basis of free and 
equal competition with other traders. They came as privileged persons 
with certain trading rights given to them exclusively by the East India 
Company. Their importation into Bombay was considered for the first 
time in the year 1671 by Governor Aungier. This fact is referred to in 
the Gazetteer of Bombay Town and Island, Vol. I in the following terms :1° 


“Another scheme for the advantage of Bombay in which Governor 
Aungier interested himself was the settlement of Surat Banias in 
Bombay. It appears that the Mahajan or committee of the Surat Bania 
community desired the assurance of certain privileges before risking the 
move to Bombay and that the company had given a general approval to 
the Mahajan’s proposal. On the 10th January the Surat Council wrote 
to the Company. The Mahajan or Chief Council of the Banias have been 
much satisfied with the answer which you were pleased to give to their 
petition sent you by the ship Samson touching their privileges in Bombay. 
It seems they have determined once more to trouble Your Honours with 
a letter which they have ordered your broker Bhimji Parakh to write, 
representing their desires that the said privileges may be confirmed to 
them under your great seal, for which their request they give you their 
reason and ground in their own letter which they have sent us to be 
transmitted to you and now goes in your packet by ship Falcon. The 
argument they use to strengthen their request seems to have some weight. 
They say the Honourable Company are perpetual and their ordinances 
always of force, but their Presidents and Councils are mutable, and the 
succeeding Presidents and Councils, do alter often what their predecessors 
have granted on which score they hope your Honours will be pleased to 
grant their petition. As to our judgments hereon, we humbly offer that we 
cannot see any detriment can accrue to you thereby, rather a considerable 
advantage may follow; and as to the latitude and extent of what privileges 
you shall afford them, it must be totally referred to your own wisdoms 
howsoever you shall please to determine in this matter. We judge 


10. Bombay Gazetteer, I, pp. 46-47. 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 115 


if your Honours would please to favour them with a line in answer to their 
letter, it would be a great comfort to them and no disadvantage to your interest.” 


32. What were the privileges which the Gujarathi Banias had asked 
for from the East India Company ? The following petition by one Nima 
Parakh, an eminent Bania belonging to the City of Diu, gives some idea 
of what they were :" 


“That the Honourable Company shall allot him so much ground in or 
near the present, town free of rent as shall be judged necessary to build 
a house or warehouse thereon. 


“2. That he with the Brahmans of Vers (Gors or priests) of his caste shall 
enjoy the free exercise of their religion within their own houses without the 
molestation of any person whatsoever ; that no Englishman, Portuguese, or 
other Christian nor Muhammadan shall be permitted to live within their 
compound or offer to kill any living creature there, or do the least injury 
or indignity to them, and if any shall presume to offend them within the 
limits of their said compound, upon their complaint to the Governor (at 
Surat), or Deputy Governor (at Bombay), the offenders shall be exemplarily 
punished ; that they shall have liberty to burn their dead according to their 
custom, also to use their ceremonies at their weddings ; and that none of 
their profession of what age, sex or condition whatever they be, shall be 
forced to turn Christians, nor to carry burthens against their wills. 


“8. That he and his family shall be free from all duties of watch and 
ward, or any charge and duty depending thereon ; that neither the Company 
nor the Governor, Deputy Governor or Council, or any other person, shall 
on any pretence whatsoever force them to lend money for public or private 
account or use any indirect. 


“4. That in case there falls out any difference or suit in law between 
him or his vakil or attorneys or the Banias of his caste, and any other 
persons remaining on the island, the Governor or Deputy Governor shall 
not suffer him or them to be publicly arrested dishonoured or carried to 
prison, without first giving him due notice of the cause depending, that he 
or they may cause justice to be done in an honest and amicable way and 
In case any difference happen between him or his attorney and any Bania 
of their own caste, they may have liberty to decide it among themselves 
without being forced to go to law.” 


“5. That he shall have liberty of trade in his own ships and vessels to 
what port he pleases, and come in and go out when he thinks good, without 
paying anchorage, having first given the Governor or Deputy Governor or 
customer notice and taken their consent thereunto. 


11. Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, pp. 74-76. 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“6. That in case he brings any goods on shore more than he can sell on 
the island within the space of 12 months, he shall have liberty to transport 
them to what port he pleases, without paying custom for exportation. 


“7. That in case any person be indebted to him, and also to other Banias, 
and be not able to pay all his debts, his right may be preferred before 
other Banias. 


“8. That in case of war or any other danger which may succeed, he 
shall have a warehouse in the castle to secure his goods, treasure, and 
family therein. 


“9. That he or any of his family shall have liberty of egress and regress to 
and from the fort or residence of the Governor or Deputy Governor; that they 
shall be received with civil respect and be permitted to sit down according 
to their qualities; that they shall freely use coaches, horses or palanquins 
and quitasols (that is barsums or umbrellas) for their convenience without 
any disturbances ; that their servants may wear swords and daggers, shall 
not be abused, beaten or imprisoned except they offend, and that in case 
of any of his kindred or friends shall come to visit him or them from any 
other ports, they shall be used with civility and respect. 


“10. That he and his assigns shall have liberty to sell and buy coconuts, 
betelnuts, pan or betel-leaves, and any other commodity not rented out 
without any molestation on the island.” 


33. How this petition of Nima Parakh was disposed of can be seen 
from the reply of the Deputy Governor of Bombay dated 3rd April, 1677, 
which was in the following terms: 


“According to order we have considered the articles of Nima Parakh 
Bania, which if we rightly understand we do not apprehend any prejudice 
in their concession the most of them being what the meanest enjoy. 


“The first is very easy, the Company having vast ground enough, and 
we daily do the same to Banias and others who come to inhabit here. As 
to the second, the free exercise of religion is permitted to all with the 
use of their ceremonies at weddings and feast, the Banias always burning 
their dead without molestation. Neither do we permit any person to kill 
anything near the Banias who all live by themselves, much less can any 
person presume to enter into anybody's house or compound without the 
owner's license ; and, for forcing people to turn Christian against their 
wills, the whole world will vindicate us; neither are any persons forced 
to carry burdens against their wills. No Bania, Brahman, Moor, or such 
man is obliged to watch or ward or other duty, but if any person buys 
an oart or warge (vada) he is bound on every alarm to send a musquiter. 
But if he possesses no land no duty is exacted, so the articles may be 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 117 


granted to Nima, and when he goes about to buy any land he may be 
acquainted with that small incumbrance thereon. 


“The 4th article is indeed a privilege but no more than Girdhar, the 
Moody and some others have, which does not in the least exempt them 
from the hands of the law or justice, but does only ask that Justice be 
done respectfully, which he need not doubt of, and for matter of differences 
among themselves there is already his Honour’s patent authorising them 
to decide such things. 


“As to the 5th, the great anchorage of a rupee per ton is wholly taken 
off. There remains only a small one of a rupee for every 100 tons, which is 
so inconsiderable a matter that we do not believe we will stick at it. If he 
does, it will amount but to a small matter being only for his own vessels 
that the Company may easily allow it. 


“The 6th if we rightly apprehend it, is no more than what all people 
enjoy, who are so far from paying custom at exportation of their own goods 
that they pay none for what goods they buy. But if he intends his goods 
must pay no custom at landing nor none at exportation of what he cannot 
sell, it will be so great a loss to the Company, they having farmed out 
the customs for two years, that the benefit of his settling here, will, we 
believe, not countervail it, till it comes into the Company’s hands again. 


“As to the 7th, our law is such that if a person be indebted to several 
men, whosoever gets a judgment first in Court will be paid his full debt, but 
no man can be aggrieved at that, nor can any creditor have any pretence 
to what is once paid, and when judgment is given it is already paid in law, 
so that he is no longer proprietor of it. But when a person is indebted to 
two men and the first sues him and upon that the second comes in and 
sues him too, with what justice can we pay all the debtor’s estate to the 
second creditor. Only of this he may be assured that all justice shall be 
done him with speed according to our law and the party forced to pay the 
full debt, if able, and lie in prison for the rest till he pleases to release 
him, which we suppose may well content him. 


“As to the 8th, in case of war all persons of quality have liberty to repair 
to the castle and secure their money and other things of value. Nor that 
I suppose he intends to fill up the castle with gurf (coarse) goods ; but for 
money, jewels household stuff, cloth goods of value, that take up small 
room, he may bring what he pleases and may have a warehouse apart 
allotted for himself and family. 


“The 9th and 10th we may join together, they being only to fill up the 
number. They are plain optics to show the nature of those they live under 
which, when they have experimented our Government, themselves will 
laugh at us, enjoying more freedom than the very articles demand, for 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the meanest person is never denied egress and regress upon respectful notice 
given and for horses and coaches and the like he may keep as many as he 
pleases and his servants be permitted to wear what arms they please, a thing 
common to all. Nothing is more promoted by us than the free liberty for buying 
and selling which is the load-stone of trade. 


“That last thing he asked of having 10 mans of tobacco free of all duties 
is the most difficult thing of all, for the farmers will ask a vast deal to grant 
such a licence, it being a very great profit they make in the sale of 10 mans, 
so that we know not which way this article can be condescended to, but in this 
your Honours can judge better than us.” 


34. In reply on the 26th April, the Surat Council wrote :'* “We observe 
your answer touching the articles proposed by Nima Parakh Bania in order 
to his settlement on Bombay. When we come again to treat with him thereon, 
we hope so to moderate the affair that the island shall not receive any the 
least prejudice thereby and we do not question but wholly to put him by 
his request to 10 mans of tobacco which he would annually receive or bring 
on the island free of all duties.” 


Point (5) 
Bombay—an Emporium of India 


35. That Bombay is an emporium for the whole of India may be admitted. 
But it is difficult to understand how it can be said that because of this, 
Maharashtra cannot claim Bombay. Every port serves a much larger area 
than the country to which it belongs. No one, on that account, can say 
the country in which the port is situated cannot claim it as a part of its 
territory. Switzerland has no port. It uses either German, Italian or French 
Ports. Can the Swiss therefore deny the right of Germany, Italy or France, 
the territorial rights of their ports. Why then should Maharashtrians be 
denied the right to claim Bombay merely because it serves as a port for 
Provinces other than Maharashtra ? It would be different if the Province of 
Maharashtra were to get a right to close the Port to Non-Maharashtrians. 
Under the constitution, it will not have that right. Consequently, the inclusion 
of Bombay in Maharashtra will not affect the right of non-Maharashtrians 
to use the port as before. 


Point (6) 
Gujarathis—owners of Trade and Industry of Bombay 


36. It may be granted that the Gujarathis have a monopoly of trade. 
But, as has already been pointed out, this monopoly, they have been able 
to establish because of the profits they were able to make which were the 
result of the privileges given to them by the East India Company on their 


12. This is probably new demand made by Nima Parakh. 
13. Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, p. 77. 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 119 


settlement in Bombay. Who built up the trade and industry of Bombay 
is a matter for which no very great research is necessary. There is no 
foundation in fact for the statement that the trade and industry of 
Bombay was built up by Gujarathis. It was built up by Europeans and 
not by Gujarathis. Those who assert that it is the Gujarathis who did it 
should consult the Times of India Directory before making such a claim. 
The Gujarathis have been just merchants which is quite a different thing 
from being industrialists. 


37. Once it is established that Bombay belonged to Maharashtra the claim 
of Maharashtra to include Bombay cannot be defeated by the argument 
that the trade and industry of Bombay is owned by the Gujarathis. The 
claim of mortgagor to his land cannot be defeated by the mortgagee on 
the ground that the mortgagee has built up permanent structures on the 
land. The Gujarathis assuming they have built up the trade and industry 
of Bombay are in no better position than a mortgagee is. 


38. But who have built up the trade and industry of Bombay seems to 
me quite irrelevant to the decision of the issue whether Bombay should or 
should not be included in Maharashtra. This argument based on monopoly 
of trade and industry is really a political argument. It means that the 
owners may rule the workers but the workers must not be allowed to 
rule the owners. Those who use this argument do not seem to know what 
they are up against. The one thing they are up against is whether this 
argument is to be confined only to the City of Bombay or whether it is 
to have a general application. 


39. There is no reason why it should not have a general application. 
For just as in Bombay City society is divided into owners and workers 
or into capitalists and wage-earners, such also is the case of society in 
Gujarat or for the matter of that in every province of India. If the owners 
and capitalists of Bombay are to be protected by the exclusion of Bombay 
from Maharashtra because Maharashtrians belong to the working classes, 
what is the method they suggest for protecting the capitalists of Gujarat 
from the working classes of Gujarat. Those Gujarathi Professors like Vakils 
and Dantwalas who are searching their brains to supply arguments to 
the Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay have not thought of finding ways 
and means for protecting the Gujarathi capitalists of Gujarat against 
the working classes of Gujarat. The only remedy they can suggest is the 
abandonment of adult suffrage. That is the only way by which they can 
protect the capitalists if they are out to protect capitalists in general and 
not the Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay in particular. 


40. There is however one argument which the Professors could urge. It is 
that the Maharashtrians being in a majority would discriminate against the 
Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay if Bombay was included in Maharashtra. 


120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


One could appreciate such an argument. But those who like to use this 
argument must remember two things : 


G) That Maharashtra is not the only place in which such a situation 
can arise. It may arise in any province. I like to refer to Bihar. In 
Bihar the land in which coal is found belongs to the people of Bihar. 
But the coal-owners are Gujarathis, Kathiawaris or Europeans. 
Is there no possibility of Biharis making a discrimination against 
Gujarathi and Kathiawari coal-owners ? Are the coalfields of Bihar 
to be excluded from the Province of Bihar and constituted into 
a separate Province in the interest of Kathiawari and Gujarathi 
coal-owners ? 


Gi) The constitution of India has noted the possibility of discrimination 
being made against a minority and has made more than ample 
provision for preventing it. There are the fundamental rights. 
There are the provisions against discrimination; there are the 
provisions of payment of compensation, and there are the High 
Courts with the inherent rights to issue high prerogative writs both 
against individuals and Governments to stop any harm, injustice 
or harassment being done to any citizen. What more protection do 
the Gujarathi traders and industrialists of Bombay want against 
the possibility of discrimination ? 


Point (7) 
Maharashtra's eye on Bombay's surplus 


41. Before accusing Maharashtrians of having an eye on the surplus 
of Bombay it must be proved that Bombay has a surplus. What appears 
as surplus is due really to bad accounting. It is bad accounting where 
expenditure on overhead charges such as (1) the Governor and his 
establishment, (2) the Ministers and their establishments, (3) the 
Legislature and the expenditure thereon, (4) Judiciary, (5) Police and (6) 
Provincial establishments such as those of the Commissioners of Police 
and Directors of Public Instruction is not being taken into account. I 
doubt very much if on the existing basis of taxation, Bombay will have 
any surplus if expenditure on these items is charged to Bombay. It is a 
fallacy to charge all such expenditure to Maharashtra and exempt Bombay 
from it and then argue that Bombay has a surplus. 


42. The statement that the Maharashtrians want Bombay because they 
want to live on the surplus revenue of Bombay, besides being wrong in 
fact raises a question of motive. I do not know if the Maharashtrians are 
actuated by any such motive. They are not a commercial community. Unlike 
other communities, the Maharashtrians have no nose for money, and I am 
one of these who believe that it is one of their greatest virtues. Money has 
never been their god. It is no part of their culture. That is why they have 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 121 


allowed all other communities coming from outside Maharashtra to 
monopolize the trade and industry of Maharashtra. But as I have shown 
there is no surplus and no question of Maharashtrians casting their eyes 
on 1t. 


43. But supposing such a motive in the minds of the Maharashtrians, 
what is wrong in it ? It is quite open to Maharashtrians to contend that 
they have a greater claim on Bombay's surplus because they have played 
and they will continue to play a greater part in supplying labour for the 
building up of the trade and industry of Bombay more than the people 
from other Provinces have done or likely to do. It would be difficult for 
any economist with any reputation to save who could deny that labour 
has as much claim on the wealth produced as capital if not more. 


44. Secondly, the surplus from Bombay is not consumed by Maharashtra 
alone but is consumed by the whole of India. The proceeds of the Income- 
tax, Super-tax, etc. which Bombay pays to the Central Government are 
all spent by the Central Government for all-India purposes and is shared 
by all other Provinces. To Prof. Vakil it does not matter if the surplus 
of Bombay is eaten up by United Provinces, Bihar, Assam, Orissa, West 
Bengal, East Punjab and Madras. What he objects to is Maharashtra 
getting any part of it. This is not an argument. It is only an exhibition 
of his hatred for Maharashtrians. 


45. Granting that Bombay was made into a separate Province, what 
I don’t understand is how Prof. Vakil is going to prevent Maharashtra 
from getting share of Bombay surplus revenue. Even if Bombay is made 
separate Province, Bombay will have to pay income-tax, super-tax, etc. 
and surely Maharashtra will get a part of the revenue paid by Bombay 
to the Centre either directly or indirectly. As I have said the argument 
has in it more malice than substance. 


Points (8) AND (9) 
General arguments against the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra 


46. I will now turn to the Points (8) and (9) which have been urged by 
Professors Dantwala and Gheewala. Their arguments strike at the very root 
of the principle of Linguistic Provinces. As such I should have dealt with 
them in Part I of this Memorandum. But as the aim of their argument is 
to exclude Bombay from being included in Maharashtra, I have thought 
it proper to deal with them in this Part of the Memorandum as they 
are really arguments against the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra. 


47. The sum total of the arguments of the two Professors is that 
Linguistic Provinces are bad. This cry against Linguistic Provinces is too 
late. Since when two Professors having been holding these views is not 
known. Are they opposed to Gujarat being reconstituted on Linguistic 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Provinces also has not been made clear by them. Or, is it that they 
believed in the principle of Linguistic Provinces but hurried to disavow 
1t when they realized that the admission of the principle involves the 
surrender of Bombay to Maharashtra. It is perhaps one of these cases 
where a person not finding argument limited to his purpose is forced to 
resort to an argument which proves more than he is anxious to allow. 
I am, however, prepared to examine the substance of their argument. 


48. Prof. Dantwala relies upon Lord Acton and quotes the following 
passage from his Essay on Nationality printed im his well-known book 
The History of Freedom and Other Essays in support of his own view 
against Linguistic Provinces. The quotation reads as follows : 


“The combination of various nations in one State is a necessary condition 
of civilized life as the combination of men in society.” 


49. I am sorry to say that this quotation completely misrepresents 
Lord Acton. The quotation is only a few opening lines of a big passage. 
The full passage reads as follows : 


“The combination of different nations in one State is as necessary a condition 
of civilized life as the combination of men in society. Inferior races are raised 
by living in political union with races intellectually superior. Exhausting and 
decaying nations are revived by the contact of younger vitality. Nations in 
which the elements of organization and the capacity for Government have 
been lost, either through the demoralizing influence of despotism or the 
disintegrating action of democracy, are restored and educated a new under 
the discipline of a stronger and less corrupted race. This fertilizing and 
regenerating process can only be obtained by living under one Government. 
It is in the cauldron of the State that the fusion takes place by which the 
vigour, the knowledge and the capacity of one portion of mankind may be 
communicated to another.” 


50. Why Prof. Dantwala left out the rest of the passage, it is difficult to 
understand. I am not suggesting that it is a deliberate case of suppresio 
veri and suggestio falsi. The fact is that it does misrepresent Lord Acton. 
Why has the Professor relied upon this passage, I do not understand. It 
is quite obvious that if the inferior races are placed in common with the 
superior races, the inferior races may improve. But the question is, who is 
inferior or who is superior. Are the Gujarathis inferior to Maharashtrians? 
Or are the Maharashtrians inferior to Gujarathis ? Secondly, what is the 
channel of cummunion between Gujarathis and Maharashtrians which 
can assure the fusion of the two ? Prof. Dantwala has not considered 
the question. He found a sentence in Lord Acton's Essay and jumped at 
it for he could find nothing else to support his case. The point is that 
there is nothing in the passage which has any relevance to the principle 
involved in the question of Linguistic Province. 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 123 


51. So much for Prof. Dantwala’s arguments. I will now examine 
Prof. Gheewala’s arguments. Prof. Gheewala also relies on Lord Acton. 
He quotes a portion of a passage from Lord Acton’s Essay on Nationality. 
I reproduce below the passage in full : 


“The greatest adversary of the rights of nationality is the modern theory 
of nationality. By making the State and the nation commensurate with 
each other in theory, it reduces practically to a subject condition all other 
nationalities that may be within the boundary. It cannot admit them to an 
equality with the ruling nation which constitutes the State, because the 
State would then cease to be national, which would be a contradiction of 
the principle of its existence. According, therefore, to the degree of humanity 
and civilization in that dominant body which claims all the rights of the 
community, the inferior races are exterminated, or reduced to servitude, or 
outlawed, or put in a condition of dependence.” 


52. I do not understand why the learned Professor has dragged in the 
name of Lord Acton. The passage does not really help him. There is one 
thing which seems to be uppermost in his mind. He thinks that if Bombay 
is included in Maharashtra the Province of Maharashtra will consist of 
two nationalities—one consisting of the Marathi-speaking people and the 
other of the Gujarathi-speaking people and the Marathi-speaking people 
who would be the dominant class will reduce the Gujarathi-speaking 
people to a subject condition. It is in support of this he thought of citing 
Lord Acton. Such a possibility is always there. There is no objection to 
the way in which he has presented the problem. But there are great 
objections to the conclusions he draws. 


53. In the first place, in a country like India in which society is 
throughout communally organized it is obvious that in whatever way it 
is divided into areas for administrative purposes, in every area there will 
always be one community which by its numbers happens to be a dominant 
community. As a dominant community it becomes a sole heir to all political 
power, which the area gets. If Marathi-speaking people in a unified 
Maharashtra with Bombay thrown into it will become dominant over the 
Gujarathi-speaking people, will this prospect be confined to Maharashtra 
only ? Will such a phenomena not occur within the Marathi-speaking 
people ? Will it not be found in Gujarat if Gujarat became a separate 
Province ? I am quite certain that within the Marathi-speaking people 
who are sharply divided between the Marathas and the non-Marathas, the 
Marathas being a dominant class will reduce both Gujarathi-speaking and 
the non-Marathas to a subject condition. In the same way in Gujarat in 
some parts the Anavil Brahmins from a dominant class. In other parts it is 
the Patidars who form a dominant class. It is quite likely that the Anavils 
and the Patidars will reduce the condition of the other communities to 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


subjection. The problem therefore is not a problem peculiar to Maharashtra. 
It is a general problem. 


54. What is the remedy for this problem ? Prof. Gheewala believes that 
the remedy lies in having a mixed State. So far as this remedy is concerned 
1t is not his own. He has adopted it from Lord Acton. But I have no doubt 
that so far as Lord Acton advocates this remedy he is quite wrong. Lord 
Acton cites the case of Austria in support of his view. Unfortunately, Lord 
Acton did not live to see the fate of Austria. It was a mixed State. But far 
from providing for the safety of nationalities the clash of nationalities blew 
up Austria to bits. The real remedy is not a mixed State but an absolute 
State with no power to the people which is generally captured by a communal 
majority and exercised in the name of the people. Is Prof. Gheewala prepared 
for this remedy ? One need have no doubt to what his answer would be. 


55. In the second place, Prof. Gheewala has confounded nationality in the 
social sense of the term with Nationality in its legal and political sense. 
People often speak of nationality in speaking about Linguistic Provinces. 
Such use of the term can be only in the non-legal and non-political sense 
of the term. In my scheme there is no room even for the growth of separate 
provincial nationality. My proposal nips it in the bud. But even if the 
commonly suggested pattern of Linguistic Provinces with the language of 
the Province as the official language were adopted, Provinces cannot have 
that attribute of sovereignty which independent nations have. 


56. It is very difficult to understand what exactly what Prof. Gheewala 
wants. Broadly he wants two things : He wants a mixed State and he also 
wants that a dominant section should not be im a position to reduce the 
smaller sections to subjection. I cannot see how Linguistic Provinces can come 
in the way of achieving it. For even after Provinces have been re-constituted 
on linguistic basis,— 


(1) Provinces will continue to be a conglomeration of communities which 
will give Prof. Gheewala the mixed State that he wants ; 


(2) If Prof. Gheewala wants a more pronounced form of a mixed State to 
protect smaller communities or nationalities, he will certainly have 
it at the Centre. 


As I have said, I do not think a mixed State is either a good State or stable 
State. But if Prof. Gheewala prefers it, he will have it in one form or another, 
both in the Provinces as well as at the Centre, in the former in the form of 
different communities and in the latter in the form of the representatives 
of different Provinces. 


57. With regard to his second objective, there will be double protection. 
In the first place, the citizen will have such protection as a mixed State 
he thinks can give. Secondly, citizenship will be common throughout India. 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 125 


There is no provincial citizenship. A Gujarathi im Maharashtra will have 
the same rights of citizenship in Maharashtra as Maharashtrian will have. 


Given these facts, I fail to understand what objection Prof. Gheewala can 
have to Linguistic Provinces ? 


58. Prof. Gheewala has made two other recommendations. He says, (1) if 
Provinces have to be reconstituted, constitute them on rational basis rather 
than on linguistic basis and (2) make nationality a personal thing. 


59. To reconstitute Provinces on economic basis —which is what is meant 
by rational basis—appears more scientific than reconstituting them on 
linguistic basis. However, unscientific linguistic reorganization of Provinces I 
cannot see how they can come in the way of rational utilization of economic 
resources of India. Provincial boundaries are only administrative boundaries. 
They do not raise economic barriers for the proper utilization of economic 
resources. If the position was that the resources contained within a Linguistic 
Province must only be explained by the people of the Province and no other 
than it could no doubt be said that the scheme of Linguistic Provinces was 
mischievous. But such is not the case. So long as Linguistic Provinces are 
not allowed to put a ban on the exploitation of the resources of the people 
by any body capably of wishing to exploit them a Linguistic Province will 
yield all the advantages of a rationally planned Province. 


60. The proposal of making nationality as a personal thing and put it 
on the same footing as religion may be dismissed as being to Utopian. It 
would raise many administrative problems. It will come when the world is 
one and all nationals are its citizens. Nationality will automatically vanish 
as being quite useless. 


61. So far I have dealt with the arguments advanced by those who are 
opposed to the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra. I have taken pains to 
do so not because I felt that they were very weighty. I did so because I felt 
1t desirable to prevent the common man from being misled. The possibility 
of this happening was there and for two reasons. In the first place, those 
who have come forward with these arguments are not ordinary men. They 
are University Professors. Secondly, these Professors came out with their 
arguments after Prof. Gadgil had put forth the case for the inclusion of 
Bombay in Maharashtra. Unfortunately, no attempt has so far been made to 
refute the arguments of the adversaries of Prof. Gadgil. The result has been 
the creation of an impression that Prof. Gadgil's adversaries have carried 
the day. It was absolutely essential to remove this impression. 


The other side 


62. There are however arguments which the adversaries of Prof. Gadgil 
have not thought of hut which may be advanced with justice as well as force, 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


in favour of the claim of Maharashtrians for the inclusion of Bombay in 
Maharashtra. It is quite possible that these arguments may suggest themselves 
to the Commission. But I don't like to leave it to chance. I therefore propose 
to set them out below even though the Commission might think that it was 
unnecessary. 


Calcutta and Bombay 


63. In deciding upon the issue of exclusion of Bombay from Maharashtra 
the Commission will have to take into account the position of Calcutta. Like 
Bombay it is the chief emporium of the whole of eastern part of India. Like 
the Maharashtrians in Bombay the Bengalis in Calcutta are in a minority. 
Like the Maharashtrians in Bombay, the Bengalis do not own the trade 
and industry of Calcutta. The position of the Bengalis vis-a-vis Calcutta is 
worse than the position of the Maharashtrians vis-a-vis Bombay. For, the 
Maharashtrians can at least claim that they have supplied labour if not 
capital for the trade and industry of Bombay. The Bengalis cannot even say 
this. If the Commission can accept the arguments urged for the separation 
of Bombay from Maharashtra, it must be equally prepared to recommend 
the separation of Calcutta from West Bengal. For it is a very pertinent 
question to ask that if for the reasons given Bombay can be separated from 
Maharashtra why when the same reasons exist Calcutta be not separated 
from West Bengal. 


Is Bombay Viable 


64. Before Bombay can be separated it must be proved that financially 
Bombay is a viable Province. As I have already said if proper accounting of 
revenue and expenditure was made Bombay on the basis of present level of 
taxation may not be a self-sufficient Province. If that be so, the proposal for 
creating Bombay a separate Province must fall to the ground. It is no use 
comparing Bombay with Provinces like Orissa and Assam. The standard of 
administration, the standard of living and consequently the level of wages 
in Bombay are all so high that I doubt that even with a crashing rate of 
taxation Bombay will be able to raise the necessary amount of revenue to 
meet the expenditure. 


The aim behind Greater Bombay 


65. This doubt regarding viability of Bombay Province is heightened 
by the indecent haste shown by the Government of Bombay in creating 
Greater Bombay by including within the limits of Bombay the adjoining 
parts of Maharashtra. It seems that the object of including such area 
cannot but be to make Bombay viable. What else can it be? So long as 
Bombay remained part of Maharashtra it did not matter to Maharashtrians 
in which administrative area a portion of Maharashtra was included. But 
when Bombay is to be a separate Province it will take a long time to make 


MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE 127 


Maharashtrians part with their territory to make Bombay greater and viable. 
What is more important is the scheme of greater Bombay casts responsibility 
upon the Linguistic Provinces Commission to decide whether they could, 
with justice force Maharashtrians not only to submit to the demand of the 
Gujarathis to give up Bombay but also to submit to their further demand 
to hand over a part of territory of Maharashtra to make Bombay a viable 
Province. The Commission cannot escape this responsibility. 


66. Maharashtra and Bombay are not merely inter-dependent, they 
are really one and integral. Severance between the two would be fatal to 
both. The sources of water and electricity for Bombay lie in Maharashtra. 
The intelligentsia of Maharashtra lives in Bombay. To sever Bombay from 
Maharashtra would be to make the economic life of Bombay precarious and 
to dissociate the masses of Maharashtra from its intelligentsia without whose 
lead the masses of Maharashtra will be nowhere. 


Arbitration as a Solution 


67. I have seen a suggestion made in some quarters that problem of 
Bombay should be settled by arbitration. I have never heard of a more absurd 
suggestion than this. It is as absurd as the suggestion to refer matrimonial 
cause to arbitration. The matrimonial tie is too personal, to be severed by 
a third party. Bombay and Maharashtra are tied together by God to use 
a Biblical phrase. No arbitrator can put them as under. The only agency 
which is authorized to do so is the Commission. Let it decide. 


NEED FOR CHECKS AND 
BALANCES 


Article on Linguistic States 


From : The Times of India, dated 25rd April 1953 


131 


NEED FOR CHECKS AND BALANCES 


The British who ruled India for more than 150 years never thought of 
creating linguistic States although the problem was always there. They were 
more interested in creating a stable administration and maintaining law 
and order throughout the country than in catering to the cultural craving of 
people in multi-lingual areas. It is quite true that towards the end of their 
career they did realise that the administrative set-up which they had built 
required some adjustment from the point of view of linguistic considerations, 
at any rate in cases where the conglomeration was very glaring. For instance, 
they did create Bengal, Bihar and Orissa as linguistic States before they 
left. It is difficult to say whether if they had continued to rule, they would 
have followed the path of forming linguistic States to its logical conclusion. 


But long before the British thought of creating linguistic provinces the 
Congress under the aegis of Mr. Gandhi had already in the year 1920 framed 
a constitution for itself on the basis of linguistic provinces. Whether the 
ideology underlying the constitution of the Congress as framed in 1920 was 
a well thoughtout ideology or whether it was a sop to draw people inside 
the Congress fold, one need not now stop to speculate. There is, however, 
no doubt about it that the British did realise that linguistic considerations 
were important and they did give effect to them to a limited extent. 


Opposition 


Upto the year 1945, the Congress was, of course, not called upon to face 
the responsibility which it had created for itself by its constitution of 1920. 
It was only in the year 1945 when it assumed office that this responsibility 
dawned upon the Congress. Looking into the recent history of the subject 
the necessary momentum to the issue was given by a member of Parliament 
by moving a resolution for the creation of linguistic provinces in India. 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The duty of answering on behalf of the Government to the debate fell on me. 
Naturally I took the matter to the higher authorities in order to ascertain 
what exactly their point of view was. Strange as it may appear, it became 
clear to me that the High Command was totally opposed to the creation of 
linguistic provinces. In these circumstances, the solution that was found was 
that the responsibility to answer the debate had better be taken over by the 
Prime Minister. The Prime Minister in reply to the debate made statement 
promising the creation of an Andhra State immediately. On the basis of 
the statement made by the Prime Minister, the resolution was withdrawn. 
The matter rested there. 


Second Time 


As Chairman of the Drafting Committee, I had to deal with the matter a 
second time. When the draft Constitution was completed, I wrote a letter to 
the Prime Minister asking him whether I could include Andhra as a separate 
State in Part A States of the Constitution in view of what he had said im 
the course of the debate on the Resolution. I have nothing with me here 
to refresh my memory as to what exactly happened. But the President of 
the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, appointed a Committee to 
investigate into the formation of linguistic States, under the Chairmanship 
of Mr. Dhar, a lawyer from U.P. 


People will remember the Dhar Committee for one thing if not for any 
other. The Committee said that under no circumstances should Bombay City 
be included in Maharashtra if Maharashtra was made a linguistic State. 
That report was then considered by the Jaipur session of the Congress. 
The Jaipur Congress appointed a Three-Man Committee consisting of the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel and Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya. They 
produced a report, the gist of which was that an Andhra province should be 
created immediately but the city of Madras should remain with the Tamils. 
A committee was appointed to go into the details. It produced a more or less 
unanimous report. But the report was opposed by substantial elements among 
the Andhras including Mr. Prakasam who were not prepared to relinquish 
their claim to Madras, and the thing lay dormant there. 


After that comes the incident of Shri Potti Sriramulu who had to sacrifice 
his life for the sake of an Andhra province. It is a sad commentary on the 
ruling party that Mr. Sriramulu should have had to die for a cause the 
validity of which was accepted by all Congressmen. The creation of a new 
Andhra province now being thought of is only a pindadan to the departed 
soul of Mr. Sriramulu by the Prime Minister. Whether such action on the 
part of the Government would have been tolerated in any other country is 
a matter on which there is no use speculating. 


There are, in my opinion, three conditions which must be satisfied before 
a linguistic State is brought into being. The first condition is that it must 
be a viable State. This rule was accepted as absolute when the question of 


NEED FOR CHECKS AND BALANCES 133 


the merger of the Indian States was under consideration during the making 
of the Constitution. Only those Indian States which were viable were 
allowed to remain as independent States. All others were merged into the 
neighbouring States. 


A Sahara ? 


Is the proposed Andhra State a viable State ? Mr. Justice Wanchoo had 
very candidly admitted that the annual revenue deficit of the proposed Andhra 
State will be of the magnitude of Rs. 5 crores. It is possible for the proposed 
Andhra State to reduce this gap either by increase of taxation or decrease in 
expenditure ? The Andhras must face this question. Is the Centre going to 
take the responsibility of meeting this deficit ? If so, will this responsibility 
be confined to the proposed Andhra State or will it be extended to all similar 
cases ? These are questions which are to be considered. 


The new Andhra State has no fixed capital. I might incidently say 
that I have never heard of the creation of a State without a capital. 
Mr. Rajagopalachari (the staunchest Tamilian tribesman) will not show the 
Government of the proposed Andhra State the courtesy of allowing 1t to 
stay in Madras city even for one night—courtesy which is prescribed by the 
Hindu Dharma on all Hindus for an atithi. The new Government is left to 
choose its own habitat and construct thereon its own hutments to transact 
its business. What place can it choose ? With what can it construct its 
hutments ? Andhra is Sahara and there are no oases in it. If it chooses some 
place in this Sahara it is bound to shift its quarters to a more salubrious 
place, and the money spent on this temporary headquarters would be all a 
waste. Has the Government considered this aspect of the case ? Why not 
right now give them a place which has the possibility of becoming their 
permanent capital. 


It seems to me that Warangal is best suited from this point of view. It 
1s the ancient capital of the Andhras. It is a railway junction. It has got 
quite a large number of buildings. It is true that it lies within that part of 
Andhra which is part of Hyderabad State. As a matter of principle Hyderabad 
State which is a monstrocity should have been broken up and a complete 
Andhra State might have been created. But if the Prime Minister has some 
conscientious objection to the proposal, can he not create an enclave in the 
Andhra part of Hyderabad and join it to the new Andhra State and make a 
way to Warangal ? An enclave is not a new thing in India. But the Prime 
Minister wants to work against the will of God in Hyderabad as well as in 
Kashmir. I am sure he will very soon learn the consequences of it. 


First Condition 


This is just incidental. My main point is that a linguistic State must 
be viable. This is the first consideration in the creation of a linguistic 
State. The second consideration is to note what is likely to happen within 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a linguistic State. Unfortunately no student has devoted himself to a 
demographic survey of the population of India. We only know from our census 
reports how many are Hindus, how many are Muslims, how many Jews, 
how many Christians and how many untouchables. Except for the knowledge 
we get as to how many religions there are this information is of no value. 
What we want to know is the distribution of castes in different linguistic 
areas. On this we have very little information. One has to depend on one’s 
own knowledge and information. I don’t think it would be contradicted if 
it is said that the caste set-up within the linguistic area is generally such 
that it contains one or two major castes large in number and a few minor 
castes living in subordinate dependence on the major castes. 


Communal Set-up 


Let me give a few illustrations. Take the Punjab of PEPSU. The Jats 
dominate the whole area. The untouchables live in subordinate dependence 
on them. Take Andhra—there are two or three major communities spread 
over the linguistic area. They are either the Reddis or the Kammas and 
the Kappus. They hold all the land, all the offices, all the business. The 
untouchables live in subordinate dependence on them. Take Maharashtra. 
The Marathas are a huge majority in every village in Maharashtra. The 
Brahmins, the Gujars, the Kolis and the untouchables live in subordinate 
co-operation. There was a time when the Brahmins and the banias lived 
without fear. But times have changed. After the murder of Mr. Gandhi, the 
Brahmins and the banias got such a hiding from the Marathas that they have 
run away to the towns as safety centres. Only the wretched untouchables, 
the Kolis and the Malis have remained in the villages to bear the tyranny 
of the Maratha communal majority. Anyone who forgets this communal set- 
up will do so at his peril. 


In a linguistic State what would remain for the smaller communities to 
look to ? Can they hope to be elected to the Legislature ? Can they hope to 
maintain a place in the State service ? Can they expect any attention to their 
economic betterment ? In these circumstances, the creation of a linguistic 
State means the handing over of Swaraj to a communal majority. What an 
end to Mr. Gandhi’s Swaraj ! Those who cannot understand this aspect of 
the problem would understand it better if instead of speaking in terms of 
linguistic State we spoke of a Jat State, a Reddy State or a Maratha State. 


Third Issue 


The third problem which calls for consideration is whether the creation 
of linguistic States should take the form of consolidation of the people 
speaking one language into one State. Should all Maharashtrians be collected 
together into one Maharashtra State ? Should all Andhra area be put into 
one Andhra State ? This question of consolidation does not merely relate 
to new units. It relates also to the existing linguistic provinces such as 


NEED FOR CHECKS AND BALANCES 135 


U.P., Bihar and West Bengal. Why should all Hindi-speaking people be 
consolidated into one State as has happened in U.P. ? Those who ask for 
consolidation must be asked whether they want to go to war against other 
States. If consolidation creates a separate consciousness we will have in 
course of time an India very much like what it was after the break-up of 
Maurya Empire. Is destiny moving us towards it ? 


This does not mean that there is no case for linguistic provinces. What 
it means is that there must be definite checks and balances to see that a 
communal majority does not abuse its power under the garb of a linguistic 
State. 


THOUGHTS 
ON 
LINGUISTIC STATES 


First Published : 1955 
Reprinted from the edition of 1955 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


PREFACE 


The creation of Linguistic States is a burning question of the day. 
I regret that owing to my illness I was not able to take part in the 
debate that took place in Parliament much less in the campaign that 
is carried on in the country by partisans in favour of their views. The 
question is too important for me to sleep over in silence. Many have 
accused me for remaining quiet not knowing what the cause was. 


I have therefore taken the other alternative i.e. to set out my 
views in writing. 


Readers may find certain inconsistencies in my views as expressed in 
this brochure and as expressed formerly in certain public statements. 
Such changes in my view are, I am sure, very few. The former 
statements were made on the basis of fragmentary data. The whole 
picture was then not present to the mind. For the first time it met 
my eye when the report of the S.R.C. came out. This is sufficient 
justification for any change in my views which a critic may find. 


To a critic who is a hostile and malicious person and who wants to 
make capital out of my inconsistencies my reply is straight. Emerson 
has said that consistency is the virtue of an ass and I don't wish to 
make an ass of myself. No thinking human being can be tied down 
to a view once expressed in the name of consistency. More important 
than consistency is responsibility. A responsible person must learn 
to unlearn what he has learned. A responsible person must have the 
courage to rethink and change his thoughts. Of course there must 
be good and sufficient reasons for unlearning what he has learned 
and for recasting his thoughts. There can be no finality in thinking. 


140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The formation of Linguistic States, although essential, cannot be 
decided by any sort of hooliganism. Nor must it be solved in a manner 
that will serve party interest. It must be solved by cold blooded 
reasoning. This is what I have done and this is what I appeal to 
my readers to do. 


23rd December 1955 B. R. AMBEDKAR 
Milind Mahavidyalaya 

Nagsen Vana, College Road 

Aurangabad (Dn.) 


PART I 
THE WORK OF THE COMMISSION 
CHAPTER 1 
LINGUISM AND NOTHING ELSE 


The present Constitution of India recognizes the following States which 
are enumerated in the Schedule : 


Part ‘A’ STATES Part ‘B’ STATES Part ‘C’ STATES 

1. Andhra 1. Hyderabad 1. Ajmer 

2. Assam 2. Jammu and 2. Bhopal 

3. Bihar Kashmir 3. Coorg 

4. Bombay 3. Madhya Bharat 4. Delhi 

5. Madhya Pradesh 4. Mysore 5. Himachal Pradesh 
6. Madras 5. Patiala 6. Kutch 

7. Orissa 6. Rajasthan 7. Manipur 

8. Punjab 7. Saurashtra 8. Tripura 

9. Uttar Pradesh 8. Travancore-Cochin 9. Vindhya Pradesh 


Article 3 of the Constitution gives power to Parliament to create new 
States. This was done because there was no time to reorganize the States 
on linguistic basis for which there was a great demand. 


In pursuance of this incessant demand the Prime Minister appointed the 
States Reorganization Commission to examine the question. In its report 
the States Reorganization Commission has recommended the creation of 
the following States : 


Proposed New States 


Name of the State Area Population Language 
(in sq. miles) (in crores) 
1. Madras “3 ie 8 50,170 3.00 Tamil 
2. Kerala 2 mee 14,980 1.36 Malyalam 
3. Karnatak uu 72,730 1.90 Kanarese 
4. Hyderabad 5 m 45,300 1.13 Telugu 
5. Andhra u E 64,950 2.09 Telugu 
6. Bombay 3 a Q 151,360 4.02 Mixed 
7. Vidarbha = Oe 36,880 0.76 Marathi 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Proposed New States—contd. 


Name of the State Area Population Language 
(in sq. miles) (in crores) 

8. Madhya Pradesh .. z a 171,200 2.61 Hindi 
9. Rajasthan = x a 132,300 1.60 Rajasthani 
10. Punjab és = zé 58,140 1.72 Punjabi 
11. Uttar Pradesh bs = ss 113,410 6.32 Hindi 
12. Bihar = se ae 66,520 3.82 Hindi 
13. West Bengal x " °: 34,590 2.65 Bengali 
14. Assam y = se 89,040 0.97 Assamese 
15. Orissa bs =: z: 60,140 1.46 Oria 
16. Jammu and Kashmir ee s: 92,780 0.14 Kashmiri 


The important thing is to compare the size of the States— 


Taking population as the measuring red the result may be presented as 
follows : 


There are 8 States with a population between 1 and 2 crores each. 
There are 4 States with a population between 2 and 4 crores. 
There is one State above 4 crores. 

There is one State above 6 crores. 


The result, to say the least, is fantastic. The Commission evidently thinks 
that the size of a State is a matter of no consequence and that the equality in 
the size of the States constituting a Federation is a matter of no moment. 

This is the first and the most terrible error which the Commission has 
committed. If not rectified in time, it will cost India a great deal. 


CHAPTER 2 
LINGUISM IN EXCELSIS 


In the first chapter it has been pointed out that one result of the recommendations 
of the States Reorganization Commission is the disparity in the size of the different 
States the Commission has suggested for creation. 


But there is another fault in the recommendations of the Commission which 
perhaps is hidden but which is nonetheless real. 


It lies in not considering the North in relation to the South. This will be clear 
from the following table : 


Southern States Central States Northern States* 
Name .. Population Name Population Name .. Population 
(in crores) (in crores) (in crores) 
Madras e. 3.00 Maharashtra 3.31 Uttar š 6.32 
Pradesh 
Kerala s 1.36 Gujarat 1.13 Bihar 3 3.85 
Karnataka .. 1.90 Saurashtra 0.4 Madhya x” 2.61 
Pradesh 
Andhra i: 1.09 Kutch 0.5 Rajasthan .. 1.60 
Hyderabad .. 1.13 Punjab x 1.72 


* I have included certain centrally situated States because by language they are affiliated to 
one another. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 143 


This scheme of dividing India in the name of Linguistic States cannot 
be overlooked. It is not so innocuous as the Commission thinks. It is full 
of poison. The poison must be emptied right now. 


The nature of Union of India expresses only an idea. It does not 
indicate an achievement. Bryce in his “American Commonwealth” relates 
the following incident which is very instructive. This is what he says : 


“A few years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was occupied 
at its annual conference in revising liturgy. It was thought desirable to 
introduce among the short sentence prayers a prayer for the whole people ; 
and an eminent New England Divine proposed the words ‘O Lord, bless our 
Nation’. Accepted one afternoon on the spur of the moment, the sentence 
was brought up next day for reconsideration, when so many objections were 
raised by the laity to the word, ‘Nation’, as importing too definite recognition 
of national unity, that it was dropped, and instead there were adopted the 
words, ‘O Lord, bless these United States.’ ” 


India is not even mentally and morally fit to call itself the United 
States of India. We have to go a long way to become the United States 
of India. The Union of India is far, far away, from the United States of 
India. But this consolidation of the North and balkanisation of the South 
is not the way to reach it. 


PART II 
THE LIMITATIONS OF LINGUISM 
CHAPTER 3 
THE PROS AND CONS OF A LINGUISTIC STATE 


“One State, one language” is a universal feature of almost every State. 
Examine the constitution of Germany, examine the constitution of France, 
examine the constitution of Italy, examine the constitution of England, 
and examine the constitution of the U.S.A. “One State, one language” is 
the rule. 


Wherever there has been a departure from this rule there has been a 
danger to the State. The illustration of the mixed States are to be found 
in the old Austrian Empire and the old Turkish Empire. They were blown 
up because they were multi-lingual States with all that a multi-lingual 
State means. India cannot escape this fate if it continues to be a congery 
of mixed States. 


The reasons why a unilingual State is stable and a multi-lingual State 
unstable are quite obvious. A State is built on fellow-feeling. What is this 
fellow-feeling ? To state briefly it is a feeling of a corporate sentiment of 
oneness which makes those who are charged with it feel that they are kith 
and kin. This feeling is a double-edged feeling. It is at once a feeling of 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


fellowship for one's own kith and kin and anti-fellowship for those who are 
not one's own kith and kin. It is a feeling of “consciousness of kind ” which 
on the one hand, binds together those who have it so strongly that it over- 
rides all differences arising out of economic conflicts or social gradations 
and, on the other, severs them from those who are not of their kind. It is 
a longing not to belong to any other group. 


The existence of this fellow-feeling is the foundation of a stable and 
democratic State. 


This is one reason why a linguistic State is so essential. But there are 
other reasons why a State should be unilingual. There are two other reasons 
why the rule “one State, one language ” 1s necessary. 


One reason is that democracy cannot work without friction unless there 
is fellow-feeling among those who constitute the State. Faction fights for 
leadership and discrimination in administration are factors ever present in 
a mixed State and are incompatible with democracy. 


The present State of Bombay is the best illustration of the failure of 
democracy in a mixed State. I am amazed at the suggestion made by the 
States Reorganization Commission that the present Bombay State should 
be continued as it is to enable us to gain experience of how a mixed State 
flourishes. With Bombay as a mixed State for the last 20 years, with the 
intense enmity between the Maharashtrians and Gujaratis, only a thoughtless 
or an absent-minded person could put forth such a senseless proposal. The 
former State of Madras is another illustration of the failure of democracy 
in a mixed State. The formation of a mixed State of United India and the 
compulsory division of India into India and Pakistan are other illustrations 
of the impossibility of having democracy in a mixed State. 


Another reason why it is necessary to adopt the rule of “one State, one 
language” is that it is the only solvent to racial and cultural conflicts. 


Why do Tamils hate Andhras and Andhras hate Tamils ? Why do Andhras 
in Hyderabad hate Maharashtrians and Maharashtrians hate Andhras ? Why 
do Gujaratis hate Maharashtrians and Maharashtrians hate Gujaratis ? The 
answer is very simple. It is not because there is any natural antipathy between 
the two. The hatred is due to the fact that they are put in juxtaposition and 
forced to take part in a common cycle of participation, such as Government. 
There is no other answer. 


So long as this enforced juxtaposition remains, there will be no peace 
between the two. 


There will be people who would cite the cases of Canada, Switzerland 
and South Africa. It is true that these cases of bilingual States exist. But 
it must not be forgotten that the genius of India is quite different from the 
genius of Canada, Switzerland and South Africa. The genius of India is to 
divide—the genius of Switzerland, South Africa and Canada is to unite. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 145 


The fact that they have been held together uptil now is not in the 
natural course of things. It is due to the fact that both of them are bound 
by the Congress discipline. But how long is the Congress going to last ? 
The Congress is Pandit Nehru and Pandit Nehru is Congress. But is Pandit 
Nehru immortal ? Any one who applies his mind to these questions will 
realize that the Congress will not last till the sun and the moon. It must one 
day come to an end. It might come to an end even before the next election. 
When this happens the State of Bombay will find itself engaged in civil war 
and not in carrying on administration. 


We therefore want linguistic States for two reasons. To make easy the 
way to democracy and to remove racial and cultural tension. 


In seeking to create linguistic States India is treading the right road. It is 
the road which all States have followed. In the case of other linguistic States 
they have been so, from the very beginning. In the case of India she has to 
put herself in the reverse gear to reach the goal. But the road she proposes 
to travel is well-tried road. It is a road which is followed by other States. 


Having stated the advantages of a linguistic State I must also set out 
the dangers of a linguistic State. 


A linguistic State with its regional language as its official language 
may easily develop into an independent nationality. The road between an 
independent nationality and an independent State is very narrow. If this 
happens, India will cease to be Modern India we have and will become the 
medieval India consisting of a variety of States indulging in rivalry and 
warfare. 


This danger is of course inherent in the creation of linguistic States. 
There is equal danger in not having linguistic States. The former danger a 
wise and firm statesman can avert. But the dangers of a mixed State are 
greater and beyond the control of a statesman however eminent. 


How can this danger be met ? The only way I can think of meeting the 
danger is to provide in the Constitution that the regional language shall not 
be the official language of the State. The official language of the State shall 
be Hindi and until India becomes fit for this purpose English. Will Indians 
accept this ? If they do not, linguistic States may easily become a peril. 


One language can unite people. Two languages are sure to divide people. 
This is an inexorable law. Culture is conserved by language. Since Indians 
wish to unite and develop a common culture it is the bounden duty of all 
Indians to own up Hindi as their language. 


Any Indian who does not accept this proposal as part and parcel of a 
linguistic State has no right to be an Indian. He may be a hundred per cent 
Maharashtrian, a hundred per cent Tamil or a hundred per cent Gujarathi, 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


but he cannot be an Indian in the real sense of the word except in a 
geographical sense. If my suggestion is not accepted India will then cease 
to be India. It will be a collection of different nationalities engaged in 
rivalries and wars against one another. 


God seems to have laid a heavy curse on India and Indians, saying ‘Ye 
Indians shall always remain divided and ye shall always be slaves !' 


I was glad that India was separated from Pakistan. I was the philosopher, 
so to say, of Pakistan. I advocated partition because I felt that it was only 
by partition that Hindus would not only be independent but free. If India 
and Pakistan had remained united in one State Hindus though independent 
would have been at the mercy of the Muslims. A merely independent India 
would not have been a free India from the point of view of the Hindus. 
It would have been a Government of one country by two nations and of 
these two the Muslims without question would have been the ruling race 
notwithstanding Hindu Mahasabha and Jana Sangh. When the partition 
took place I felt that God was willing to lift his curse and let India be one, 
great and prosperous. But I fear that the curse may fall again. For I find 
that those who are advocating linguistic States have at heart the ideal of 
making the regional language their official language. 


This will be a death knell to the idea of a United India. With regional 
languages as official languages the ideal to make India one United country 
and to make Indians, Indians first and Indians last, will vanish. I can do 
no more than to suggest a way out. It is for Indians to consider it. 


CHAPTER 4 
MUST THERE BE ONE STATE FOR ONE LANGUAGE ? 
What does a linguistic State mean ? 


It can mean one of two things. It can mean that all people speaking one 
language must be brought under the jurisdiction of one State. It can also 
mean that people speaking one language may be grouped under many States 
provided each State has under its jurisdiction people who are speaking one 
language. Which is the correct interpretation ? 


The Commission took the view that the creation of one single State for 
all people speaking one and the same language was the only rule to be 
observed. 


Let the reader have a look at map No. 1. He will at once note the 
disparity between the Northern and Southern States. This disparity is 
tremendous. It will be impossible for the small States to bear the weight 
of the big States. 


How dangerous this disparity is, the Commission has not realized. Such 
disparity no doubt exists in the United States. But the mischief it might 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 147 


cause has been prevented by the provisions in the Constitution of the 
United States. 


One such safeguard in the Constitution of the United States has been 
referred to by Mr. Pannikar in his dissenting minute to the Report (See 
Table No. 2). 


I give below the following extract from his minute : 


“I consider it essential for the successful working of a federation that the 
units should be fairly evenly balanced. Too great a disparity is likely to create 
not only suspicion and resentment but generate forces likely to undermine the 
federal structure itself and thereby be a danger to the unity of the country. 
This is clearly recognised everywhere. In most federal constitutions, though 
wide variation exists in respect of the population and resources of the unit, 
care is taken to limit the influence and authority of the larger States. Thus in 
the United States of America, for example, though the States are of varying 
population and resources and the State of New York has many times the 
population, say of Nevada, the constitution provides for equal representation 
of every State in the Senate.” 


On this point Mr. Pannikar also refers to the Soviet Union and old 
Germany. This is what he says: 


“In the Soviet Union also, in which great Russia has a larger population 
than most other units of the Federation taken together, representation im 
the House of Nationalities is weighed against her so that the other units of 
the Federation may not be dominated by the larger unit. In the Bismarckian 
Reich again, though Prussia had a dominant position from the point of view 
of population, she was given less representation in the Reichsrat or the 
house representing the states than she was entitled to (less than one-third) 
and the permanent presidency of that body was vested im Bavaria, clearly 
demonstrating that even here—where there was concentration of political, 
military and economic power in one State—it was considered necessary, in 
the interest of the union, to give weightage to the smaller units and also to 
reduce Prussia to the position of minority in the Reichsrat, States Council, 
which enjoyed greater powers than the Reichstag or the House of the People.” 


Mr. Pannikar has however not mentioned one other safeguard in the 
Constitution of the United States against the evils of disparity. In our 
Constitution the two Houses are not co-equal in authority. But the position 
in the Constitution of the United States is quite different. In the U.S.A. 
the two Houses are co-equal in authority. Even for money bills the consent 
of the Senate is necessary. This is not so in India. This makes a great 
difference to the disparity in the population. 


This disparity in the population and power between the States is sure 
to plague the country. To provide a remedy against it is most essential. 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


CHAPTER 5 
THE NORTH VERSUS THE SOUTH 


What the Commission has created is not a mere disparity between the 
States by leaving U.P. and Bihar as they are, by adding to them a new 
and a bigger Madhya Pradesh with Rajasthan it creates a new problem 
of North versus South. 


The North is Hindi speaking. The South is non-Hindi speaking. Most 
people do not know what is the size of the Hindi-speaking population. It 
is as much as 48 per cent of the total population of India. Fixing one's 
eye on this fact one cannot fail to say that the Commission’s effort will 
result in the consolidation of the North and the balkanization of the South. 


Can the South tolerate the dominance of the North? 


It may now not be a breach of a secret if I revealed to the public what 
happened in the Congress Party meeting when the Draft Constitution of 
India was being considered, on the issue of adopting Hindi as the national 
language. There was no article which proved more controversial than 
Article 115 which deals with the question. No article produced more 
opposition. No article, more heat. After a prolonged discussion when 
the question was put, the vote was 78 against 78. The tie could not 
be resolved. After a long time when the question was put to the Party 
meeting the result was 77 against 78 for Hindi. Hindi won its place as a 
national language by one vote. I am stating these facts from my personal 
knowledge. As Chairman of the Drafting Committee I had naturally entry 
to the Congress Party enclosure. 


These facts reveal how much the South dislikes the North. This 
dislike may grow into hatred if the North remains consolidated and the 
South becomes disintegrated and if the North continues to exercise a 
disproportionate influence on the politics of India (See Map 1). 


To allow one State to have such preponderating influence in the Centre 
is a dangerous thing. 


Mr. Pannikar has referred to this aspect of the case. In his dissenting 
minute he says : 


“The consequence of the present imbalance, caused by the denial of the 
federal principal of equality of units, has been to create feelings of distrust and 
resentment in all the States outside Uttar Pradesh. Not only in the Southern 
States but also in the Punjab, Bengal and elsewhere the view was generally 
expressed before the Commission that the present structure of government 
led to the dominance of Uttar Pradesh in all-India matters. The existence of 
this feeling will hardly be denied by anyone. That it will be a danger to our 
unity, if such feelings are allowed to exist and remedies are not sought and 
found now, will also not be denied.” 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 149 


There is a vast difference between the North and the South. The North is 
conservative. The South is progressive. The North is superstitious, the South 
is rational. The South is educationally forward, the North is educationally 
backward. The culture of the South is modern. The culture of the North is 
ancient. 


Did not Prime Minister Nehru on the 15th of August 1947 sit at the 
Yajna performed by the Brahmins of Benares to celebrate the event of a 
Brahmin becoming the first Prime Minister of free and independent India 
and wear the Raja Danda given to him by these Brahmins and drink the 
water of the Ganges brought by them ? 


How many women have been forced to go Sati in recent days and immolate 
themselves on the funeral pyre of their dead husbands. Did not the President 
recently go to Benares and worship the Brahmins, washed their toes and 
drank the water ? 


The North still has its Satis, its Nanga Sadhus. What havoc the Nanga 
Sadhus made at the last Hardwar Fair ! Did anyone in U.P. protest against 
it ? 


How can the rule of the North be tolerated by the South ? Already there 
signs of the South wanting to break away from the North. 


Mr. Rajagopalachari has made a statement on the recommendations of 
the States Reorganization Commission which has appeared in the Times of 
India of the 27th November, 1955. This is what he says : 


“If it is impossible to put the States Reorganization Schemes in cold storage 
for the next 15 years, the only alternative is for the Centre to govern India as 
a unitary state and deal with district officers and district boards directly, with 
regional commissioners' supervision. 


“It would be utterly wrong to fritter away national energy in dispute 
over boundaries and divisions conceived in the drawing room and not on the 
background of conditions that have resulted historically. 


“Apart from the general convictions of mine, I feel that a large southern 
State is absolutely essential for preserving the political significance of that part 
of the country. To cut the South up into Tamil, Malayalam and other small 
States will result only in complete insignificance of everybody and, in the net 
result, India as a whole will be the poorer.” 


Mr. Rajagopalachari has not expressed himself fully. He did do so fully 
and openly to me when he was the Head of the State and I was the Law 
Minister in charge of drafting the constitution. I went to Mr. Rajagopalachari 
for my usual interview which was the practice of the day. At one such 
interview Mr. Rajagopalachari, referring to the sort of constitution which 
the Constituent Assembly was making, said to me, “You are committing 
a great mistake. One federation for the whole of India with equal 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


representation for all areas will not work. In such a federation the Prime 
Minister and President of India will always be from the Hindi speaking 
area. You should have two Federations, one Federation of the North and 
one Federation of the South and a Confederation of the North and the 
South with three subjects for the Confederation to legislate upon and equal 
representation for both the federations.” 


These are the real thoughts of Mr. Rajagopalachari. They came to me as 
a revelation coming as they did from the innermost heart of a Congressman. 
I now regard Mr. Rajagopalachari as a prophet predicting the break-up 
of India into the North and the South. We must do everything to falsify 
Mr. Rajagopalachari's prophecy. 


It must not be forgotten that there was a civil war in the U.S.A. between 
the North and the South. There may also be a civil war between the North 
and the South in India. Time will supply many grounds for such a conflict. 
It must not be forgotten that there is a vast cultural difference between the 
North and the South and cultural differences are very combustible. 


In creating this consolidation of the North and balkanization of the South 
the Commission did not realize that they were dealing with a political and 
not a merely linguistic problem. 


It would be most unstatesmanlike not to take steps right now to prevent 
such a thing happening. What is the remedy ? 


PART III 
SOLUTION 
CHAPTER 6 
THE DIVISION OF THE NORTH 
The problem having been realized we must now search for a solution. 


The solution lies obviously in adopting some standard for determining 
the size of a State. It is not easy to fix such a standard. If two crores of 
population be adopted as a standard measure most of the Southern States 
will become mixed States. The enlargement of the Southern States to meet 
the menace of the Northern States is therefore impossible. The only remedy 
is to break up the Nothern States of U.P., Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. 


How did this solution not strike the Congress Working Committee I am 
unable to understand. It is so obvious. 


Division of the Northern States 


As I have said the Commission in designing linguistic States has created 
a consolidation of the North and balkanization of the South. The Commission 
has not I am sure done this intentionally. But intentionally or unintentionally 
the fact is there. Its evil consequences are also clear. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 151 


It is therefore necessary that this situation must be rectified. The only way 
to do this is to divide the three States of (1) Uttar Pradesh, (2) Bihar and 
(3) Madhya Pradesh into smaller units. 


In this behalf I make bold to offer certain tentative proposals. 
This division does not conflict with the underlying principles of a linguistic 


State. For, if these States are divided in the way suggested, each resulting State 
will be a linguistic State. 


I am happy to find Mr. Pant saying in the recent debate in Parliament on 
the subject that he has no objection to the cutting up of the U.P. What he said 
for U.P. may well be taken as applicable to Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. 


Diuision of Uttar Pradesh.—My proposal with regard to the Uttar Pradesh 
is to divide it into three States (See Map 2). Each of these three States should 
have a population of approximately two crores which should be regarded as 
the standard size of population for a State to administer effectively. Where 
the boundary lines of these three States should be drawn I have shown in the 
accompanying Map No. 2. 


The three States of the Uttar Pradesh could have as their capitals (1) Meerut 
(2) Cawnpore and (3) Allahabad. They are situated quite in the centre of each 
of these three States. 


Division of Bihar—My proposal with regard to Bihar is to divide it into two 
States (See Map 3). Each of these two States will have a population of a little 
over one and half crores. It is not a small population for one Government to 
administer. 


Where the boundary lines should be drawn I have shown in the accompanying 
Map No. 3. 


The two States of Bihar could have as their capitals (1) Patna and (2) Ranchi. 
They are situated quite in the centre of the two States. 


Division of Madhya Pradesh. —Madhya Pradesh stands before us in two forms. 
The old Madhya Pradesh and the new Madhya Pradesh. 


The old Madhya Pradesh consisted of : 
(1) the Province at one time known as C. P. and Berar, and 
(2) some Indian States out of the States known as the Eastern States. 


This old State of Madhya Pradesh had a population of 2% crores. It consisted 
of 22 districts. Its legislature had 223 members. 


The new Madhya Pradesh as planned by the Commission will consist of: 
(1) the 14 districts of the old Madhya Pradesh, 
(2) the whole of Bhopal, 
(8) the whole of Vindhya Pradesh, 
(4) Madhya Bharat except : Sunel enclave of Mandasaur district, and 
(5) the Sironj sub-division of Kota district of Rajasthan. 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The total population of this new Madhya Pradesh will be 26.1 million and its 
area will be about 171.200 square miles. 


I suggest that it should be divided into two States : (1) Northern Madhya 
Pradesh, (2) Southern Madhya Pradesh (See Map 4). 


The State of New Madhya Pradesh should consist of the following areas : 
(1) The whole of Vindhya Pradesh. 
(2) The whole State of Bhopal. 
The State of Southern Madhya Pradesh should consist of— 
(1) the whole State of Indore, and 
(2) the 14 districts of Mahakosal. 


The population of this Indore State will be about 2 crores and the population 
of this Vindhya Pradesh will be about 1.30 crores. (See Map No. 4). 


Why the Commission created this monster State 1t is no way to know. Even 
Prime Minister Nehru was surprised at its creation. 


All that one can think of is that the Commission has been under the impression 
that one language, one State is a categorical imperative from which there is no 
escape. As I have shown one language, one State can never be categorical imperative. 
In fact one State, one language should be the rule. And therefore people forming 
one language can divide themselves into many States. 


CHAPTER 7 
THE PROBLEMS OF MAHARASHTRA 
1 
THE PROPOSALS TO DEAL WITH MAHARASHTRA 
Maharashtra is another area which is a subject of controversy. 
There are four proposals in the field : 


(1) To retain the Bombay State as it is i.e. to retain it as a mixed State 
consisting of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Bombay. 


(2) To disrupt the existing State and to separate Maharashtra and Gujarat 
and make them into two separate States. 


(3) To make united Maharashtra with Bombay as one State. 
(4) To separate Bombay from Maharashtra and make it a separate City State. 


I would like to state what my proposals are. They are as follows : 

Bombay as a mixed State should be done away with. 

I would divide Maharashtra into four States (See Map 5) : (1) Maharashtra 
City State (Bombay), (2) Western Maharashtra, (3) Central Maharashtra and 
(4) Eastern Maharashtra. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 153 


Maharashtra City State.—The City of Bombay plus such area of 
Maharashtra as would enable it to be a good and strong City State. 


Western Maharashtra.—(1) Thana, (2) Kolaba, (3) Ratnagiri, (4) Poona, 
(5) North Satara, (6) South Satara, (7) Kolhapur and (8) the Marathi-speaking 
territories given over to Karnataka. 


Central Maharashtra—(1) Dang, (2) East Khandesh, (3) West Khandesh, 
(4) Nasik, (5) Ahmednagar, (6) Aurangabad, (7) Nanded, (8) Parbhani, 
(9) Beed, (10) Usmanabad, (11) Sholapur City and the Marathi-speaking 
area of Sholapur District and (12) the Marathi-speaking territories given 
over to Telangana. 


Eastern Maharashtra.—(1) Buldhana, (2) Yeotmal, (3) Akola, (4) Amraoti, 
(5) Wardha, (6) Chanda, (7) Nagpur, (8) Bhandara and (9) the Marahi- 
speaking territories given to Hindi States. 


I will next proceed to examine the merits of these proposals. 
II 
MAHARASHTRIANS UNDER THE MIXED STATE 


Should Bombay remain a mixed State ? It is a most unusual procedure. 
The City of Calcutta is not a separate City State. Madras is not a separate 
City State. Why Bombay alone be made the exception ? 


Secondly, it is already a mixed State. What is the experience of the 
Maharashtrians under this mixed State ? The Maharashtrians have suffered 
terribly under this mixed State. 


What is the position of the Maharashtrians in the Bombay Cabinet ? 


Let us consider the distribution of Ministership : 


Gujarathi Ministers 4 
Marathi Ministers 4 
Kannada Ministers eee vet 1 

Total a 9 


Gujarathi members in the Assembly are only 106, Marathi members 
are 149 and yet the number of Gujarathi Ministers is equal to that of 
Maharashtrian Ministers. 


Let us come to Deputy Ministers : 


Marathi speaking 5 
Gujarathi speaking 2 
Kannada speaking ee is 2 

Total ie 9 


Only among Deputy Ministers do the Maharashtrians have a majority 
of one. 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


But how the power and subjects are distributed among the Ministers 
and Deputy Ministers is the most important matter. It shows what power 
and authority the Maharashtrian Ministers possess in this mixed Cabinet 
of the Bombay State. 


Allocation of Subjects among Ministers 


Gujarathi Ministers Maharashtrian Ministers 
1. Morarji Desai z 105 Subs. Hirey ss 49 Subs. 
2. Dinkerrao Desai š 26 Subs. Nimbalkar .. 20 Subs. 
3. Jivaraj Mehta as 43 Subs. Tapase sa 15 Subs. 
4. Shantilal Shah 3 28 Subs. Chavan s; 4 Subs. 
Total .. 202 88 


The allocation of subjects among Deputy Ministers is also done on the 
same pattern. 


Allocation of Subjects among Deputy Ministers 


Gujarathi Maharashtrian 

Deputy Ministers Deputy Ministers 
1. Indumati Sheth .. 12 Subs. 1. Wandrekar . 12 Subs. 
2. Babubhai J. Patel 3 Subs. 2. Deshmukh 4 Subs. 
3. Naravane 5 Subs. 
4. Sathe Ff 5 Subs. 
5. Faki ; 3 Subs. 

Total . 15 29 


Let us now consider how much money is spent on development in 
Maharashtra and in Gujarath. The following figures will give an idea of the 
Per Capita Expenditure for the three years on Maharashtra and Gujarath : 


Per Capita Expenditure on Development in Rupees 


Years 
Population 1950-51 1951-52 1952-53 
1. Maharashtra .. 2,17,20,091 1.7 2.3 1.8 
2. Gujarath . 1,18,96,789 2.9 3.1 3.2 


What a differential treatment ? What a discrimination ? What an injustice ? 
Can anybody blame the Maharashtrians if they felt disgusted with the mixed 
State of Bombay ? 


Such a position of subordination no Maharashtrian can tolerate. The idea 
of a mixed State must be blown off once for all. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 155 
HI 
THE POSITION OF THE CITY OF BOMBAY 


The Bombay City is an area which is a subject matter of controversy. 
The controversy has become very acute. 


Maharashtrians want the City to be part of Maharashtra, Gujarathis 
want the City to be a separate State. Heads have been broken over the 
controversy. But there has been no agreement. It is therefore necessary to 
go to the root of the matter. 


The Gujarathis do not claim Bombay City as their own. But will not let go 
their hold on it. They claim a sort of easement over it by reason of the fact 
that they control the trade and industry of the City. The issue is : should 
it become part of Maharashtra or should it be constituted into a separate 
State ? The Gujarathis and Maharashtrians are sharply divided on the 
issue. The Maharashtrians want that Bombay should become exclusively a 
part of the new Maharashtra State. The Gujarathis are stoutly opposed to 
it. They have presented two alternatives. One alternative is not to break up 
the existing bi-lingual State of Bombay into two linguistic units of Gujarath 
and Maharashtra. The Congress Working Committee's decision is to make 
the city of Bombay into a separate State. 


The Gujarathis are happy. The Maharashtrians are naturally angry. 


The resentment of the Maharashtrians is well justified. The arguments 
urged against the claim of the Maharashtrians have no force at all. 


The first argument that is urged is that the Marathi-speaking population 
of Bombay City does not form a majority of the total population of the City. 
The total population of Bombay City is very large (See Statistical Appendix). 
Marathi-speaking population is 48 per cent. 


Those who use this kind of argument do not seem to realize the weakness 
of it 


The total Marathi population of Bombay City is no doubt less than 
50 per cent but it has to be valued against two factors. One is that 
geographically no one can deny that Bombay is part of Maharashtra even if 
the Maharashtrians are in a minority in the City. Even Mr. Morarji Desai 
admitted in the course of his speech in the meeting of the Gujarath Pradesh 
Congress Committee that Bombay is part of Maharashtra. 


The second point to be taken into consideration in valuing the population 
factor is the continued influx of population from the rest of India who come 
to Bombay either for making profits or for earning their bread. None of 
them regard Bombay as their home ; they should not therefore be counted 
as permanent residents of Bombay City. Many come for a few months and 
go back. 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bombay is a home only to the Maharashtrians and none else. It is not 
therefore logical or fair to count the non-Maharashtrians for the purpose of 
coming to the conclusion as to who form the majority of population in the 
Bombay City. 


Again it is not realized that the increase in the non-Marathi-speaking 
people in the Bombay City is due to the absence of a local law restricting 
citizenship. If Bombay State had such a law all this influx into Bombay 
from all parts of India could have been shut out and the Maharashtrian 
majority retained. 


It is also not realized that the influx of the non-Maharashtrians in Bombay 
is due to the fact that Bombay is a port, and it is a port on the Western 
Coast. The route from Europe to Bombay is much shorter than the route 
from Europe to Calcutta or Europe to Madras. That is why large number of 
poor people from other parts of India leave their homes and come to Bombay 
as temporary residents. It is easier to find a job in Bombay than elsewhere. 


Really speaking the matter has to be looked at from a different point of 
view. People have been coming to Bombay for the last two hundred years or 
so. Yet this influx has not reduced the Maharashtrian population in the city 
below 48 per cent. After two hundred years, the bedrock of its population 
remains Maharashtrian in its composition. This is due to the migratory 
character of City (See Appendix 3). The Gujarathis are migratory population. 


There are also other arguments which could be urged in favour of allowing 
Bombay to remain as part of Maharashtra. 


Bombay is not the only composite city in India. Calcutta and Madras are 
also composite cities. If Calcutta can be part of Western Bengal and Madras 
can be part of Madras State what objection can there be to Bombay being 
made part of Maharashtra ? This is the question that every Maharashtrian 
will ask. I see no answer to this question. The only answer that comes to 
one's mind is that the Congress High Command thinks that Maharashtrians 
are unfit to rule others. This is a slur on the Maharashtrian character and 
they will not tolerate it. 


It is said that Bombay has been built up by the capital belonging to 
non-Maharashtrians. That may be so. But has Madras been built by the 
capital of Madrasees ? Has Calcutta been built by the capital of Bengalees? 
Without the capital of Europeans Madras and Calcutta would have been 
villages. Then why urge this point against the Maharashtrians when they 
claim Bombay to themselves ? Maharashtrians have at least contributed 
labour without which Bombay could not have been what it is. It must 
always be remembered that the life lines of Bombay lie in Maharashtra. The 
sources of its electricity He in Maharashtra. Sources of its water supply lie 
in Maharashtra. The sources of its labour lie in Maharashtra. Maharashtra 
can at any time make the city of Bombay “Mohenjodaro' a City of the Dead. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 157 


The Gujarathi population is filled with fear that Maharashtrians 
will practise discrimination against them. But under our Constitution 
discrimination is not possible for the reason that the Constitution contains 
a list of fundamental rights and remedies by way of writs from the High 
Court and the Supreme Court which can immediately provide redress for 
a wrong. For every wrong of a discriminative character there is a remedy 
provided by the Constitution. Why should the Gujarathis have any fear ? 


Let us now consider what benefit the Gujarathis are going to get from 
Bombay being made a separate City State. Their population in the Bombay 
State is only ten per cent. How many seats can they get in the Bombay City 
State Legislature ? Not even ten per cent. How can ten per cent protect 
their clients against 90 per cent ? 


It must be remembered that the feelings between the Maharashtrians 
and the Gujarathis would hereafter be running high as never before. A 
Maharashtrian will not vote for a Gujarathi candidate and a Gujarathi 
voter will not vote for a Maharashtrian candidate. Hitherto the Gujarathis 
have been able to plough the sands of Maharashtra with their money. But 
money may not succeed once self-respect is aroused. The Gujarathis must 
consider whether goodwill is not a better protection than a paltry share in 
the Government of the City. 


While the case of Maharashtra is as strong as steel there are some points 
on the other side which they must not fail to consider in their anger. 


They want Bombay to be within Maharashtra. But the question which 
they must consider is : What do they want ? Do they want prosperous 
Bombay or do they want decadent Bombay ? Can Bombay be prosperous 
under Maharashtra ? This in other words means : can Maharashtra 
provide the capital necessary for the growing trade and industry of the 
City ? No Maharashtrian can answer this question in the affirmative. The 
Maharashtrians may be able to supply the need for capital after a course 
of years. But certainly not now. 


The second point is : what would be the effect on the standard of living 
of Maharashtrians living in Bombay if the City’s prosperity declines either 
by flight of capital or removal of business houses. The Maharashtrians must 
not forget, however it may hurt their pride, that they are a nation of clerks 
and coolies. What employment can they get in a declining city ? 


The Maharashtrian should consider the question of Bombay from this 
point of view. There is a saying which says : 


waa wae sth waft a: | 


There is also another reason why Bombay City should be made a separate 
state. The minorities and the Scheduled Castes who are living in the villages 
are constantly subjected to tyranny, oppression, and even murders by the 
members of the majority communities. The minorities need an asylum, 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a place of refuge where they can be free from the tyranny of the majority. 
If there was a United Maharashtra with Bombay included in it where they 
can go to for safety ? The same tyranny was practised over the Brahmins, 
Marwaris and Gujarathis living in the villages when Godse killed Mr. Gandhi. 
All the Brahmins, Marwaris and Gujarathis who were once living in villages 
ran away and are now living in towns and forgetting their experiences are 
shouting for United Maharashtra, after having reached a safe harbour. 


It seems to me that Maharashtrians will do well to accept the decision 
of the Congress High Command for the time being. 


The Maharashtrians need have no fear of losing Bombay. Nobody can 
dispossess Maharashtrians of Bombay. Much less can there be any custer 
of them by anybody. 


The real objection to the creation of Bombay as a separate State arises 
from the fact that the name Bombay does not carry within it the sense that 
it is part of Maharashtra. It is to remove this objection that I propose that 
the new State of Bombay should be renamed by another name which will 
carry on its face the word Maharashtra. 


Supposing in terms of this suggestion instead of saying that Bombay 
be made a separate State it is said that Maharashtra be divided into four 
States, (1) Maharashtra City State (which is Bombay City), (2) Western 
Maharashtra, (8) Central Maharashtra, (4) Eastern Maharashtra; what 
obJection can there be to the creation of a separate State of Bombay ? 


This also involves the separation of Bombay. With this change in the 
name of the City I like to know which Maharashtrian can raise objection 
to the creation of Bombay as a separate City State on the ground that this 
scheme separates Bombay from Maharashtra ? To say that Bombay be made 
a separate State is merely stating that Maharashtra be divided into four 
States. If there is no objection to Maharashtra being divided into two or 
three States what objection can there be to Maharashtra being divided into 
four? I can see none. For the sake of similarity in language I propose that 
Calcutta be called Bengal City State and Madras be called Tamil City State. 


This is one proposal which I make to ease the tension between 
Maharashtrians and Gujarathis. 


The Maharashtra City State will be a surplus State. Those who are 
wanting United Maharashtra with Bombay are hoping to get the benefit of 
this surplus for Maharashtra. 


The surplus revenue of the City State arises because of (1) The Property 
Tax and (2) The Electricity Tax. Can the revenue from these two sources 
be appropriated by Maharashtra if Bombay becomes a separate City State ? 


Nothing can be done to take away the yield of the Property Tax from 
the Bombay City State Property Tax. It is a local tax, on local situated 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 159 


property. The State within which the property is situated is entitled to the 
yield of the Tax. 


With regard to the Electricity Tax the situation is different. 


When Gujarath and Maharashtra are separated—and they must be— 
Gujarath will claim the revenue derived from electricity produced and 
consumed within Gujarath. Maharashtra will claim the revenue derived from 
electricity produced and consumed within Maharashtra. Bombay City as a 
State will do the same. Can Bombay be allowed to do so and appropriate 
the revenue to itself ? Is it Just ? Bombay City does not produce electricity. 
It is produced outside Bombay City in Maharashtra. Therefore the new 
Bombay City State has no right to appropriate to itself the whole revenue 
derived from electricity. The proper thing to do is to apply the principle of 
the segregation of the sources and division of the yield well known to all 
students of State Finance. 


To put it in concrete shape let the Centre take over the taxation of 
Electricity and divide the yield among the four States of Maharashtra— 
(1) Bombay, (2) Western Maharashtra, (3) Central Maharashtra, (4) Eastern 
Maharashtra according to their needs. 


It will also ease the financial strain that the three Maharashtras are 
likely to suffer on account of the separation of Bombay. 


IV 
UNITED OR DIVIDED ? 


I have said that Bombay be given a new area and made into a separate 
City State. 


There now remains the question of how to deal with the rest of the 
Maharashtra. I have suggested that the rest of the Maharashtra should be 
divided into three States. 


From very ancient times Maharashtra has been divided into three States. 


Maharashtra first comes to be known in history during the time of Ashok. 
It is mentioned in Mahavansa in connection with reference to the missionaries 
sent by Ashok to different parts of India for the purpose of propagating 
Buddhism. But thereafter the Pali literature speaks of Trai Maharashtrika 
or three Maharashtras. It means that from very ancient times there have 
been three Maharashtras. My proposal is not therefore new. 


The distribution of population, area and revenue would be as shown in 
Table (on page 160). 


The accompanying map No. 5 will show the area and boundaries of each 
of the three divisions. 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


For the present, from the point of view of area and population there is 
nothing to complain against the three divisions. 


From the earliest times they have always been spoken of as Trai 
Maharashtras. 


The division does no wrong to the language principle. In fact if all the 
three Maharashtras have the same language it can help to develop the 
Marathi language if it is worth their while to do so. 


The question of viability I will consider later on. I propose to deal with 
it separately in a special chapter. 


Bombay was then unknown. Otherwise it would have been the fourth 
part of Maharashtra. 


Of the remaining three parts what I call Eastern Maharashtra is already 
a separate State. All that required is that it should be allowed to remain 
separate. It has got a well-established administration system, a well- 
established revenue system and a well-established judicial system. It has 
been separated from the trammels of the Hindi-speaking people. 


The only problem that remains is how to divide the area covered by the 
Maharashtra which is part of the present Bombay State and the Marathwada 
of the Hyderabad State. 


Instead of forming a merger of the two into one and joining it to the third 
which I call Eastern Maharashtra, why not divide the Maharashtra part 
of Bombay and Marathwada into two equal States ? This is my scheme. 
I transfer six districts of Maharashtra part of the Bombay State and make 
them part of Marathwada. (See Map No. 5). The distribution of the area 
and population of the three Maharashtras are shown below : 


The Population Area and Revenue of the Three Maharashtra 
States will be approximately as follows 


Total Total Area Total Total 
Name of State Population (in sq. Revenue Expenditure 
(in crores) miles) 
WESTERN MAHARASHTRA 1,26,77,316 30,028 26,24,20,441 not known 
CENTRAL MAHARASHTRA 1,24,09,044 55,482 21,63,80,095 not known 
EASTERN MAHARASHTRA 80,27,180 39,004 9,41,11,012 not known 


Total... 3,31,18,490 1,24,514  57,29,11,548 


I will now proceed to state my reasons in support of my plan. 


I have said that Maharashtra has always been divided into three. This is 
a historical argument. It at least shows that the tradition, the way of life 
and the social and economic condition of what is called United Maharashtra 
is not one. Those who are in a hurry to have United Maharashtra 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 161 


may not take it seriously. But there are other arguments which arise out of 
the present condition and which cannot be ignored. I mention a few. 


My first argument is that a single Government cannot administer such 
a huge State as United Maharashtra. 


The total population of the Marathi-speaking area is 3,30,83,490. The 
total area occupied by the Marathi-speaking people is 1,74,514 sq. miles. 
It is a vast area and it is impossible to have efficient administration by 
a single State. Maharashtrians who talk about Samyukta Maharashtra 
have no conception of the vastness as to the area and population of their 
Maharashtra. But why there should be one single Maharashtrian State. I 
am quite unable to understand. To have a separate Maharashtra State is 
one thing. To have a single. Maharashtra State is quite a different thing. 
I am in favour of a separate Maharashtra, separate from Gujarathis and 
separate from Hindi-speaking people. But I am unable to understand why a 
free Maharashtra should be made into one single State. The Maharashtrians 
are not planning to declare war on U.P. and therefore they need not have 
a common front. 


Even from the point of view of Marathas why should there be this 
consolidation ? What affiliation has a Maratha of Satara got with the 
Maratha of Aurangabad ? What affiliation has a Maratha of Nasik got with 
the Maratha of Ratnagiri? What care and interest a Maratha of Satara is 
going to bestow upon the problems of the Maratha of Aurangabad ? What 
care and interest a Maratha of Nasik is going to bestow upon the problems 
of the Maratha of Ratnagiri ? The consolidation has no meaning and can 
serve no purpose. 


All Maratha Ministers in the present Bombay Cabinet come from Satara 
District or Nasik District. There is none from Konkan. 


The second consideration is the economic inequality between the three 
parts of Maharashtra. Marathwada has been solely neglected by the Nizam. 
What guarantee is there that the other two Maharashtras will look after 
the interests of what I call the Central Maharashtra ? 


The third consideration is industrial inequality between the three parts 
of Maharashtra. Western Maharashtra and Eastern Maharashtra are 
industrially well developed. What about the Central Maharashtra ? What 
guarantee is there of its industrial development ? Will Western Maharashtra 
and Eastern Maharashtra take interest in the industrial development of 
Central Maharashtra ? 


The fourth consideration is the inequality of education between Eastern 
and Western Maharashtra on the one hand and Central Maharashtra on the 
other. The inequality between them is marked. If the Central Maharashtra 
goes under the Poona University its destiny is doomed. 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Iam greatly worried about Marathwada. It was hitherto part of the Nizam's 
Territory for the last 200 years. The Nizam had criminally neglected this 
area. He took no interest in it. There is not a mile of canal irrigation in 
Marathwada. There is hardly a high school in taluka places in Marathwada. 
There is hardly a youth in Nizam’s public service from Marathwada. I speak 
from knowledge and experience. People are not only down and out they 
are ignorant. They are being grabbed by highly advanced people on both 
sides. When their avenues of employment are closed there will be further 
degradation in their position. 


I shudder to think what would happen when Marathwada goes under the 
Poona University. The standard of education in the schools and colleges under 
the Poona University is so high that hardly any boy from Marathwada can 
hope to pass the examination. It is quite possible that with the madness for 
united Maharashtra there will develop a madness for a single and common 
University. 


The creation of United Maharashtra will be followed by the onrush of 
Poona and Nagpur Brahmins in Marathwada to pick up the jobs. 


There is a further reason why Maharashtra should be divided into three. 


The total strength of the Bombay Legislative Assembly is 315. Out of 
them 149 members are Marathi-speaking. The total strength of the Bombay 
Legislative Council is 72 ; out of them 34 are Marathi-speaking. Obviously 
some Marathi-speaking person should have been the Chief Minister of the 
Bombay State. Mr. Hirey stood up as a candidate for the Chief Ministership. 
But he was made to sit down by the Congress High Command. Not 
only was Mr. Hirey made to sit down but he was forced to move that 
Mr. Morarji Desai be made the Chief Minister. What a humiliation for a 
Maharashtrian leader ! And what value does the Congress High Command 
attach to the political intelligence of Maharashtrians ? 


The same incapacity of the Maratha Ministers is clear from the division 
of subjects referred earlier. 


It is obvious from the facts given above that the Marathas are lacking 
in political talent. There is no man of eminence among them such as Tilak, 
or Gokhale or Ranade. The Maharashtrian today counts for nothing. The 
Congress Maharashtrian counts for much less in the Congress. The non- 
Congress Maharashtrian also counts for nothing. It is therefore absolutely 
essential to train up Maharashtrians in political life. This political training 
has become fundamental because of the transfer of power to the masses. The 
word Marathas is used in two senses. In one sense it means all those who 
speak the Marathi language. In another sense it means all those who are 
Marathas by caste. They are all spoken of as Marathas. But they all fail to 
make the distinction between Marathas i.e. those who speak the Marathi 
language and Marathas i.e. those who are Marathas by caste. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 163 


Those who are going to rule Maharashtra are not Marathas by speech but 
Marathas by caste, notwithstanding the hopes of the Brahmins. Now it cannot 
be denied that Marathas are politically the most backward community. It is 
fundamental that they should receive political training. If there is only one 
Maharashtra only one Maratha can be trained as Chief Minister and five or 
six as Ministers. On the other hand if there are three Maharashtra States, 
three Marathas can find training as Chief Ministers and thirty Marathas 
can get training as Ministers. We can do real service to ourselves by helping 
to educate our Masters. 


The only way of educating the Marathas is to give them more field for 
developing their abilities and exercising their abilities. Only the creation of 
three Maharashtras can do this. 


There is a story which is very appropriate to the occasion. The father of 
a young girl had taken her for an outing in a jungle. She found that under 
big trees there stood small shrubs. Finding this to be uniformly so, she 
asked her father why these small shrubs under the big trees do not grow. 
The father not being a botanist could not give an answer. So he said : Oh ! 
I do not know. He, however, felt that the question was very significant. He 
was a Professor in a college. Next day he went to the college and put the 
question to his Botanist colleague. The Botanist replied : Why ! The answer 
is simple. The big trees use up all the sun’s rays to themselves. The shrubs 
do not get any rays. That is why they do not grow. The Marathwada people 
must not forget the moral of this story. 


The only argument in favour of United Maharashtra is that it is like a 
meeting of the two brothers Rama and Bharat in Ramayana after a long 
separation. It is a silly argument, not worth consideration. 


There are some Maharashtrians who are satisfied with some kind of 
Political Treaty with Western Maharashtra guaranteeing some concessions. 
Treaties are like scraps of paper. They cannot be enforced. Instead of political 
treaties which nobody can enforce is it not better to have power in one’s 
own hands ? 


What a poor and wretched show by Maharashtrians in the Government 
of Bombay ! If this is the show that the most advanced and educated part 
of Maharashtrians can make, what can be expected from the people of 
Marathwada ? 


I advise the people of Marathwada or Central Maharashtra to have a 
State of their own so that they have power in their own hands to improve 
their own lot. 


V 
RECLAMATION OF LOST TERRITORY 


Should all the Marathi-speaking people be huddled up under one State ? 
Or should they be divided into two or more States. 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


How to dispose of the remainder when Bombay is separated is the next 
question. The remainder consists of two parts : (1) Gujarath, (2) Maharashtra. 


I am concerned with Maharashtra. 


While creating Linguistic Provinces the Commission has given over 
Marathi-speaking areas to non-Marathi-speaking areas. The number of such 
excluded areas are as follows : 


1. Belgaum Taluka with the City of Belgaum. 
Khanapur Taluka. 

Chikori Taluka including Nipani. 

Supa Taluka. 

Karwar Taluka. 

Nilanga Taluka in Bidar. 

Ahamadpur Taluka in Bidar. 

Udgir Taluka in Bidar. 

Rajgir Taluka in Adilabad. 


OOo So oF E GQ D 


= 
= 


Some portion from Vidarbha given to the neighbouring Hindi-speaking 
State. 


The Maharashtrians excluded from Maharashtra come to 13,89,648 in 
terms of population. 


The Commission in retaining the mixed State of Bombay had to secure 
two most important objects. One is not to allow Bombay to go into the hands 
of Maharashtrians. This the Commission did by creating a mixed State. The 
second thing they had to do was to secure equality between Maharashtrians 
and the Gujarathis. The necessity of equality between the two in the future 
Legislature of the Bombay State as planned by the Commission had become 
urgent as the members of Karnatak in the old Assembly on whom the 
Gujarathis depended for their majority were to disappear in the new Karnatak 
State. This the Commission did by clipping the wings of Maharashtra by 
handing over Marathi-speaking people to non-Marathi-speaking States. There 
seems to be no other reason for this political vandalism. 


This wrong done by the Commission to Maharashtra must now be remedied 
and fortunately it can be undone. The proposal of a mixed State is gone and 
there is no necessity for equality between Maharashtrians and Gujarathis. 


CHAPTER 8 
SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE ISSUE 


For the sake of the reader I summarize below the principles which should 
underly the creation of Linguistic States which are already enunciated in 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 165 


the foregoing pages but which lie about scattered. These principles may be 
stated as below : 


A) 
@) 
(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


The idea of having a mixed State must be completely abandoned. 
Every State must be an unilingual State. One State, one language. 


The formula one State, one language must not be confused with the 
formula of one language, one State. 


The formula one language, one State means that all people speaking 
one language should be brought under one Government irrespective 
of area, population and dissimilarity of conditions among the people 
speaking the language. This is the idea that underlies the agitation 
for a united Maharashtra with Bombay. This is an absurd formula 
and has no precedent for it. It must be abandoned. A people speaking 
one language may be cut up into many States as is done in other 
parts of the world. 


Into how many States a people speaking one language should be cut up, 
should depend upon (1) the requirements of efficient administration, 
(2) the needs of the different areas, (3) the sentiments of the different 
areas, and (4) the proportion between the majority and minority. 


As the area of the State increases the proportion of the minority 
to the majority decreases and the position of the minority becomes 
precarious and the opportunities for the majority to practise tyranny 
over the minority become greater. The States must therefore be small. 


The minorities must be given protection to prevent the tyranny of the 
majority. To do this the Constitution must be amended and provisions 
must be made for a system on plural member constituencies (two or 
three) with cumulative voting. 


PART IV 
THE PROBLEMS OF LINGUISTIC STATES 
CHAPTER 9 
VIABILITY 


Will the three Maharashtrian States be viable ? Will their Revenue be 
sufficient to meet their expenditure ? Such a question is bound to be asked. 


It is not that such a question can be asked about Maharashtra alone. It 
can be asked about many other States in India. 


I give four statements relating to Part A States, Part B States and the 
Central Government from Part III of the Report of the Taxation Inquiry 
Committee presided over by Dr. John Mathai (See Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7). 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


From these statements the following propositions stand out : 


(1) That upto a certain year in the life of the States there was no deficit. 
They were all viable. It is only after Congress came into office that States 
ceased to be viable. 


(2) That since the Congress came into office the Excise Revenue has begun 
to dwindle. It has gone down to a vanishing point. 


(3) That Income Tax and Sales Tax have increased enormously. 
These are the causes which explain why States have ceased to be viable. 


The Excise Revenue is being sacrificed for a false idealogy which has no 
meaning, no sense and no reality. 


In regard to the Policy of Prohibition followed by the Congress, the following 
conclusions can be drawn without fear of challenge : 


(1) An enormous amount of revenue is sacrificed for nothing. 


(2) People have not ceased to drink. There is enormous amount of illicit 
manufacture of liquor which is being sold to the public clandestinely. 


(3) The money lost by Government is picked up by the illicit manufacturer. 


(4) Prohibition has demoralized Society. Formerly only male members of 
the family drank because they alone could go to the liquor shop. Now 
illicit liquor manufacture has become a Home Industry. Liquor being 
now made at home both men and women drink. 


(5) In addition to the loss of revenue on account of Prohibition Government 
has to undertake increased expenditure on Police to enforce Prohibition 
which, however, they never do. 


What good is this Prohibition which does not prohibit ? The Congress threatens 
to extend this Prohibition to the whole of India. God bless the Congress! It is 
said that God first makes them mad whom. He wishes to destroy. God is doing 
the same with Congressmen. 


It is enough for me to say that Congress cannot have both viability and 
Prohibition. 


Coming to the Land Revenue it could certainly be increased. But the Congress 
is afraid to touch the agriculturist for fear of losing votes. It is therefore raising 
money from the Sales Tax and the Income Tax both of which fall so heavily on 
the urban classes as is apparent from Table No. 6. 


It is therefore clear that viability is no problem. Only the Congress has to 
revise its Taxation Policy. 


Viability is a question of capacity to bear taxation and will to tax. There is 
enough capacity. What is wanted is will. 


The whole of the Indian Taxation system requires to be changed. It is a 
question of altering the Constitution. I cannot deal with it now. I must reserve 
it for another occasion. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 167 


CHAPTER 10 
MAJORITIES AND MINORITIES 


Politics is nothing if not realistic. There is very little in it that is academic. It 
is therefore follows that before passing any judgement on any scheme of politics 
it is essential that one must consider the ground plan. 


Someone may ask what do I mean by “Ground Plan”. To me the ground plan 
means the social structure of a community to which the political plan is sought 
to be applied. 


It needs no argument to show that the political structure rests on the social 
structure. Indeed the social structure has a profound effect on the political 
structure. It may modify it in its working. It may nullify it or it may even make 
a mockery of it. 


In the case of India the social structure is built up on the caste system, the 
special product of Hindu civilization and culture. 


The caste system is so well known that one need not wait to explain its 
nature. One can straight proceed to show what effect it is likely to have on 
Linguistic States. 


There are some peculiar features of the caste system which must however 
be noted— 


(1) Castes are so distributed that in any given area there is one caste which 
is major and there are others which are small and are subservient to 
the major caste owing to their comparative smallness and their economic 
dependence upon the major caste which owns most of the land in the 
village. 


(2) The caste system is marked not merely by inequality but is affected by 
the system of graded inequality. All castes are not on a par. They are 
one above the other. There is a kind of ascending scale of hatred and a 
descending scale of contempt. 


(3) A caste has all the exclusiveness and pride which a nation has. It is 
therefore not improper to speak of collection of castes as a collection of 
major and minor nations. 


I am sorry, I cannot illustrate these points by reference to facts and figures. 
The census which is the only source of information on these points fails to help 
me. The last census omits altogether the caste tables which had been the feature 
of the Indian census ever since its birth. The Home Minister of the Government 
of India who is responsible for this omission was of the opinion that if a word 
does not exist in a dictionary it can be proved that the fact for which the word 
stands does not exist. One can only pity the petty intelligence of the author. 


The consequences of the caste system on politics are quite obvious. The 
interesting part is to see what effect it has upon elections which is the foundation 
of Representative Government which is reared up on a system of single member 
constituencies. 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The effects may be summarized as follows : 


(1) Voting is always communal. The voter votes for the candidate of his 
community and not for the best candidate. 


(2) The majority community carries the seat by sheer communal majority. 


(3) The minority community is forced to vote for the candidate of the 
majority community. 


(4) The votes of the minority community are not enough to enable 
the candidate to win the seat against the candidate put up by the 
majority community. 


(5) As consequence of social system of graded inequality the voter of the 
higher (major) communities can never condescend to give his vote to 
a candidate of a minority community. On the other hand the voter of 
the minority community who is socially on a lower level takes pride 
in giving his vote to the candidate of the majority community. That 
is another reason why a candidate of a minority community loses 
in election. 


The Congress always wins, so it is found. But no one asks why does 
the Congress win ? The answer is that Congress is very popular. But why 
is the Congress popular ? The true answer is that Congress always puts 
up candidates which belong to castes which are in the majority in the 
constituencies. Caste and Congress are closely linked. It is by exploiting the 
caste system that the Congress wins. 


These evil consequences of the caste system are sure to be sharpened 
by creation of Linguistic States. Minority communities may be crushed. If 
not crushed they may be tyrannized and oppressed. They are sure to be 
discriminated against and denied equality before law and equal opportunity 
in public life. 


The history of nations and the changes in their idealogies have been well 
traced by Lord Action : 


“In the old European system, the rights of nationalities were neither recognized 
by governments nor asserted by the people. The interest of the reigning families, 
not those of the nations, regulated the frontiers, and the administration was 
conducted generally without any reference to popular desires. Where all liberties 
were suppressed, the claims of national independence were necessarily ignored, 
and a princess, in the words of Fenelon, carried a monarchy in her wedding 
portion.” 


Nationalities were at first listless. When they became conscious : 


“They first rose against their conquerors in defence of their legitimate 
rulers. They refused to be governed by usurpers. Next came a time when 
they revolted because of the wrongs inflicted upon them by their rulers. 
The insurrections were provoked by particular grievances justified by 
definite complaints. Then came the French Revolution which effected 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 169 


a complete change. It taught the people to regard their wishes and wants as 
the supreme criterion of their right to do what they like to do with themselves. 
It proclaimed the idea of the sovereignty of the people uncontrolled by the past 
and uncontrolled by the existing state.” 


The caste is a nation but the rule of one caste over another may not be 
admitted to be the same as the rule of one nation over another. But supposing 
the case is not carried so far but is limited to majority and minority even 
then the question remains : What right has the majority to rule the minority? 


The answer is that whatever the majority does it is right. What complain 
the minorities can haye ? 


People who rely upon majority rule forget the fact that majorities are of 
two sorts : (1) Communal majority and (2) Political majority. 


A political majority is changeable in its class composition. A political 
majority grows. A communal majority is born. The admission to a political 
majority is open. The door to a communal majority is closed. The politics 
of a political majority are free to all to make and unmake. The politics of a 
communal majority are made by its own members born in it. 


How can a communal majority run away with the title deeds given to a 
political majority to rule ? To give such title deeds to a communal majority is 
to establish a hereditary Government and make the way open to the tyranny 
of that majority. This tyranny of the communal majority is not an idle dream. 
It is an experience of many minorities. This experience to Maharashtrian 
Brahmins being every recent it is unnecessary to dilate upon it. 


What is the remedy ? No doubt some safeguards against this communal 
tyranny are essential. The question is : What can they be ? The first 
safeguard is not to have too large a State. The consequences of too large 
a State on the minority living within it are not understood by many. The 
larger the State the smaller the proportion of the minority to the majority. 
To give one illustration—If Mahavidarbha remained separate, the proportion 
of Hindus to Muslims would be four to one. In the United Maharashtra 
the proportion will be fourteen to one. The same would be the case of the 
Untouchables. A small stone of a consolidated majority placed on the chest 
of the minority may be borne. But the weight of a huge mountain it cannot 
bear. It will crush the minorities. Therefore creation of smaller States is a 
safeguard to the minorities. 


The second safeguard is some provision for representation in the 
Legislature. The old type of remedy provided in the Constitution were 
(1) certain number of reserved seats and (2) separate electorates. Both these 
safeguards have been given up in the new Constitution. The lambs are shorn 
of the wool. They are feeling the intensity of the cold. Some tempering of 
the wool is necessary. 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Separate electorates or reservation of seats must not be restored to. It 
would be enough to have plural member constituencies (of two or three) 
with cumulative voting in place of the system of single-member constituency 
embodied in the present Constitution. This will allay the fears which the 
minorities have about Linguistic States. 


PART V 
THE NEED FOR A SECOND CAPITAL 
CHAPTER 11 
INDIA AND THE NECESSITY OF A SECOND CAPITAL 


A WAY TO REMOVE TENSION BETWEEN 
THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH 


Can India afford to have one Capital ? That India has now one capital does 
not close the question. If the Capital of India is not satisfactorily located, 
now is the time for considering the question. 


Since the departure of the British, India has only one capital and that 
is Delhi. Before the British, India has always had two capitals. During the 
Moghal period, India had Delhi as one Capital and Shrinagar in Kashmir 
as another Capital. When the British came they too had two capitals, 
one was Calcutta and another was Simla. Even when they left Calcutta 
for Delhi, they retained Simla as their summer Capital. The two capitals 
maintained by the Moghuls and by the British were the results of climatic 
conditions. Neither the British nor the Moghuls were able to live in Delhi or 
in Calcutta continuously for 12 months. The summer months in Delhi were 
unbearable to the Moghuls. They made Shrinagar their second capital for 
summer months. The summer months in Calcutta were equally unbearable 
to the British. They, therefore, established a second capital. To these climatic 
conditlons must now be added three other conditions. There was no popular 
Government when the Moghuls ruled or when the British ruled. Now we 
have popular Government and the convenience of the people is an important 
factor. Delhi is most inconvenient to the people of the South. They suffer 
the most from cold as well as distance. Even the Northern people suffer in 
the summer months. They do not complain because they are nearer home 
and they are nearer the seat of power. Second is the feeling of the Southern 
people and the third is the consideration of Defence. The feeling of the 
Southern people is that the Capital of their Country is far away from them 
and that they are being ruled by the people of Northern India. The third 
consideration is of course more important. It is that Delhi is a vulnerable 
place. It is within bombing distance of the neighbouring countries. Although 
India is trying to live in peace with its neighbours it cannot be assumed 
that India will not have to face war sometime or other and if war comes, 
the Government of India will have to leave Delhi and find another place for 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 171 


its location. Which is the place to which the Government of India can 
migrate ? A place that one can think of is Calcutta. But Calcutta is also 
within bombing distance from Tibet. Although India and China today are 
friends, how long the friendship would last no one can definitely say. The 
possibility of conflict between India and China remains. In that event Calcutta 
would be useless. The next town that could be considered as a refuge for 
the Central Government is Bombay. But Bombay is a port and our Indian 
Navy is too poor to protect the Central Government if it came down to 
Bombay. Is there a fourth place one could think of ? I find Hyderabad to be 
such a place. Hyderabad. Secunderabad and Bolarum should be constituted 
into a Chief Commissioner's Province and made a second capital of India. 
Hyderabad fulfils all the requirements of a capital for India. Hyderabad is 
equidistant to all States. Anyone who looks at the table of distances given 
below will realize it : 


From Delhi From Hyderabad 

Miles Miles 
To Bombay n % 798 440 
To Calcutta i = 868 715 
To Madras s: sx 1,198 330 
To Karnul a 7 957 275 
To Trivendrum re sm 1,521 660 
To Patiala . z 124 990 
To Chandigarh be 28 180 1,045 
To Lucknow es 275 770 


From the defence point of view it would give safety to the Central 
Government. It is equidistant from all parts of India. It would give satisfaction 
to the South Indian people that their Government is sometimes with them. 
The Government may remain in Delhi during winter months and during 
other months it can stay in Hyderabad. Hyderabad has all the amenities 
which Delhi has and it is a far better City than Delhi. It has all the grandeur 
which Delhi has. Buildings are going cheap and they are really beautiful 
buildings, far superior to those in Delhi. They are all on sale. The only thing 
that is wanting is a Parliament House which the Government of India can 
easily build. It is a place in which Parliament can sit all the year round 
and work, which it cannot do in Delhi. I do not see what objection there 
can be in making Hyderabad a second capital of India. It should be done 
right now while we are reorganising the States. 


Hyderabad, Secunderabad and Bolarum should be constituted into a second 
capital of India. Fortunately, it can be very easily done with satisfaction to 
the whole of South India, to Maharashtra and to the Andhras. 


This is another remedy for easing the tension between the North and 
the South. 


PART VI 


MAPS 


MAP NO. 1 


INDIA 
NORTH VS. SOUTH 


“ — 2 


4 A D yy 


í 


MAP No. 


DEHRA $ 
GARHWAL 


DIVISION OF UTTAR PRADESH 


ALMORA 
—— WESTERN UTTAR PRADESH 
e MEERUT 
ot CENTRAL UTTAR PRADESH 
” e i 
P 
s ÉZ 
è 
á 
Pa 
¢ 
ALIGARH z SupVAMAN PUR 
ane” 
. 
ETOH g 
e pe ' 
- 
AGRA 
GoRaRHPUA 
E 
CAWNPORE, Rai GARELI FYZABAD 
P 
⁄“ 
? 
e 
+ 
+ 
Pa BANDA ALLAHABAD Ni 
e 
x É BENARES 
° 
YunaNsi 
N 


P. EASTERN 


UTTAR PRADESH 


MAP No, 3 


DIVISION OF BIHAR 


NORTH 
BiHAR 


DARBHANCA 


ePATNA 


SHAHABAD 


a 
ae 
- ore - Ka 
a 


GAYA on™ 


oes sam: ee DA 


SANTAL PARGANAS 


HAZARIBAGH 


RANCHI 
° 


SOUTH BIHAR 


MAP No. 4 


DIVISION OF MADHYA PRADESH 


<———— NORTHERN MADHYA PRADESH 


MADHYA PRADESH 


SOUTHERN MADHYA PRADESH -——— > 


MAP No. 5 


DIVISION OF MAHARASHTRA 


wast” NAGPUR 


+ Warona 
£ 


YEOTMAL 


MAHARASHTRA 
ITS FOUR STATES 


PART VII 


STATISTICAL APPENDICES 


183 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


SIG LP + 
TEE TGS P 
+ 

6L9'F09 + 
08Z‘L?L‘6 
+ 


PLO‘OES + 
G88‘EZs + 
009‘803‘Z 
+ 


ZI8S‘9SL + 
L8ZÝSI + 
T86+ 


09€°S06‘0S 
+ 


(— əseəszoəp 
+ 9sBeroUl) 
s pue 
p suumnyoo 
uəəxMA3əq 
ƏouədszəJJIq 


T89°GS + 


GEZ ZLL Z + 
OZ8 ZSS + 


666'89I1'F + 


T99‘LZZ + 
IZS‘TOT + 


6Z8‘SZOʻT + 
SIL'GE9 + 


T99‘OLT + 
I96 + 


0S8°“298“6 + LZGLESGPS LLI‘GZG‘STS 


9 
C TS6T UI 
asap 
+ IS6I 
ur əseə3soSur) 
g pue 
+ suumIos 
uəəmşəq 
ə5SsuəzəjJr(Gq 


6ř0‘L03 89£'F8I I8S'I8S I 
LGL‘SLE‘9G Z6V'T109%Z PZ8°S6I‘8s T 
8IF'609'£  869'9S0'£ LL 199 8 q 
E6S SV IF TF69°9Z%8 198980 L 
SLOGPEST “¿IS TIT T T6Z‘ITSE'T Li 
9G9‘LZO'T S88‘9Z6 0GZ OST'T II 
OFS‘Z86CL TII0%6GS6TI TI9‘LOT‘PT SEI 
8896097 §18°EL16‘S Gs89‘OIL F L 
SLS‘OSL LI6‘6PS POG PSL OT 
orG‘9 T9g‘¢ GVS'9 A 


LES‘OSP‘998 GGG 
ç f g a 


(201M) UMOYS 


TE6T [uo stensunrq) I861 
ənsuo1 Axerprsqns pue 
-1əuqou T&6L onsuo}-1ey oul ueyods 
saoyeods saəs[eəds se sioyevods sosensurl 
JO “ON JO “ON JO “ON JO “ON 


Soljlmey o1stInsury Aq uorejpndod 


L XIGNUddV 


asensuel MN `F 


asensuel elypuy `e 
sosensurl] əl1erpəuudsəl1u `Z 


` SƏZENZULJ eplaeiq `T 
—sosensur] UBIPIARs M) 

,SOseNSUL] UsIVY put ULEN `g 

sosensur] əsəuruO-Te I, `Z 


səsensuvs[ uetuang-oləqt, `T 
—sosensuUv] əsəuruo-o3əqu, (ID) 
,Sosensurl epunyy `€ 
sosensury q9uru M-uo], ` 
sosensuv] uetsəuopu `T 
—sosensuey orzqsnv (1) 


vuliIng pue vrpu] jo edensue]—vVy 
I 


sdnois əSensucvr[ 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


184 


`(Trp8 LZ) səeSensSuws[ AreIpisqns [eurStaoqe pue pH Sepnpuyt 

‘royjoue ULU) 

4əu9ea Kfrwej əuo 0} popoe oq XTarey 3qouuso KAY) ey} SJUSUTE[O ƏSIƏATP YONS UILJUOI pue SOSeNSUL] ULIPUJ SNOLIBA WOJJ UMBIP IIVE s1oə[eIp SSO LI 
`sənruugje oraqsnv oAaey Aoyy əl[qeqoad 

st JI Mq “(098 apuopY Np səngun] “uəuooO pu JANIN) WL se W} S7291} TYSN[AZIg ‘[NJJQnop SI SeSENSUL| OM} SOY} JO UOTPCOTJISSV]O 3994105 AY Lx 


196 “81 + F69:'0Z + 90L‘6EE ZIL‘6LE 660‘ZSP OL ği ədomy Jo səSensue— o 


*BOLIJY pue səuqunoo 


66186 + 06706 + PSS‘ GOS P6S‘TIS 988‘SOS LI oTyeIsy 19440 Jo səSensuvr|—g 


'pegradsun pue 


GPL 16 + 698 + 16S p999 8198°6Z Í 2 pouinjyer you səsensurvr' 'p 
T8601 + I8S6'0I + 666‘SZ STOʻST 666‘97 9 4 spəqerp KsdiH 'g 
9L10'96 + 910°9 + 9L0°9% = 9L0°9% T Tyseysning ` 
FLT= VII+ 997 088 997 Z 7 Əsəueurepuv `I 
—səsšuensux[ pessejpun (A) 
VSE'GrPS'TE + SUS STT + S0FV669'89g% GsSgq99099'66%ç 606°01I9Z 6I ü səsensuL] ueLIy-opuJ 'g 
ST 98 + LI9'SIG + 986'CSS'‘T 61S ‘POET TEO'VSS'T G sesensuR] oIpred `Z 
6SV'GLY + T6L‘88S + 9970165 GLO‘T86'T VEL‘ LoS € ü sesensur] urut `T 
—sosensuv, uesdoiny-opuy (AD 


L 9 S Y £ G I 


*`pluo5—1 XIANAddV 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 185 
APPENDIX 2 
Area and Population of States of United States of America 
Name of State Area Population 
sq. miles Est. 1944 

1 2 3 
1. Alabama 51,609 2,818,083 
2. Arirona 113,909 638,412 
3. Arkansas 53,102 1,776,446 
4. California 158,693 8,746,989 
5. Colorado 104,247 1,147,269 
6. Connecticut 5,009 1,176,807 
7: Delaware 2,057 283,802 
8. Florida 58,560 3,367,217 
9. Georgia 58,876 3,223,727 
10 Idaho 83,557 531,573 
11. Illinois 56,400 7,729,720 
12. Indiana 36,291 3,419,707 
13. Jowa 56,280 2,269,759 
14. Kansas 82,276 1,774,447 
15. Kentucky 40,395 2,630,194 
16. Louisiana 48,523 2,535,385 
17. Maine 33,215 793,600 
18. Maryland 10,577 2,127,874 
19. Massachusetts 8,257 4,162,815 
20. Michigan 58,216 5,429,641 
21. Minnesota 84,008 2,508,663 
22. Mississippi 47,716 2,175,877 
23. Missouri 69,674 3,589,538 
24. Montana 147,138 464,999 
25. Nebraska 77,237 1,213,792 
26. Nevada 110,540 156,445 
27. New Hampshire 9,304 457,231 
28. New Jersey 7,836 4,167,840 
29. New Mexico 121,666 532,212 
30. New York 49,576 12,632,890 
31. North Caroline 52,712 3,534,545 
32. North Dakota 70,665 528,071 
33. Ohio 41,222 638,667 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


APPENDIX 2—contd. 


Name of State Area Population 
sq. miles Est. 1944 
1 2 3 
34. Oklahoma és x ss 69,919 2,064,679 
35. Oregon ss = = 96,981 1,214,226 
36. Pennsylvania Së Yë 45,332 9,247,088 
37. Rhode-Island s: N. m 1,214 778,972 
38. South Carolina $ A 31,055 1,923,354 
39. South Dakota ” = 77,047 558,629 
40. Tennessee š s sç 42,246 2,870,158 
41. Texas 6 sŠ a 267,339 6,876,248 
42. Utah s a af 84,916 606,994 
43. Vermont = s: s: 9,609 310,941 
44. Virginia bs ss 3 40,815 3,119,115 
45. Washington .. a A 68,192 2,055,378 
46. West Virginia z A 24,181 1,715,984 
47. Wisconsin “Š = ss 56,154 2,975,910 
48. Wyoming m D . 97,914 257,108 
APPENDIX 3 


The population of the Bombay City according to the Communities 
given in the Census of 1941 is as follows: 


Hindu i z z a2 1. 8,99,398 
Scheduled Castes u es X si 1,21,352 
Muslims .. .. .. .. .. 2,51,518 
Indian Christians a 7 x ss 1,22,683 
Anglo-Indians s: Fa es zë 8,787 
Parsees =š s 5 2Ë 1. 58,813 
Sikhs i - u bs 3 2,418 
Jains a z = ç a 33,281 
Buddhists w" w. Pe = sç 912 
Tribes š s 7 ee a 4,606 
Others s Š a i m s ë 29,847 

Total z 1,489,883 


The area of the Bombay City according to the Census of 1941 was 30 sq. miles. 


187 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


868 Té + GZL + 68 S 689°68 Z6L‘ST + 06L‘9F PIZ‘LS POV TE + ü uruooo 
OGP9I + PISS- 6I‘? 691901 880°99 + 606‘09 8E6'FOI 60“ + i. BTV MAO -roU ly 
6696 + 6L8S'T9 + TPZ S €46ʻTL 681“6V + ES6‘6F 6998°881T GI6'E8 + = @LOOUBABLY, 
Xouəsv 
960“ — VIVES + Z89987 8897S 9G0°8G + 989 %@V ZOT‘86S 99%°“S1I + BIpuy [8170909 
08091 — ¿G6UTOL + 90616 O89T8Z FLIOT + 9LT‘SOT LLO‘EES 10621 + ` Bporeg 
OOT + 98.99; + LZE‘69 89181 Scl‘SIl + LZPr69 E9T‘697 98L°68T + ` ea 
gg + 0980€ + 98/66 089608 90016 + 8EZSZI OOL‘OPS “Z9FSIS + ` ƏzosX]W 
`1e3əq pue 
0991 + OFT‘'Sh + I0990F 126`809 868761 + I90ZV F90'679 600°LZ + SƏUMOIq [817090 
x08Z‘STE 
+ FLO0'996 + +669‘L99 ZZ9G6EOT xEZOZLE + P6GTZG6GS TO6SSTT LOL'9I6G+ | Avquiog 
SSTG + IG66'FF + 6S0‘6T O€S‘SLG TSS + ¿GIS IZS LI9 486 + ` ewmg 
E98‘897 + SOVT6 — T8S°S89 LL LIST Z6TLZET'T PEF PSG OLS 9ZL‘T 98E6TLL+ 7 TesusÑq 
8,89“ — 98S‘L6 + G606:'9/ 199916 T Z9/'OFUI + 980'SL LVOTIST IIOTEZT + ` wessy 
ules 


YOM S38}S 
IO səSurA04d 


6 8 L 9 S Y e G jE 
SJUBISIUIQ, SJUBISIWWI sjuweasSrurq sjueaSrurtu[ — sso[ 10 syueqaSrurq SJULISTUWWUJ — sso| 10 94819 I0 ƏSurA01d 
TE-IZ6T UOYLULA IZ61 + ules 49N Te6T + 68 39N 


BIPU] UM UOTeASIW JO ƏumIoA IJL UI I661 WIM pəzeduro9 sy uonerreA 


epu Ul uonweasrurq puy uorsasSsruutu] [erourAoid-31a91u 


V6 XIANAddV 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


188 


‘popnpoxe 918 BIPUJ usmntuig ƏpIsmo səragunoo WOJJ PUL 0} SƏINFY UOLIBISIIN ‘VIOOUBABIT, pue uruooo əpnləoxə Koyj 
aIOYM “'SeIPEIN JO əseo oY} ut 3dəoxə WYJ O0) poayoeiye S978IQ SY) 107 əsouq1 əpn[our sooutaocad 107 sonst əu,.—Ə?oA7 


Aouesy sozeyg qelung səpn[ou[ ‘AOUOSY BIPUT usə3sƏAA səpn[ou, 
906961 — S6F⁄6L + 980°SS6‘T 989098 896‘L9G‘T — 081°99/' 89999: LOS'T6GT- ” esuo pue xeyIg 
LGOLGT + 9ST69 + P6L'66E'T ZSTU SF ZF9 16 —  TOPLOGT 80SF6F SEPTS9OT- ` səouraoaq POFUN 
68066 + E8Z0S + Z6L‘'VI6 609°961 E8SISTL— TEZISTI 26897 688989 — ü SeIpeEnN 
Z80'TS — 0.929 + S68°L9'8 PEZZřZ 099939 — ITS‘P98 EI6‘6ZE 8689I9 — ü vueyndley 
‘Kouao sy 

Aequog jsurese pəpn[oul S89°'6% S6L‘90T 068: 981 — sojejg BIPU] U19459 M 
Tes‘0g — = L89‘SIT + SGr’s9e LZILET 9Z8991-— Z09%88 PISTIS S8L‘6T — ü peqeIopsH 
GLS‘ILT + OFUSE + Zr6°08S S89T6S 0O0F6°09 + LI8‘ZOL SZ0S89 Z6L‘LO — ü qefung 
6Z0‘0T + GLE = 916 ‘ES T9S‘T9 98977 — SPP FG 68T‘T9 99288 — Jrurqsey pue nurure e 
961; + LOS‘8 — 970687 LS9‘68G Zg9 + 1698966 O0OS8'T9Z ILP PI — i JOI[eAO 
6LO‘E + 169 + ESTP 968'T L6GS — SIG L Sotz ZSL? — š WAIS 


Əsor'r YOAIYM SI8JS 
IO SƏJUMOId 


“STBQOOIN, 
986 + TFI — 918 9681 O0O80“I + 68g Sep SOL‘ET + pue suewepuy 
“OOUTAOL 
ISU 82 + LEGO — 09¢‘L9 G6E‘SIT S89°0S9 + T89‘06 S98 TIT L8TIS + IƏ1TJUOIA ISOM YHON 
61LF LI — 918 + VS 09 99T'99 Pee + C9L‘CP ZVG'99 =6LL‘ES + ü uejstyonIeg 
I88 + Ip + 0987 ses‘es  996'08 + T&S‘ 619%_ 88EG + n 31000 
6 8 L 9 g 2 € Z I 


‘PHUOI—VE XIANAddV 


189 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


"S9}B1S 04 
80 e 8G SVT IGG ELS pousisse Amp əmf Jo oreyg 
"S9}B1S 04 
e GI e sI 6T T'O 6G 06'9G GL'G6 LYI yo'0 60°6 pəusrsse Xv}-9UIODUT JO ITEY 
c) 
'`əmuəo oy} WoT SjUBIS 
9°GG T6L V8 9E G6 LIL 68°98 cvV9 LOG 60'6 pue ənuəAƏdz JO uor]n[oA9(T 
“(qou) 
ydoy ore syunooor [eyIdeo 
S'I GG 6'6 O'OT GG 60'8 YL'OI LOL EG L ggg YIM TOF SYIOM UOTVSTATT 
GG VG 80 60 TI 68 OT 86 r 69'0 IL'O 99°0 (you) $}s010,J 
gag! Lv Go LG I6 _ M = XEL sə[eS [Ie1zguə9p 
6'0 GT VI GT S'I I6`€ 68°C 60°T ITT LO I uomnsaslst8ə% 
TG 8'4 gag! VVI ELT OGEG OZGST €9°6 0801 VU OI sdureyg 
L'6 LATA OLT GSI 8'96 IS'HYV cre% 80°ET 69°ET LOST OSTOXO 97845 
OST 9ST T'6S LVS L67 06°69 IGOS OSG 96'953 80°66 ƏnuəAəq puer 
0'001 0'00T1 0'001 0'001 0'001 YO'9? L8'66I 8L'9L 98'7L 87'8G anuas?y [BIOL 
oT 6 8 L 9 q Y € G I 
Ca D CH D 
VG-ES6I SVP-HVG6GLI 68-88661 LE-9EGI GG-IG6IL PS-EGGI SV-HVGLI 6E-8EGT LEEGI ¿Gë IG6I 


(Jua? ted) ənuəAəz [E}0} ur əzeus 


(səədny Jo səzoz9) PPPA 


ənuəAəqw 91ue3S/[erourAoid 


y XIANHddV 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


190 


‘(Spun ƏAzəsə%] ənuəA9q% o1 pue 


98'68 O 23°02 (> TOZI ©) CZs G) sore © Woy i surpn[oxə) (—) %touəp 10 (+) snjding 
ZLS O) SUTI © Sro O 09'9 G) 67T G) i U ©) Pep JO (+) sntdans 
68007 PI TLE LS 668 OT'606 80°66 i ` ` əsxmairpuədx 
LT L9S 67 LSE 68 666 09 GIS LEVIG T ú i. u ƏnuəAəq 
TD TD 
GG-PS6T xVG-EG6L €S-GS6T 6S-TS6T TS-OS6T 


SALVLS .V, LHVd 


yUNODDY ənuəAəq] uo SIEIS əq JO UOTJISOg Are,oSpng 


S XIGNUddV 
‘pepnpour 
oie (Sosuodxe SUIYIOM SuUTJONpoep 194E) S4d19994 YoU SUTYeJLopuN əleS pUe səmntnrnn oI[Qnd szəugo 107 ‘sydtooer SSOIS 
woar əznyrpuədxə əaruə SuUTJONpep Joye Jou UYL} oe sgsəaoJj JOpuN sydreder ‘popnpoxe ore spunj WOJJ SIƏJSULIL 
‘S997849 O Weg XIS put g Weg “V Hed II 0} Ə1e[94 rG-eG6I 107 soans1y 


“TT MN pue purç Surpn[oxə səoutAoad Əuru 107 BIL GPH-PPEL PUL 6E-QEGT 107 səznmStq ‘Gy M'N pur purg ‘eurmng 103 
soy) əpn[5xə 1 E-9EGT 107 səxm3tuq `<equuog Jo yed se purg əpn[our 3nq ewang 10} ƏS04} ƏPNJOXƏ ZZ-IZGT I0} SƏNI 


‘917090 

8'6 Og GE L'O k 80°SP 99°6 LVG 0g'0 IEZI oY} Wo “979 “pre ur sjUBIH 
‘97819 0} pousiIsse sənnp 

ce sees saa sae ads P6'ST mee bees atte == ggioxe [eayUeg Jo əreuge 


OL 6 8 L 9 G y € 6 I 


`pluoo9—vy XIANAdAV 


191 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


`erpul POPIAIPUN 0} əge[91 Ch-FHET PUL GE-SEGT AOJ SOMFY BUMA 10} asoy} JO BAISN(IUI ere LE-9EGT PUL ZZ-IZGT 10J səxm8t4 


‘SWYS 110dsuUBI) peor pue APOLIQeTO “sJisəzoj ‘UOLS, “WNIAO epuN s3drəoəz you səpnlour NUA [BIO], y 


GO 30G TE GZOT “O 60 50 vo 7" ie 7 ~ Qou) sudxeaSə[Ə1, P ISO 


—sjuewyiedeq [eroz9urtuoo 

8S 666 8'6 GT'S 8'0I T88 6L veo k ni ` ANP BS 

86 009, VII VI9S GOT 998 VOL S&ét FE 08'S ` (Jeu) sərmp əsroxə [eaquəo 

L6 Or'se ZG ZZS OZ yoz .... .... *=..  s.... .. .. xBy uorgesodaIog 

9LT IS69 TPG 69°08 99T PLSI 88T ESIL VEG PLI “V Y Qəu) əmroour uo SƏXEL 

907 OOO09T GIT LL6E G87 ISO 99k IIS G6s T9TE ` ` (jeu) swojsN) 

OOT veres OOI OVTVES OOT O6¢68 OOIT SIS OOIT 0009 `” ~” „MUAY [BIOL 

Caw 

vS-ES6L SV-VV6L 66-8661 LE-9E6T GG-TG6T 


(SILVI PIPAS) sənuəAəq] I[ea3uəo 


L XIANHAddV 


‘AJUO SYJUOU XIS 10}V[ 10} O|QBJIBAB ore soJVUIT}SA pəstAƏ94 PUL SBIPEW JO 0784S oJISOdUIOD əy} 107 SOJBLWIIISA YOSpnq əpn[out PG-EGEI 107 sornsiy 4 


‘(spun eATesay ənuəAəw 07 pue 


68's ©) roe O bae G) LES G) SI (+) Wo stejsuesty Surpn[oxə) (—) Joep 10 (+) snjdang 
68'S (-) r9'g O PoE G) LT'9 G) GPT (+) = i “  (-) Wop 10 (+) sn[dznS 
G9'LZI c8'SII 88'S01 eq'001 e6'I9 = š = “o əmyppuədxy 
9L'IZI IZ'ZII ZIT'SOT 0L'901 ee &6 j: ° j ü anusady 
CAD CTA 

GG-FG61 FG-6S61 €S-GS6L GG-TS6L TS-OS6T 


(səədny jo sə1zo1O) 


SALVLS 4, LYVd 
yUNODDY ənuəAəq] uo SEIS əq Jo uonrsodq Are,oSpng 


9 XIANAHddV 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


192 


9'0 80 I S+ 87 86 j 8 91 6g LG OTT indseyig 
“Spue[sy 
ë 9 8 e 9 8 ZI IZ ve TeQOoIN 2 uewepuy 
Ip 67 06 ZST 861 088 c'o co I 61 org 689 7 owly 
cs Tg 99T Poor S968 LET'S 996 96 G98'T Z904 90L°9 89L‘ET essuo 
SI8 686 FSLI TZET F9SI 9887 PLT £037 LLE 119 8907 9894 wessy 
188 SZ TIS 8ZřS (65 OZ6OIT TL9T 689'T OT8 € 086 S986 SF6°6I IBN % “TD 
6L,8% OPES 61 OTOTI ZSZTI 9560 602 SEIS PER  OZZSIT GZE'sl 9FG‘9E rey 
LO O88'S LEVY ESS0'S GEIS 687? LBP 07G 9860 T PPr8G 8989 L69ZI qefung 4sey 
LIIT? PLSP 6699 ¿SISI TIIF'SI SZ6%8 8089 B8ZI'9 IS6'TI F089Z ZFS'66 OPE‘OG səoutAoad pəlrun 
gg TIOS PPS'G OPO'G O9T'9 90TI %¿9T LPS‘T 06%  S8000I PESTI LES‘TS [esueg 459M 
SITI ISI 973Z TIOOL 089ʻOT IG9'06 99ZT  LIZT 929°C 006TI P8I'ST P8E6Z Lequog 
L86‘T 686I LZ6‘€ 0891 99FI G60°GE 8807 907 ZSI  OPOSZ 00877 IF8°6F SeIpenwN 
GI II OL 6 8 yg 9 G y € G T 
Solemoyy Sole] SUOS10q sə[curə T Sole] SUOSIOg So[euoy Sole SUOSIOg sə[ctuə T Sole] suosiəq 
siSu1O Sojsey pəmpəuəs uonserndoq 
surr[sn]AT snpuIH 


8 XIANHddV 


səmnrunurtuoo Aq uorun ULIPpUJ əy} JO uorgejndo 
nr Ə Aq run rpul 94} J eT d 


193 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


LZZ 893 GS 0897 Z0LZ Z8ZS Z89 SZL SOPI 999 89 6ZEL ƏI0SÁW 
97T  LZ9T PLOS GSE 69€ 69 gq I9 SII  Z68T OSIS 60 1ruysey 
LITOT  O080T ¿60% LOS 8089 Z8gOT ZřřI LEVI 8Z6Z Z66L ke 9 6EE‘9T peqeIop4H 
895 OLS SPS TIL6T TE6T 2068 897 696 LEG IS Gp E6P'L UIYDOD) sLooUBABL], 
955 06 9S7 988T ZO0FT LELZ OZI ZI Sy LYLTI 608T 999g BIIYsSBINEG 
s69 99  99ZT Z897 96I'G 8L86 LIZ‘9 8989 G80‘ST ueyyseley 
9IP es? 668 S77 089 96 ZOT GILT PIZ ¿ASST 898T P ZTE AS dad 
VSS TGs GL? LLES 9SV9% SOS OIG 166 LEV LOVE PELE TFTA qereyg esypeyy 
97 67 96 L6S‘T SSPT T987 ¿61 GOS 668 OSLT G6IS‘T 699g ysopeig LAPUA 
LG 99 PZI 8ST SLT 988 9 9 ZI IT GLE BIS emdi, 
GT SI og 9ST 9 08 €97 676 ZIS ndrue W 
eT 9T 67 918 998 GLI 60T OZI 626 I Sk G86 ysoperg [eyoeuly 
SEI 9L1T GOS ZC 696 SPP eg 69 EZI 88 989 8I6 pea 
09 LS LIT PDT Get 62g 0g 61 68 39 GE IOS yng 
9 6 TI 67 9G GOT II ST 9% 9L Z6 691 31000 
IS 68 OTT G6T SIZ OT? 16 96 L8T GLE OI 98, Iedoug 
GI LL OL 6 8 L 9 q Y € G T 


'‘prłuoo—8 XIANAddV 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
APPENDIX 9 
Statistics of Chief Castes 
Caste Strength Where chiefly found 
Agri ee 265,285 Bombay. 
Ahar, Ahir, Gopi, Goshi, Goala, 14,170,032 Most Provinces. 
Golla, Gowari, Gaura, 
Kavundan Idaiyan. 
Ahom 3 249,434 Assam 
Arain, Kunjra, Koeri, Kachhi, 5,048,849 Most Provinces. 
Murao. 
Arora, Bhansali, Lohana .. 1,499,407 Baluchistan, Bombay, N.W.F.P. 
Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, 
W. I. States. 

Babhan, Bhuinhar 1,113,541 Bihar and Orissa, U.P.C.P. 

Baidya D 9 110,739 Bengal. 

Baiga, Bhaina, Binjwar, Bharia, 1,050,760 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, C.P., 
Kadar, Bhumia, Bhunjia, C.I., Rajputana, Sikkim. 
Bhuiya,Ghatwar,Naiya, Pao. 

Bairagi 838,285 Most Provinces. 

Baloch 1,333,215 Baluchistan, Bombay, Punjab, 

N.W.F.P. 

Baniya, Bhatia, Chetti, Khatri, 5,176,383 Most Provinces. 
Kamati (Vaishya). 

Banjara, Lumbadi, Labana, 951,022 Bombay, C.P., C.I., Gwalior- 
Lamani. Hyderabad, Mysore, Raj 

putana. 

Baria, Bhalia, Chodhra, 3,418,643 Most Provinces. 

Gedia, Khant, Koli, Kotwal, 
Naikda, Patclia, Patanwadia, 
Thakarda, Talabda, Valvi. 
Bauri, Bagdi .. 1,671,481 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
Rajputana. 
Bawaria, Bavuri, Baori, Bagari, 309,720 Most Provinces. 
Vagri, Badhik. 

Bayar, Barmanu, Dhangar, 811,746 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, U.P., 
Musahar. Central India. 

Bedar, Boya 991,536 Bombay, Madras, Hyderabad, 


C. P. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 195 


APPENDIX 9—contd. 


Caste Strength Where chiefly found 
Bhandari. Idiga, Iruvan, 1,253,403 Bihar and Orissa, Cochin, 
Siyal Mysore, Madras, Travancore, 
Rajputana, Baroda. 
Bhangi 797,599 Ajmer-Merwara, Bombay, U.P., 
Baroda, Gwalior, Rajputana, 
W. I. States. 
Bharwad, Dhangar, 1,816,283 Most Provinces. 
Gadariya Kuruba. 
Bhat, Barhmabhatt, 397,274 Most Provinces. 
Charan Jasondhi. 
Bhatra, Pardhana, Parja 353,183 Madras, C.P. and Berar. 
Bhil, Barela Bhilala. 1,454,144 Most Provinces. 
Dhanka, Mankar, 
Mavchi, Pathia, 
Rathia, Tadvi. 
Bhisti, Bhoi, Dhimar, 3,575,941 Most Provinces. 
Jhinwar, Kahar, 
Machhi, Tiyar. 
Bohra 212,752 Bombay, Baroda, C.I.,Gwalior, 
C.P., Rajputana, W.I. States 
Travancore. 
Brahman 15,207,277 Most Provinces. 
Brahui 224,415 Baluchistan, Bombay. 
Chamar, Khalpa, Samagara 12,195,516 Most Provinces. 
Chasa, Raju 835,236 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 
Chasi, Kajbartta (Mahisya) 2,381,266 Bengal. 
Chuhra 721,981 N.W.F. Prov. Punjab, Delhi. 
Dhanuk, Kandra 758,671 Bihar and Orissa, Bengal, 
C.P., C.I., Ajmer-Merwara, 
Rajputana, Delhi, Gwalior. 
Dhobi, Parit, Vanran, 3,161,428 Most Provinces. 
Velutte-dan. 
Dom, Dombar, Bansphor 907,776 Most Provinces. 
Dharkar, Dholi. 
Dhor, Chakkliyan 671,926 Bombay, C.P., Madras, Cochin, 
Travancore, W.I. States. 
Dusadh 1,400,878 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, U.P. 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


APPENDIX 9—conid. 


Caste Strength Where chiefly found 

Fakir 820,577 Punjab, U.P., C.P., Rajputana 

C.I., Agency Gwalior. 

Garo, Hajong, Kachari, Mech, 695,648 Assam, Bengal. 

Rabha. 

Gond, Dhanwar, Kalota, 4,719,222 Andamans and Nicobars, 
Kamar, Karwar, Kolam, Bengal, Bihar and 
Kondh, Konda, Dora, Koya, Orissa, Bombay, C.P., 
Maria, Muria Nagarchi. and Berar, Madras, U.P. 

C.I. Hyderabad, Gwalior, 
Rajputana. 
Gujar 2,430,669 Ajmer-Merwara, Bombay, 
C.P. and Berar, Delhi, 
N.W. Frontier, Punjab, 
U.P., C.I., Rajputana. 
Guria, Halwai 246,583 Bihar and Orissa, U.P., C.I., 
Rajaputana, Gwalior. 
Hajjam, Ambattan, Bhandari, 3,725,860 Most Provinces. 
Kelashi, Mhali, Nadig, 
Nai “Naibrahman”, Napit, 
Nhavi, Pandithar, Vellakat- 
talavan. 
Hari 418,830 Assam, Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa Madras. 
Jat 8,377,819 N.W. Frontier, Punjab, U.P. 
Kashmir, Rajputana. 
Jogi 111,586 Gwalior, C.I., Agency, 
Rajputana, Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
Kaikolan 419,078 Madras, Cochin, Travancore. 
Kalar 1,017,179 Ajmer-Merwara, Bengal, 
C.P. and Berar, U.P., 
Baroda, C.I., Gwalior, 
Hyderabad, Rajputana, 
Sikkim. 
Kallavan, Maravan 2 948,630 Madras, Cochin, Travancore. 
Kamalan, “Viswabrahman”, 7,735,393 Most Provinces. 
Panchal. 
Karen 5 1,367,673 Burma. 
Kayastha, Karan, Prabhu 2,946,228 Most Provinces. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 197 
APPENDIX 9—contd. 
Caste Strength Where chiefly found 
Kewat, Kaibartta 1,813,278 Assam, Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa, C.P. and Berar, U.P. 
Kolita 109,250 Bihar and Orissa, C.P. and 
Berar. 
Koshti, Devang 921,201 Bengal, Bombay, C. P. and 
Berar, Madras, C.l., 
Hyderabad, Mysore, Gwalior, 
Cochin. 
Khandayat, Paik 1,060,587 Bihar and Orissa, Bengal, 
Madras. 
Kisan 431,044 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, U.P. 
Khasi, Synteng 232,595 Assam, Andamans and Nico- 
bars. 
Khatik, Chick 412,520 U.P., C.P., Bengal, Delhi, 
Ajmer-Merwara, Baluchistan 
Hyderabad, Rajputana 
Gwalior. 
Kori, Katia, Balai, Chaupal, 2,165,953 Most Provinces. 
Jugi. 
Korku, Korwa 246,765 Bihar and Orissa, C.P., C.I., U.P. 
Kumhar, Kusavan 3,080,143 Most Provinces. 
Kunbi, Karbi, Kurmi, 11,082,108 Most Provinces. 
Kshatriya, Kapu, Kapewar, 
Raddi, Vakkaliga, Vellala. 
Labbai 374,829 Coorg, Madras, Mysore, 
Travancore. 
Lodhi 1,742,470 C.P. and Berar, U.P., C.l., 
Bengal, Delhi, Rajputana, 
Hyderabad, Gwalior. 
Lushei, Sokte, Thado 192,520 Assam, Bengal, Burma. 
Mahar, Mehra, Dhed, Vankar, 4,729,405 Most Provinces. 
Holiya, Pulayan, Cheruman. 
Mala z 852,050 C.P. and Berar, Madras. 
Mali, Phulmali, Saini, 2,332,143 Most Provinces. 


Malakar 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


APPENDIX 9—conid. 


Caste Strength Where chiefly found 

Mallah, Goriya, Gonrhi 894,951 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
U.P., N.W. Frontier, C.I., 
Gwalior, Rajputana, 

Mang, Megh, Meghwal, Madgi, 2,556,765 Most Provinces. 

Madiga. 

Mapilla 139,621 Travancore, Cochin, Coorg, 
Burma. 

Maratha 6,113,061 Bombay, C.P. and Berar, 
Gwalior, Hyderabad, 
Baroda, Mysore, C.I. 

Meithei 330,545 Assam, Burma. 

Mina, Meo 1,110,479 Most Provinces. 

Mirasi 283,637 Punjab, N.W. Frontier, Raj- 

putana, Ajmer-Merwara, 
Jammu and Kashmir, C.I., 
Gwalior. 

Mochi, Jingar, Dabgar 1,026,405 Most Provinces. 

Momin 3,122,100 Most Provinces. 

Munda, Mawasi, Ho, Kol, 2,315,276 Bihar and Orissa, Bengal, 
Kharwar, Kharia, Bhogia, C.P. and Berar, C.I., U.P., 
Bhumji, Kora. Rajputana. 

Naga 272,529 Assam, Burma, Gwalior. 

Namasudra 2,265,476 Assam, Bengal. 

Nayar 1,550,641 Madras, Travancore, Cochin. 

Nepali 371,906 Most Provinces. 

Nuniya, Od, Beldar, Bind, 561,926 Most Provinces. 

Rehgar. 
Oraon 1,021,334 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
C.P. and Berar. 

Pallan 825,224 Madras. 

Pan, Panka, Ganda, Paidi, 1,241,822 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
Baraik. C.P. and Berar, Madras, 

C 
Paraiyan, Turi 1,277,865 Madras, Bombay, Baroda, 


Cochin, W.I. States, Coorg. 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


199 


APPENDIX 9—concld. 


Caste Strength Where chiefly found 
Pasi, Arakh 1,743,166 Bihar and Orissa, U.P., 
Bengal, C. I. 
Oinjara, Sarahira, Dhunia 565,254 U. P., Bombay, Rajputana 
Gwalior, N.W. Frontier, 
Punjab, C.I., Mysore, 
W.I. States, Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
Rajbhar, Rajjhar, Rajwar Bhar. 630,708 U. P., Bihar and Orissa, 
Bengal, C.P. and Berar. 
Rajput 10,743,001 Most Provinces. 
Santal, Saunta, Karmali 2,524,472 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
C.I: 
Saun 480,131 U.P., C.I. 
Sawara, Saonr, Savar, Saharia 675,628 Bihar and Orissa, C.P., 
Madras, U. P., C. IL., 
Rajputana, Gwalior. 
Shaha, Sunri 533,825 Bengal, Madras, Sikkim. 
Shan 900,204 Burma. 
Silpkar 333,036 U.P. 
Singpho, Kachin 156,253 Burma, Assam. 
Talavla, Dubla 229,190 Bombay, Baroda, W.I. States. 
Tamboli, Barai 452,423 Bengal, U.P., C.I., Rajputana, 
Gwalior, Baroda. 
Tankkshatriya 926,274 Most Provinces. 
Tanti, Tatwa, Bhulia, Chadar, 1,132,563 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, 
Sali. Bombay, C.P. and Berar. 
Telaga 1,669,559 C.I. 
Teli, Til, Chakkan, Ganig, 5,024,496 Madras, Hyderabad, Coorg. 
Chanchi, Vaniyan. 
Thakkar, Rathi, Rawat, Kanet, 714,503 Bombay, Punjab, C.I., 
Ghirath. Gwalior, Jammu and 


Kashmir, Rajputana. 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


200 


I I IG PYS ZETT TEZ‘8 TS61 

T I 9L ggs Gs80'T P878 IZ6T ess pus reylg 
I Z g 98 GOT €9 L8V‘G POSEY TS61 
Z 8 Ig ISI LS 66£‘9 Loeb  TZ6IT [esueg 
v I ISI PLIT T T VPLS v68 T&6T 
v ZST 6ST y TEL‘ 026 1261 uessruonreg 
I 8 8 GES GZS LT 961‘ OGL‘ I861I 

G I 891 611 LT 9687 vers  TZ6T wessy 
TS 06 967 6LE‘E 886 08%“ 989“ I861 
III PPI 989 L88‘S 616 GTST 8LZ‘€  IZ6I sreqoortN pue suewepuy 
9 87E 9 VoL LG vEL'T GGL‘ I861 
g ZLE 7 ZII 96 gç0 99%.  TZ6T BIBMIOTN, Joy 
GS LT SIT VI EIZ 897 697Z 8799 I86I 
G ST 96 EZI 087 GOP LOV‘S 999  IZ6T SUMOJ 
oz 98 VoL 6LT 987 898 91% y698°9 I861 
G LE SOT OST 608 998 PLIZ 9989 IZ6T epu 
OT 6 8 L 9 e v g z I 

syo ure yag  uensmyg equ,  ystyppng wsoy npuH 18A “079 BOUTAOI 


ISGI PUD IZGI ‘saipig ay. U1 pump SaIUINOLF ay) ul @%1pu U1 suossad 000 “0] Jo uo1syay Kq uo1mqi41s1GT 


sənrunuurtuoo 1VuədaəJJtq JO uore[ndod 2AP 


OI XIANAHddV 


201 


THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES 


`səp2urAoad WOI] popnpoxe oie $9784}Y [[B ASTMIOYIO ‘seins IZGI ƏY} ut pəpn[our ore S978IS ISeU3 BY) uressv JO ƏSVI ay} UT 


‘pouInjor ƏIƏM IB JB əuou VY} sənveorpur 0 É |BUOLJIBAJ st QOO‘OT ted səquimu əy} ey} sə1eorpur usq YAN 


G TOT TPT LOS 918 ZI LVE'T TLL‘L I861 
Z XOT 981 osz GIP ZI eVEe'T SPL‘L TZ61 $oye1g 
FI OT GV = srt Orr's TS61 
I GT € V7 Sart 60¢°8 IZ61 SOOUTAOIY POUN 
69T SI 66⁄T 9LI Z GG9'G P897 T861 
LI 601‘T 6ST I gegga IST‘e IZ61 qefung 
GLI IS V8T6 068 I86I 
GSI L? Z916 999 IZ6I `A N 
L 088 GL LOL T888 I861 
9 ZZE LST TLO 7988 IZ6I Serpe 
6 v8 TOT LIS = T ESZE S879 I861 
I 96 LG ELS v06‘S 6999 IZ6I pea 
Z G 01 lags) 686'8 T861 
ZI 161 S9Z'I I G6L 88, IZ6T 31009 
I oS 8 e£ ZLS OP T09‘8 T861 
I 67 I 08 O9T‘T GOP POE'S IZ6I gesog pue ‘d'O 
SOT T ve 935 aa 08t°8 668 068 T861 
ZI I p 961 pes 90¢‘8 088 898 TZ6T euang 
67 Z6 OT GPL 68 I 680“ S09“, I861 
IS III y LET v9 T PLOT 8g9L IZ6I Avquiog 
OL 6 8 p 9 g i € Z I 


‘PHU0I—OT XIANAddV 


PART III 


ON HERO AND 
HERO-WORSHIP 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 


Address delivered on the 101st Birthday Celebration 
of 
MAHADEO GOVIND RANADE 
held on 
the 18th January 1943 
in 


the Gokhale Memorial Hall, Poona 


First Published : 1943 
Reprinted from the first edition of 1943 


hy disk kanst 
st apla yer 
w: eune PL tor 
bb i 3 Qe Selar Kan 6. dary mala 


NANA a dott 
+ unhe lane N sas 


Dak Kaka kare aut ¿n 


don AIT la sac Rape 
9 ) dak x > 


Facsimile of Dr. Ambedkar's handwriting from a letter addressed to 
Prof. M. B. Chitnis 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 


PREFACE 


The Deccan Sabha of Poona invited me to deliver an address 
on the 101st birthday of the late Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade 
which it proposed to celebrate and which fell on the 18th January 
1940. I was not very willing to accept the invitation. For I knew 
that my views on social and political problems, a discussion of which 
could not be avoided in a discourse on Ranade, would not be very 
pleasing to the audience and even perhaps to the members of the 
Deccan Sabha. In the end I accepted their invitation. At the time 
when I delivered the address I had no intention of publishing it. 
Addresses delivered on anniversaries of great men are generally 
occasional pieces. They do not have much permanent value. I did 
not think that my address was an exception to this. But I have 
some troublesome friends who have been keen on seeing the whole 
of it in print and have been insisting upon it. I am indifferent 
to the idea. I am quite content with the publicity it has received 
and I have no desire to seek more. At the same time if there are 
people who think that it is worthy of being rescued from falling 
into oblivion, I do not see any reason for disappointing them. 


The address as printed differs from the address as delivered in 
two respects. Section X of the address was omitted from the address 
as delivered to prevent the performance going beyond reasonable 
time. Even without it, it took one hour and a half to deliver the 
address. This is one difference. The other difference lies in the 
omission of a large portion of Section VIII which was devoted to 
a comparison of Ranade with Phule. For the omission there are 


208 PREFACE 


two reasons. In the first place, the comparison was not sufficiently 
full and detailed to do justice to the two men; in the second 
place, when the difficulties of finding enough paper compelled me 
to sacrifice some portion of the address this appeared to be best 
offering. 


The publication of the address is taking place under peculiar 
circumstances. Ordinarily reviews follow publication. In this case 
the situation is reversed. What is worse is that the reviews have 
condemned the address in scathing terms. This is a matter primarily 
for the publishers to worry about. I am happy that the publisher 
knows the risk and he takes it. Nothing more need be said about 
1t except that it supports the view taken by my friends that the 
address contains matter which is of more than ephemeral value. As 
for myself I am not in the least perturbed by the condemnation of 
this address by the Press. What is the ground for its condemnation ? 
And who has come forward to condemn 1t ? 


I am condemned because I criticized Mr. Gandhi and 
Mr. Jinnah for the mess they have made of Indian politics, and 
that in doing so I am alleged to have shown towards them hatred 
and disrespect. In reply to this charge what I have to say is that 
I have been a critic and I must continue to be such. It may be 
I am making mistakes but I have always felt that it is better to 
make mistakes than to accept guidance and direction from others 
or to sit silent and allow things to deteriorate. Those who have 
accused me of having been actuated by feelings of hatred forget 
two things. In the first place this alleged hatred is not born of 
anything that can be called personal. If I am against them it is 
because I want a settlement. I want a settlement of some sort 
and I am not prepared to wait for an ideal settlement. Nor can 
I tolerate anyone on whose will and consent settlement depends 
to stand on dignity and play the Grand Moghul. In the second 
place, no one can hope to make any effective mark upon his time 
and bring the aid that is worth bringing to great principles and 
struggling causes if he is not strong in his love and his hatred. 
I hate injustice, tyranny, pompousness and humbug, and my 
hatred embraces all those who are guilty of them. I want to tell 
my critics that I regard my feelings of hatred as a real force. 
They are only the reflex of the love I bear for the causes I believe 


PREFACE 209 


in and I am in no wise ashamed of it. For these reasons I tender no 
apology for my criticism of Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah, the two men 
who have brought India’s political progress to a standstill. 


The condemnation is by the Congress Press. I know the Congress 
Press well. I attach no value to its criticism. It has never refuted 
my arguments. It knows only to criticise, rebuke and revile me for 
everything I do and to misreport, misrepresent and pervert every- 
thing I say. Nothing, that I do, pleases the Congress Press. This 
animosity of the Congress Press towards me can to my mind not 
unfairly, be explained as a reflex of the hatred of the Hindus for 
the Untouchables. That their animosity has become personal is clear 
from the fact that the Congress Press feels offended for my having 
criticised Mr. Jinnah who has been the butt and the target of the 
Congress for the last several years. 


However strong and however filthy be the abuses which the 
Congress Press chooses to shower on me I must do my duty. I am 
no worshipper of idols. I believe in breaking them. I insist that if 
I hate Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah—TI dislike them, I do not hate 
them—it is because I love India more. That is the true faith of a 
nationalist. I have hopes that my countrymen, will some day learn 
that the country is greater than the men, that the worship of Mr. 
Gandhi or Mr. Jinnah and service to India are two very different 
things and may even be contradictory of each other. 


22 Prithviraj Road B. R. AMBEDKAR 
New Delhi 
15th March 1943 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 


I 


I must tell you that I am not very happy over this invitation. My fear is 
that I may not be able to do justice to the occasion. When a year ago the 
Centenary of Ranade's Birthday was celebrated in Bombay, the Rt. Hon'ble 
Srinivas Shastri was chosen to speak. For very many reasons he was 
well-qualified for performing the duty. He can claim to be a contemporary 
of Ranade for a part of his life. He had seen him at close range and was 
an eye witness of the work to which Ranade devoted his life. He had 
opportunity to judge him and compare him with his co-workers. He could 
therefore expound his views about Ranade with a sense of confidence 
and with intimacy born out of personal touch. He could cite an anecdote 
and illuminate the figure of Ranade before his audience. None of these 
qualifications are available to me. My connection with Ranade is of the 
thinnest. I had not even seen him. There are only two incidents about 
Ranade which I can recall. First relates to his death. I was a student in 
the first standard in the Satara High School. On the 16th January 1901 
the High School was closed and we boys had a holiday. We asked why it 
was closed and we were told that because Ranade was dead. I was then 
about 9 years old. I knew nothing about Ranade, who he was, what he 
had done; like other boys I was happy over the holiday and did not care 
to know who died. The second incident which reminds me of Ranade is 
dated much later than the first. Once I was examining some bundles of 
old papers belonging to my father when I found in them a paper which 
purported to be a petition sent by the Commissioned and non-Commissioned 
officers of the Mahar Community to the Government of India against 
the orders issued in 1892 banning the recruitment of the Mahars in the 
Army. On inquiry I was told that this was a copy of a petition which was 
drafted by Ranade to help the aggrieved Mahars to obtain redress. Beyond 
these two incidents I have nothing to recall of Ranade. My knowledge 
about him is wholly impersonal. It is derived from what I have read about 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


his work and what others have said about him. You must not expect me 
to say anything of a personal character which will either interest, you or 
instruct you. I propose to say what I think of him as a public-man in his 
days and his place in Indian politics today. 


II 


As you are well aware, there are friends of Ranade who do not hesitate 
to describe him as a great man and there are others who with equal 
insistance deny him that place. Where does the truth lie? But this question 
must, I think, wait upon another, namely, is history the biography of great 
men? The question is both relevant as well as important. For, if great 
men were not the makers of history, there is no reason why we should 
take more notice of them than we do of cinema stars. Views differ. There 
are those who assert that however great a man may be, he is a creature of 
Time—Time called him forth, Time did everything, he did nothing. Those 
who hold this view, in my judgment, wrongly interpret history. There have 
been three different views on the causes of historical changes. We have 
had the Augustinian theory of history, according to which history is only 
an unfolding of a divine plan in which mankind is to continue through war 
and suffering until that divine plan is completed at the day of judgment. 
There is the view of Buckle who held that history was made by Geography 
and Physics. Karl Marx propounded a third view. According to him history 
was the result of economic forces. None of these three would admit that 
history is the biography of great men. Indeed they deny man any place in 
the making of history. No one except theologians accepts the Augustinian 
theory of history. As to Buckle and Marx, while there is truth in what they 
say, their views do not represent the whole truth. They are quite wrong 
in holding that impersonal forces are everything and that man is no factor 
in the making of history. That impersonal forces are a determining factor 
cannot be denied. But that the effect of impersonal forces depends on man 
must also be admitted. Flint may not exist everywhere. But where it does 
exist, 1t needs man to strike flint against flint to make fire. Seeds may not 
be found everywhere. But where they do exist, it needs man to ground it 
to powder and make it a delectable and nutritious paste and thereby lay 
the foundation of agriculture. There are many areas devoid of metals. But 
where they do exist, it needs a man to make instruments and machines 
which are the basis of civilization and culture. 


Take the case of social forces. Various tragic situations arise. One such 
situation is of the type described by Thayer in his biography of Theodore 
Roosevelt when he says : 


“There comes a time in every sect, party or institution when it stops 
growing, its arteries harden, its young men see no visions, its old men 
dream no dreams; it lives on the past and desperately tries to perpetuate 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 213 


the past. In politics when this process of petrifaction is reached we call it 
Bourbonism and the sure sign of the Bourbon is that, being unconscious that 
he is the victim of sclerosis, he sees no reason for seeking a cure. Unable to 
adjust himself to changed and new conditions he falls back into the past as an 
old man drops into his worm-out arm-chair.” 


The other kind of situation is not one of decay but of destruction. The 
possibilities of it are always present whenever there is a crisis. The old 
ways, old habits and old thoughts fail to lift society and lead it on. Unless 
new ones are found there is no possibility of survival. No society has a 
smooth sailing. There are periods of decay and possibilities of destruction 
through which every society has to pass. Some survive, some are destroyed, 
and some undergo stagnation and decay. Why does this happen? What is 
the reason that some survive? Carlyle has furnished an answer. He puts 
in his characteristic way: 


“No time need have gone to ruin, could it have found a great enough, a man 
wise and good enough; Wisdom to discern truly what the Time wanted, valour 
to lead it on to the right road thither, these are the salvation of any Time.” 


This seems to me to be quite a conclusive answer to those who deny man 
any place in the making of history. The crisis can be met by the discovery 
of a new way. Where there is no new way found, society goes under. Time 
may suggest possible new ways. But to step on the right one is not the work 
of Time. It is the work of man. Man therefore is a factor in the making of 
history and that environmental forces whether impersonal or social if they 
are the first are not the last things. 


HI 


Who can be called a great man? If asked of military heroes such as 
Alexander, Attila, Caesar and Tamerlane, the question is not difficult to 
answer. The militarymen make epochs and effect vast transitions. They 
appal and dazzle their contemporaries by their resounding victories. They 
become great without waiting to be called great. As the lion is among the 
deer, so they are among men. But it is equally true that their permanent 
effect on the history of mankind is very small. Their conquests shrink, and 
even so great a General as Napoleon after all his conquests left France 
smaller than he found it. When viewed from a distance they are seen to 
be only periodical, if necessary, incidents in the world’s movement, leaving 
no permanent mark on the character of the society in which they live The 
details of their career and their moral may be interesting, but they do not 
affect society and form no leaven to transform or temper the whole. 


The answer becomes difficult when the question is asked about a person 
who is not a military general. For, it then becomes a question of tests, and 
different people have different tests. 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Carlyle the apostle of Hero Worship had a test of his own. He laid it 
down in the following terms : 


“But of great man especially, of him I will venture to assert that it is 
incredible he should have been other than true. It seems to me the primary 
foundation of him, this... No man adequate to do anything, but is first of all 
in right earnest about it; what I call a sincere man. I should say sincerity, 
a deep, great genuine sincerity, is the first characteristic of all men in any 
way heroic.” 


Carlyle was of course particular in defining his test of sincerity in 
precise terms, and in doing so he warned his readers by defining what 
his idea of sincerity was— 


“Not the sincerity that calls itself sincere : Ah no,” he said, “that is a 
very poor matter indeed ; — a shallow, braggart, conscious sincerity ; oftenest 
self-conceit mainly. The great man’s sincerity is of the kind he cannot speak 
of, is not conscious of : Nay, I suppose, he is conscious rather of insincerity ; 
for what man can walk accurately by the law of truth for one day ? No, the 
great man does not boast himself sincere, far from that; perhaps does not 
ask himself if he is so : I would say rather, his sincerity does not depend 
on himself; he cannot help being sincere!” 


Lord Rosebery proposed another test when dealing with Napoleon—who 
was as great an Administrator as a General. In answering the question, 
Was Napoleon Great ? Rosebery used the following language : 


“If by ‘great’? be intended the combination of moral qualities with those of 
intellect, great be certainly was not. But that he was great in the sense of 
being extraordinary and supreme we can have no doubt. If greatness stands 
for natural power, for predominance, for something human beyond humanity, 
then Napoleon was assuredly great. Besides that indefinable spark which 
we call genius, he represents a combination of intellect and energy which 
has never perhaps been equalled, never certainly surpassed.” 


There is a third test, suggested by the philosophers or, to be more 
accurate, by those who believe in divine guidance of human affairs. They 
have a different conception of what is a great man. To summarise the 
summary of their view, as given by Rosebery, a great man is launched 
into the world, as a great natural or supernatural force, as a scourge 
and a scavenger boon to cleanse society and lead it on to the right path 
who is engaged in a vast operation, partly positive, mainly negative, but 
all relating to social regeneration. 


Which of these is the true test ? In my judgment all are partial and none 
is complete. Sincerity must be the test of a great man. Clemenceau once said 
that most statesmen are rogues. Statesmen are not necessarily great men, 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 215 


and obviously those on whose experience he founded his opinion must have 
been those wanting in sincerity. Nonetheless no one can accept that sincerity 
is the primary or the sole test. For sincerity is not enough. A great man 
must have sincerity. For it is the sum of all moral qualities without which 
no man can be called great. But there must be something more than mere 
sincerity in a man to make him great. A man may be sincere and yet he 
may be a fool, and a fool is the very antithesis of a great man. À man is 
great because he finds a way to save society in its hours of crisis. But what 
can help him to find the way ? He can do so only with the help of intellect. 
Intellect is the light. Nothing else can be of any avail. It is quite obvious 
that without the combination of sincerity and intellect no man can be great. 
Is this enough to constitute a great man? At this stage we, must, I think, 
make a distinction between an eminent individual and a great man. For I 
am certain that a great man is something very different from an eminent 
individual. Sincerity and intellect are enough to mark out an individual as 
being eminent as compared to his fellows. But they arc not enough to rake 
him to the dignity of a great man. A great man must have something more 
than what a merely eminent individual has. What must be that thing ? Here 
comes the importance of the philosopher's definition of a great man. A great 
man must be motivated by the dynamics of a social purpose and must act 
as the scourge and the scavenger of society. These axe the elements which 
distinguish an ominent individual from a great man and constitute his title- 
deeds to respect and reverence. 


IV 


Was Ranade a great man ? He was of course great in his person. Vast in 
physique—he could have been called “Your Immense” as the Irish servant 
who could not pronounce Your Eminence used respectfully to call Cardinal 
Wiseman—his master. He was a man of sanguine temperament, of genial 
disposition and versatile in his capacity. He had sincerity which is the sum 
of all moral qualities and his sincerity was of the sort which was prescribed 
by Carlyle. It was not a conscious “braggart sincerity”. It was the natural 
sincerity, a constitutional trait and not an assumed air. He was not only 
big in his physique and in his sincerity, he was also big in intellect. Nobody 
can question that Ranade had intellect of a high calibre. He was not merely 
a lawyer and a judge of the High Court, he was a first class economist, a 
first class historian, a first class educationist and a first class divine. He 
was not a politician. Perhaps it is good that he was not. For if he had 
been, he might not have been a great man. As Abraham Lincoln said, 
“Politicians are a set of men who have interests aside from the interests of 
the people and who, to say the most of them are taken as a mass, at least 
one long step removed from honest men.” Ranade though not a politician 
was a profound student of politics. Indeed it would be difficult to find in the 
history of India any man who could come up to Ranade in the width of his 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


learning, the breadth of his wisdom and the length of his vision. There 
was no subject which he did not touch and in which he did not acquire 
profundity. His reading was on the scale of the colossal and every inch 
he was a scholar. He was great not merely by the standard of his Time, 
but he was great— measured by any standard. As I have said no claim 
for being a great man can rest on the foundation of sincerity and intellect 
either singly or in combination. Ranade could not be called great if he had 
these two qualities and no more. His title to being a great man must rest 
upon the social purposes he served and on the way he served them. On 
that there can be no doubt. Ranade is known more as a social reformer 
than as a historian, economist or educationist. His whole life is nothing 
but a relentless campaign for social reform. It is on his role as a social 
reformer that this title to being a great man rests. Ranade had both the 
vision and the courage which the reformer needs, and in the circumstances 
in which he was born his vision was no small a virtue than his courage. 
That he developed a vision of the Prophet—I am using the word in the 
Jewish sense—cannot but be regarded as a matter of surprise if the time 
in which he was born is taken into account. Ranade was born in 1842 some 
24 years after the battle of Kirkee which brought the Maratha Empire to an 
end. The downfall of the Maratha Empire evoked different feelings among 
different people. There were men like Natu who served as accessories before 
the fact. There were some who played the part of accessories after the fact, 
inasmuch as they were happy that the cursed rule of the Brahmin Peshwa 
was brought to an end. But there can be no doubt that a large majority of 
the people of Maharashtra were stunned by the event. When the whole of 
India was enveloped by the advancing foreign horde and its people being 
subjugated piece by piece, here in this little corner of Maharashtra lived a 
sturdy race who knew what liberty was, who had fought for it inch by inch 
and established it over miles and miles. By the British conquest they had 
lost what was to them a most precious possession. One can quite imagine 
how the best intellect of Maharashtra had its mind utterly confounded and 
its horizon fully and completely darkened. What could be the natural reaction 
to so great a catastrophe? Can it be other than resignation, defeatism and 
surrender to the inevitable? How did Ranade react? Very differently. He held 
out the hope that the fallen shall rise. Indeed he developed a new faith on 
which this hope was founded. Let me quote his own words. He said : 


“I profess implicit faith in two articles of my creed. This country of ours is 
the true land of promise. This race of ours is the chosen race.” 


He did not rest quiet by merely enunciating this new Mosaic Gospel of 
hope and confidence. He applied his mind to the question of the realization 
of this hope. The first requisite was of course a dispassionate analysis of the 
causes of this downfall. Ranade realized that the downfall was due to certain 
weaknesses in the Hindu social system and unless these weaknesses were 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 217 


removed the hope could not be realized. The new gospel was therefore 
followed by a call to duty. That duty was no other than the duty to reform 
Hindu society. Social reform became therefore the one dominant purpose of 
his life. He developed a passion for social reform and there was nothing he 
did not do to promote it. His methods included meetings, missions, lectures, 
sermons, articles, Interviews, letters—all carried, on with an unrelenting 
zeal. He established many societies. He founded many Journals. But he was 
not content with this. He wanted something more permanent, something 
more systematic for promoting the cause of social reform. So he founded the 
Social Conference, an All-India Organization which ran as an adjunct to the 
Indian National Congress. Year after year the Conference met to discuss 
the social ills and to find the ways of remedying them, and year after year 
Ranade attended its annual sessions as though it was a pilgrimage and 
fostered the cause of social reform. 


In fostering the cause of social reform Ranade showed great courage. 
Many people of this generation will perhaps laugh at such a claim. Courting 
prison has become an act of martyrdom in India. It is regarded both as a 
patriotic act and also as an act of courage. Most people who would otherwise 
be beneath notice and in whose case it could rightly be said that they were 
scoundrels who had taken to politics as their last refuge, have by going to 
prison become martyrs and have acquired a name and fame which, to say 
the least, is quite astounding. There would be some substance in this view, 
if prison life involved the rigours to which men lke Tilak and those of his 
generation had been subjected. Prison life today has lost all its terrors. It has 
become a mere matter of detention. Political prisoners are no longer treated 
as criminals. They are placed in a separate class. There are no hardships to 
suffer, there is no reputation to lose and there is no privation to undergo. 
It calls for no courage. But even when prison life had, as in the time of 
Mr. Tilak, its rigours the political prisoners could make no claim to greater 
courage than a social reformer. Most people do not realize that society can 
practise tyranny and oppression against an individual in a far greater degree 
than a Government can. The means and scope that are open to society for 
oppression are more extensive than those that are open to Government, also 
they are far more effective. What punishment in the penal code is comparable 
in its magnitude and its severity to excommunication ? Who has greater 
courage—the social reformer who challenges society and invites upon himself 
excommunication or the political prisoner who challenges Government and 
incurs sentence of a few months or a few years imprisonment? There is 
also another difference which is often lost sight of inestimating the courage 
shown by the social reformer and the political patriot. When the social 
reformer challenges society there is nobody to hail him a martyr. There 
is nobody even to befriend him. He is loathed and shunned. But when 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the political patriot challenges Government he has whole society to support 
him. He is praised, admired and elevated as the saviour. Who shows more 
courage—The social reformer who fights alone or the political patriot who 
fights under the cover of vast mass of supporters ? It would be idle to deny 
that Ranade showed courage in taking up the cause of social reform. Indeed 
he showed a high degree of courage. For let it be remembered that he lived 
in times when social and religious customs however gross and unmoral 
were regarded as sacrosanct and when any doubt questioning their divine 
and moral basis was regarded not merely as heterodoxy but as intolerable 
blasphemy and sacrilege. 


Vv 


His path as a reformer was not smooth. It was blocked from many 
sides. The sentiments of the people whom he wanted to reform were deeply 
rooted in the ancient past. They held the belief that their ancestors were 
the wisest and the noblest of men, and the social system which they had 
devised was of the most ideal character. What appeared to Ranade to be 
the shames and wrongs of the Hindu society were to them the most sacred 
injunctions of their religion. This was the attitude of the common man. The 
intelligentsia was divided into two schools—a school which was orthodox in 
its belief but unpolitical in its outlook, and a school which was modern in its 
beliefs but primarily political in its aims and objects. The former was led by 
Mr. Chiplunkar and the latter by Mr. Tilak. Both combined against Ranade 
and created as many difficulties for him as they could. They not only did 
the greatest harm to the cause of social reform, but as experience shows 
they have done the greatest harm to the cause of political reform in India. 
The unpolitical or the orthodox school believed in the Hegelian view—it is a 
puzzle to me—namely to realize the ideal and idealize the real. In this it was 
egregiously wrong. The Hindu religious and social system is such that you 
cannot go forward to give its ideal form a reality because the ideal is bad; 
nor can you attempt to elevate the real to the status of the ideal because the 
real, i.e., the existing state of affairs, is worse than worse could be. This is 
no exaggeration. Take the Hindu religious system or take the Hindu social 
system, and examine it from the point of social utility and social justice. It is 
said that religion is good when it is fresh from the mint. But Hindu religion 
has been a bad coin to start with. The Hindu ideal of society as prescribed 
by Hindu religion has acted as a most demoralizing and degrading influence 
on Hindu society. It is Nietzschean in its form and essence. Long before 
Nietzsche was born Manu had proclaimed the gospel which Nietzsche sought 
to preach. It is a religion which is not intended to establish liberty, equality 
and fraternity. It is a gospel which proclaims the worship of the superman— 
the Brahmin by the rest of the Hindu society. It propounds that the superman 
and his class alone are born to live and to rule. Others are born to serve 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 219 


them, and to nothing more. They have no life of their own to live, and 
no right to develop their own personality. This has been the gospel of the 
Hindu Religion. Hindu philosophy, whether it is Vedanta, Sankhya, Nyaya, 
Vaishashika, has moved in its own circle without in anyway affecting the 
Hindu religion. It has never had the courage to challenge this gospel. That 
Hindu philosophy that everything is Brahma remained only a matter of 
intellect. It never became a social philosophy. The Hindu philosophers had 
both their philosophy and their Manu held apart in two hands, the right not 
knowing what the left had. The Hindu is never troubled by their inconsistency. 
As to their social system, can things be worst ? The Caste system is in itself 
a degenerate form of the Chaturvarnya which is the ideal of the Hindu. How 
can anybody who is not a congenital idiot accept Chaturvarnya as the ideal 
form of society ? Individually and socially it is a folly and a crime. One class 
and one class alone to be entitled to education and learning! One class and 
one class alone to be entitled to arms! One class and one class alone to trade! 
One class and one class alone to serve! For the individual the consequences are 
obvious. Where can you find a learned man who has no means of livelihood 
who will not degrade his education? Where can you find a soldier with no 
education and culture who will use his arms to conserve and not to destroy ? 
Where can you find a merchant with nothing but the acquisitive instinct to 
follow who will not descend to the level of the brute ? Where can you find the 
servant who is not to acquire education, who is not to own arms and who is 
not to possess other means of livelihood to be a man as his maker intended 
him to be ? If baneful to the individual it makes society vulnerable. It is not 
enough for a social structure to be good for a fair weather. It must be able 
to weather the storm. Can the Hindu caste system stand the gale and the 
wind of an aggression? It is obvious that it cannot. Either for defence or 
for offence a society must be able to mobilize its forces. With functions and 
duties exclusively distributed and immutably assigned, what way is there 
for mobilization ? Ninety per cent of the Hindus— Brahmins, Vaishyas and 
Shudras—could not bear arms under the Hindu social system. How can a 
country be defended if its army cannot be increased in the hour of its peril. 
It is not Buddha who, as is often alleged, weakened Hindu society by his 
gospel of non-violence. It is the Brahminic theory of Chaturvarnya that has 
been responsible not only for the defeat but for the decay of Hindu society. 
Some of you will take offence at what I have said about the demoralizing 
effect of the Hindu socio-religious ideal on Hindu society. But what is the 
truth ? Can the charge be denied ? Is there any society in the world which 
has unapproachables, unshadowables and unseeables ? Is there any society 
which has got a population of Criminal Tribes ? Is there a society in which 
there exists today primitive people, who live in jungles, who do not know 
even to clothe themselves ? How many do they count in numbers? Is it a 
matter of hundreds, is it a matter of thousands? I wish they numbered 


220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a paltry few. The tragedy is that they have to be counted im millions, millions 
of Untouchables, millions of Criminal Tribes, millions of Primitive Tribes!! 
One wonders whether the Hindu civilization, is civilization or infamy? This 
is about the ideal. Turn now to the state of things as it existed when Ranade 
came on the scene. It is impossible to realize now the state of degradation 
they had reached when the British came on the scene and with which the 
reformers like Ranade were faced. Let me begin with the condition of the 
intellectual class. The rearing and guiding of a civilization must depend 
upon its intellectual class—upon the lead given by the Brahmins. Under 
the old Hindu Law the Brahmin enjoyed the benefit of the clergy and not 
be hanged even if he was guilty of murder, and the East India Company 
allowed him the privilege till 1817. That is no doubt because he was the 
salt of the Earth. Was there any salt left in him? His profession had lost 
all its nobility. He had become a pest. The Brahmin systematically preyed 
on society and profiteered in religion. The Puranas and Shastras which 
he manufactured in tons are treasure trove of sharp practices which the 
Brahmins employed to befool, beguile and swindle the common mass of 
poor, illiterate and superstitious Hindus. It is impossible in this address to 
give references to them. I can only refer to the coercive measures which the 
Brahmins had sanctified as proper to be employed against the Hindus to the 
encashment of their rights and privileges. Let those who want to know read 
the preamble to Regulation XXI of 1795. According to it whenever a Brahmin 
wanted to get anything which could not be willingly got from his victim, he 
resorted to various coercive practices—lacerating his own body with knives 
and razors or threatening to swallows some poison were the usual tricks he 
practised to carry out his selfish purposes. There were other ways employed 
by the Brahmin to coerce the Hindus which were as extraordinary as they 
were shameless. A common practice was the erection in front of the house 
of his victim of the koorh—a circular enclosure in which a pile of wood was 
placed—within the enclosure an old woman was placed ready to be burnt 
in the koorh if his object was not granted. The second devise of such a 
kind was the placing of his women and children in the sight of his victim 
and threaten to behead them. The third was the Dhurna—starving on the 
doorstep of the victim. This is nothing. Brahmins had started making claims 
for a right to deflower the women of non-Brahmins. The practice prevailed 
in the family of the Zamorin of Calicut and among the Vallabhachari sect of 
Vaishnavas. What depths of degradation the Brahmins had fallen to ! If, as 
the Bible says, the salt has lost its flavour wherewith shall it be salted ? No 
wonder the Hindu Society had its moral bonds loosened to a dangerous point. 
The East India Company had in 1819 to pass a Regulation (VII of 1819) to 
put a stop to this moral degeneracy. The preamble to the Regulation says 
that women were employed wholesale to entice and take away the wives 
or female children for purposes of prostitution, and it was common practice 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 221 


among husbands and fathers to desert their families and children. Public 
conscience there was none, and in the absence of conscience it was futile to 
expect moral indignation against the social wrongs. Indeed the Brahmins 
were engaged in defending every wrong for the simple reason that they lived 
on them. They defended Untouchability which condemned millions to the lot 
of the helot. They defended caste, they defended female child marriage and 
they defended enforced widowhood—the two great props of the Caste system. 
They defended the burning of widows, and they defended the social system 
of graded inequality with its rule of hypergamy which led the Rajputs to 
kill in their thousands the daughters that were born to them. What shames! 
What wrongs! Can such a society show its face before civilized nations ? 
Can such a society hope to survive ? Such were the questions which Ranade 
asked. He concluded that on only one condition it could be saved—namely, 
rigorous social reform. 


VI 


His greatest opponents however came from the political school of the 
intelligentsia. These politicals developed a new thesis. According to that thesis 
political reform was to have precedence over social reform. The thesis was 
argued from platform to platform and was defended by eminent people like 
Mr. Justice Telang, a Judge of the Bombay High Court, with the consummate 
skill of an acute lawyer. The thesis caught the imagination of the people. 
If there was one single cause to which the blocking of the Social Reform 
movement could be attributed, it was this cry of political reform. The thesis 
is unsupportable, and I have no doubt that the opponents of Ranade were 
wrong and in pursuing it did not serve the best interests of the country. 
The grounds on which Mr. Justice Telang defended the Politicians’ thesis 
were of course logical. But he totally forgot that logic is not reason, and 
analogy is not argument. Neither did he have a correct understanding of the 
inter-relation between the “social” and the “political” which Ranade had. Let 
us examine the reasons for the thesis. Those that were advanced were not 
very impressive. But I am prepared to meet the most impressive arguments 
that could be advanced. Even then the thesis will not stand. The following 
strike me as being the most impressive. In the first place, it could be said 
that we want political power first because we want to protect the rights of 
the people. This answer proceeds from a very frugal theory of Government 
as was propounded by the American statesman Jefferson according to whom 
politics was only an affair of policing by the State so that that the rights 
of people were maintained without disturbance. Assume that the theory is 
a sound one. The question is, what is there for the State to police if there 
are no rights? Rights must exist before policing becomes a serious matter 
of substance. The thesis that political reform should precede social reform 
becomes on the face of it an absurd proposition, unless the idea is that the 
Government is to protect those who have vested rights and to penalize those 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


who have none. The second ground that could be urged in support of the 
thesis is that they wanted political power because they wanted to confer on 
each individual certain fundamental rights by law and that such conferring of 
the political rights could not take place unless there was political power first 
obtained. This of course sounds very plausible. But is there any substance 
in it? The idea of fundamental rights has become a familiar one since their 
enactment in the American Constitution and in the Constitution, framed by 
Revolutionary France. The idea of making a gift of fundamental rights to 
every individual is no doubt very laudable. The question is how to make 
them effective ? The prevalent view is that once rights are enacted in a 
law then they are safeguarded. This again is an unwarranted assumption. 
As experience proves, rights are protected not by law but by the social and 
moral conscience of society. If social conscience is such that it is prepared 
to recognize the rights which law chooses to enact, rights will be safe and 
secure. But if the fundamental rights are opposed by the community, no 
Law, no Parliament, no Judiciary can guarantee them in the real sense 
of the word. What is the use of the fundamental rights to the Negroes in 
America, to the Jews in Germany and to the Untouchables in India? As 
Burke said, there is no method found for punishing the multitude. Law can 
punish a single solitary recalcitrant criminal. It can never operate against 
a whole body of people who are determined to defy it. Social conscience—to 
use the language of Coleridge—that calm incorruptible legislator of the soul 
without whom all other powers would “meet in mere oppugnancy—is the 
only safeguard of all rights fundamental or non-fundamental.” 


The third argument of the politicals could be based on the right to self- 
Government. That self-Government is better than good Government is a 
well-known cry. One cannot give it more value than one can give to a slogan, 
and all would like to be assured that self-Government would also be a good 
Government. There is no doubt that the politicals wanted good Government 
and their aim was to establish a democratic form of Government. But they 
never stopped to consider whether a democratic form of Government was 
possible. Their contention was founded on a series of fallacies. A democratic 
form of Government presupposes a democratic form of society. The formal 
framework of democracy is of no value and would indeed be a misfit if there 
was no social democracy. The politicals never realized that democracy was 
not a form of Government : it was essentially a form of society. It may not 
be necessary for a democratic society to be marked by unity, by community 
of purpose, by loyalty to public ends and by mutuality of sympathy. But it 
does unmistakably involve two things. The first is an attitude of mind, an 
attitude of respect and equality towards their fellows. The second is a social 
organization free from rigid social barriers. Democracy is incompatible and 
inconsistent with isolation and exclusiveness, resulting in the distinction 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 223 


between the privileged and the unprivileged. Unfortunately, the opponents 
of Ranade were never able to realize the truth of this fact. 


One may judge it by any test and it will be found that the stand that 
Ranade took in this controversy and his plan of work were correct and 
fundamental to if they were not the pre-requisites of political reform. 
Ranade argued that there were no rights in the Hindu society which the 
moral sense of man could recognize. There were privileges and disabilities, 
privileges for a few and disabilities for a vast majority. Ranade struggled to 
create rights. Ranade wanted to vitalize the conscience of the Hindu society 
which had become moribund as well morbid. Ranade aimed to create a real 
soclal democracy, without which there could be no sure and stable politics. 
The conflict was between two opposing points of view and it centred round 
the question which is more important for the survival of a nation, political 
freedom or. strong moral fiber. Ranade took the view that moral stamina 
was more important than political freedom. This was also the view of Lecky 
the great historian who after a careful and comparative study of history 
came to the conclusion that : 


“The foundation of a Nation's strength and prosperity is laid in pure domestic 
life, in commercial integrity, in a high standard of moral worth, and of public 
spirit, in simple habits, in courage, uprightness, and a certain soundness and 
moderation of judgment which springs quite as much from character as from 
intellect. If you would form a wise judgment of the future of a nation, observe 
carefully whether these qualities are increasing or decaying. Observe carefully 
what qualities count for most in public life. Is character becoming of greater 
or less importance ? Are the men who obtain the highest posts in the nation 
men of whom, in private life, irrespective of party competent judges speak 
with genuine respect ? Are they of sincere convictions, consistent lives and 
indisputable integrity ? It is by observing this current that you can best cast 
the horoscope of a nation.” 


Ranade was not only wise but he was also logical. He told his opponents 
against playing the part of Political Radicals and Social Tories. In clear and 
unmistakable terms he warned them saying : 


“You cannot be liberal by halves. You cannot be liberal in politics and 
conservative in religion. The heart and the head must go together. You cannot 
cultivate your intellect, enrich your mind, enlarge the sphere of your political 
rights and privileges, and at the same time keep your hearts closed and cramped. 
It is an idle dream to expect men to remain enchained and enshackled in their 
own superstition and social evils, while they are struggling hard to win rights 
and privileges from their rulers. Before long these vain dreamers will find 
their dreams lost.” 


Experience has shown that these words of Ranade have been true, even 
prophetic. Let those who deny this consider : Where are we today in politics 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and why are we where we are? It is now 50 years since the National 
Congress was born. Its stewardship has passed hands, I won’t say from 
the sane to the insane, or from realists to idealists, but from moderates 
to radicals. Where does the country stand today at the end of 50 years 
of political marching ? What is the cause of this deadlock ? The answer is 
simple. The cause of deadlock is the absence of Communal settlement. Ask 
why is communal settlement necessary for political settlement and you 
realize the fundamental importance of the stand that Ranade took. For the 
answer to this question is to be found in the wrong social system, which is 
too undemocratic, too over-weighed in favour of the classes and against the 
masses, too class conscious and too communally minded. Political democracy 
would become a complete travesty if it were built upon its foundations. That 
is why nobody except the high caste Hindus will agree to make it the case 
of a political Democracy without serious adjustments. Well may some people 
argue to their satisfaction that the deadlock is the creation of the British 
Government. People like to entertain thoughts which sooth them and which 
throw responsibility on others. This is the psychology of escapism. But it 
cannot alter the fact that it is the defects of social system which has given 
rise to the communal problem and which has stood in the way of India 
getting political power. 


Ranade’s aim was to cleanse the old order if not to build a new one. 
He insisted on improving the moral tone of Hindu society. If he had been 
heard and followed, the system would have at least lost its rigours and its 
rigidity. If it could not have avoided Communal settlement it would have 
made it easy. For his attempts, limited as they were, would have opened 
the way to mutual trust. But the politicals had developed a passion for 
political power which had so completely blinded them that they refused to 
see virtue in anything else. Ranade has had his revenge. Is not the grant 
of political safeguard a penalty for denying the necessity of social reform ? 


How much did Ranade achieve in the field in which he played so dominant 
a part ? In a certain sense the question is not very important. Achievement 
is never the true measure of greatness. “Alas”, as Carlyle said, “we know 
very well that ideals can never be completely embodied in practice. Ideals 
must ever lie a very great way off; and we will right thankfully content 
ourselves with any not intolerable approximation thereto!” Let no man, 
as Schillar says, too querulously “measure by a scale of perfection the 
meagre product of reality” in this poor world of ours. We will esteem him 
no wise man; we will esteem him a sickly discontented foolish man. And 
yet Ranade’s record of achievement was not altogether bare. The problems 
facing the then social reformers contained in the statement on social reform 
prepared by Rai Bahadur P. Anandcharly were five : (1) early marriage ; 
(2) remarriages of widows; (8) liberty for our countrymen to travel—or 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 225 


sojourn in foreign lands ; (4) women's rights of property and (5) education of 
women. Of this programme he achieved a great part. If he did not achieve 
all, there were the odds against him, which should never be forgotten. A 
clever, determined and an insincere intelligentsia came forward to defend 
orthodoxy and give battle to Ranade. The scenes were exciting, as exciting 
as those of a dread grim of battle. And battle it was. One cannot recall the 
spirit of the time when this controversy over social reform was raging in 
this country. It is not possible for decency to enter into the abuses that were 
hurled, the calumnies that were uttered, the strategies that were employed 
by the orthodox section against the Social Reformers. It is impossible to 
read the writing of those who supported orthodoxy in their opposition to the 
Age of Consent Bill without realizing the depth of the degradation to which 
the so-called leaders of the peoples had fallen. The Bill aimed to punish a 
husband who would have sexual intercourse with his wife if she had not 
attained the age of 12. Could any sane man, could any man with a sense of 
shame oppose so simple a measure ? But it was opposed, and Ranade had to 
bear the brunt of the mad orthodoxy. Assuming that Ranade's achievements 
were small; who could take pride or exultation in his failure to achieve 
more ? There was no cause for exultation. The decline of social reform was 
quite natural. The odium of social reform was too great. The appeal of 
political power too alluring. The result was that social reform found fewer 
and fewer adherents. In course of time the platform of the Social Reform 
Conference was deserted and men flocked to the Indian National Congress. 
The politicians triumphed over the social reformers. I am sure that nobody 
will now allow that their triumph was a matter for pride. It is certainly 
a matter of sorrow. Ranade may not have been altogether on the winning 
side, but he was not on the wrong side and certainly never on the side of 
the wrong as some of his opponents were. 


VIII 


How does Ranade compare with others ? Comparisons are always odious 
and unpleasant. At the same time it is true that there is nothing more 
illuminating than comparisons. Of course in making them one must bear in 
mind that to be interesting and instructive comparisons must be between 
those that are alike. Fortunately there is field for comparison. Ranade was 
a social reformer and as a social reformer he could be usefully compared 
with other social reformers. Particularly illuminating will be the comparison 
between Ranade and Jotiba Phule. Phule was born in 1827 and died in 
1890. Ranade was born in 1842 and died in 1901. Thus Phule and Ranade 
were contemporaries and both were foremost social reformers. Some may 
perhaps demur to the wisdom of comparing Ranade with other politicians. 
This can only be on the ground that Ranade was not a politician. To say that 
Ranade was not a politician is to impose a very narrow and very restricted 
meaning upon the term politician. A politician does not merely trade in 
politics but he also represents particular faith covering both—the method 


226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


as well as the metaphysics of politics. Ranade was the founder of a school 
of politics which was distinctive for its method as well as for metaphysics. 
Used in this sense Ranade was a politician and could be usefully compared 
with other politicians. Comparisons of Ranade with social reformers and 
with politicians cannot but be illuminating and there is enough material 
for such comparisons. The question really is one of time and taste. Time 
will not permit any extensive comparison of Ranade being made both with 
soclal reformers as well as with politicians. I must really choose between 
comparing Ranade with social reformers or with politicians. This is a matter 
of taste. Left to myself I would have preferred to use my available time to 
compare Ranade with Phule. For I regard social Reform more fundamental 
than political reform. Unfortunately my taste is different from the taste of 
the audience and I feel that in detaining the audience I must be guided 
more by its likes and dislikes than my own. The ardour for social reform 
has cooled down. The craze for politics has held the Indian public in its grip. 
Politics has become an appetiser—a mastic the more one tastes it the more 
one craves it. The task I am undertaking is a very unpleasant one and if Í 
venture upon it, it is only because it is my duty to expound fully and the 
desire of the public to know truly the value of Ranade's political philosophy 
and his place among politicians of today. 


Who are the present day politicians with whom Ranade is to be compared ? 
Ranade was a great politician of his day. He must therefore be compared 
with the greatest of today. We have on the horizon of India two great men, 
so big that they could be identified without being named—Gandhi and 
Jinnah, What sort of a history they will make may be a matter for posterity 
to tell. For us it is enough that they do indisputably make headlines for the 
Press. They hold leading strings. One leads the Hindus, the other leads the 
Muslims. They are the idols and heroes of the hour. I propose to compare 
them with Ranade. How do they compare with Ranade ? It is necessary to 
make some observations upon their temperaments and methods with which 
they have now familiarized us. I can give only my impressions of them, for 
what they are worth. The first thing that strikes me is that it would be 
difficult to find two persons who would rival them for their colossal egotism, 
to whom personal ascendency is everything and the cause of the country 
a mere counter on the table. They have made Indian politics a matter of 
personal feud. Consequences have no terror for them; indeed they do not 
occur to them until they happen. When they do happen they either forget 
the cause, or if they remember it, they overlook it with a complacency 
which saves them from any remorse. They choose to stand on a pedestal of 
splendid isolation. They will themselves off from their equals. They prefer to 
open themselves to their inferiors. They are very unhappy at and impatient 
of criticism, but are very happy to be fawned upon by flunkeys. Both have 
developed a wonderful stagecraft and arrange things in such a way that they 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 227 


are always in the limelight wherever they go. Each of course claims to be 
supreme. If supremacy was their only claim, it would be a small wonder. In 
addition to supremacy each claims infallibility for himself. Pius IX during 
whose sacred regime as Pope the issue of infallibility was raging said— 
“Before I was Pope I believed in Papal infallibility, now I feel it.” This is 
exactly the attitude of the two leaders whom Providence—may I say in his 
unguarded moments—has appointed to lead us. This feeling of supremacy and 
infallibility is strengthened by the Press. One cannot help saying that. The 
language used by Gardiner to describe the Northcliffe brand of journalism, 
in my opinion, quite appropriately describes the present state of journalism 
in India. Journalism in India was once a profession. It has now become a 
trade. It has no more moral function than the manufacture of soap. It does 
not regard itself as the responsible adviser of the Public. To give the news 
uncoloured by any motive, to present a certain view of public policy which it 
believes to be for the good of the community, to correct and chastise without 
fear all those, no matter how high, who have chosen a wrong or a barren 
path, is not regarded by journalism in India its first or foremost duty. To 
accept a hero and worship him has become its principal duty. Under it, 
news gives place to sensation, reasoned opinion to unreasoning passion, 
appeal to the minds of responsible people to appeal to the emotions of the 
irresponsible. Lord Salisbury spoke of the Northcliffe Journalism as written by 
office-boys for office-boys. Indian journalism is all that plus something more. 
It is written by drum-boys to glorify their heroes. Never has the interest of 
country been sacrificed so senselessly for the propagation of hero-worship. 
Never has hero-worship become so blind as we see it in India today. There 
are, I am glad to say, honourable exceptions. But they are too few and their 
volce is never heard. Entrenched behind the plaudits of the Press, the spirit 
of domination exhibited by these two great men has transgressed all limits. 
By their domination they have demoralised their followers and demoralized 
politics. By their domination they have made half their followers fools and 
the other half hypocrites. In estabhshing their supremacy they have taken 
the aid of “big business” and money magnates. For the first time in our 
country money is taking the field as an organised power. The questions 
which President Roosevelt propounded for American Public to consider will 
arise here, if they have not already arisen : Who shall rule—wealth or 
man ? Which shall lead, money or intellect ? Who shall fill public stations, 
educated and patriotic free men or the feudal serfs of corporate Capital ? 
For the present, Indian politics, at any rate the Hindu part of it, instead of 
being spiritualized has become grossly commercialized, so much so that it 
has become a byword for corruption. Many men of culture are refusing to 
concern themselves in this cesspool. Politics has become a kind of sewage 
system intolerably unsavoury and insanitary. To become a politician is like 
going to work in the drain. 


228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Politics in the hands of these two great men have become a competition 
in extravaganza. If Mr. Gandhi is known as Mahatma, Mr. Jinnah must be 
known as Qaid-i-Azim. If Gandhi has the Congress, Mr. Jinnah must have 
the Muslim League. If the Congress has a Working Committee and the 
All-India Congress Committee, the Muslim League must have its Working 
Committee and its Council. The session of the Congress must be followed 
by a session of the League. II the Congress issues a statement the League 
must also follow suit. If the Congress passes a Resolution of 17,000 words, 
the Muslim League's Resolution must exceed it by at least a thousand 
words. If the Congress President has a Press Conference, the Muslim League 
President must have his. If the Congress must address an appeal to the 
United Nations, the Muslim League must not allow itself to be outbidden. 
When is all this to end? When is there to be a settlement ? There are no 
near prospects. They will not meet, except on preposterous conditions. Jinnah 
insists that Gandhi should admit that he is a Hindu. Gandhi insists that 
Jinnah should admit that he is one of the leaders of the Muslims. Never has 
there been such a deplorable state of bankruptcy of statesmanship as one 
sees in these two leaders of India. They are making long and interminable 
speeches, like lawyers whose trade it is to contest everything, concede 
nothing and talk by the hour. Suggest anything by way of solution for the 
deadlock to either of them, and it is met by an everlasting “Nay”. Neither 
will consider a solution of the problems which is not eternal. Between them 
Indian politics has become “frozen” to use a well-known Banking phrase and 
no political action is possible. 


How does Ranade strike as compared to these two? I have no personal 
impression to give. But reading what others have said I think I can say 
what he must have been like. He had not a tinge of egotism in him. His 
intellectual attaimments could have justified any amount of pride, nay even 
insolence. But he was the most modest of men. Serious youths were captivated 
by his learning and geniality. Many, feeling completely under his sway, 
responded to his ennobling influence and moulded their whole lives with 
the passionate reverence for their adored master. He refused to be satisfied 
with the praises of fools, and was never afraid of moving in the company of 
equals and of the give and take it involves, He never claimed to be a mystic 
relying on the inner voice. He was a rationalist prepared to have his views 
tested in the light of reason and experience. His greatness was natural. He 
needed no aid of the stage nor the technique of an assumed eccentricity nor 
the means of a subsidized press. As I said, Ranade was principally a social 
reformer. He was not a politician in the sense of one who trades in politics. 
But he has played an important part in the political advancement of India. 
To some of the politicians he acted as the teacher who secured such signal 
successes and who dazzled their critics by their brilliance. To some he acted 
as the guide, but to all he acted as the philosopher. 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 229 


What was the political philosophy of Ranade? It may be summed up in 
three propositions : 


(1) We must not set up as our ideal something which is purely imaginary. 
An ideal must be such that it must carry the assurance that it is a 
practicable one. 


(2) In politics, sentiment and temperament of the people are more 
important than intellect and theory. This is particularly so in the 
matter of framing a Constitution. A constitution is as much a matter 
of taste as clothes are. Both must fit, both must please. 


(3) In political negotiations the rule must be what is possible. That does 
not mean that we should be content with what is offered. No. It 
means that you must not refuse what is offered when you know that 
your sanctions are inadequate to compel your opponent to concede 
more. 


These are the three main doctrines of Ranade’s political philosophy. 
It would be quite easy to illustrate them by appropriate quotations from 
his writings and his speeches. There is no time for that nor is there any 
necessity, for they must be clear to every student of Ranade’s speeches and 
writings. Who could quarrel with Ranade on these three propositions and 
if there be one, on which? On the first only a visionary will quarrel. We 
need not take any notice of him. The second proposition is so evident that 
we could only ignore it at our peril. The third proposition is something on 
which a difference of opinion is possible. Indeed it is this which divided the 
Liberals from the Congressmen. I am not a liberal, but I am sure the view 
Ranade held was the right one. There can be no compromise on principle, 
and there should not be. But once the principle is agreed upon, there can be 
no objection to realize it by instalments. Graduation in politics is inevitable, 
and when the principle is accepted it is not harmful and indeed it may in 
certain circumstances be quite advantageous. On this third proposition there 
was really no difference between him and Tilak, except this : Tilak would 
have the possible maximised by the application of sanctions ; Ranade would 
look askance at sanctions. This is all. On the rest they were agreed. The 
absence of sanctions in Ranade’s political philosophy need not detract much 
from its worth. We all know what sanctions are available to us. We have 
tried all, old as well as new, with what effect I need not stop to describe. 


Ix 


In celebrating the birthday of Ranade we must not overlook what the 
critics and opponents are likely to say. The critics will ask what is the point 
in celebrating the birthday of Ranade. That the days of hero-worship are 
gone long past will be the line of their argument. The oppenents will say if 
I condemn idolatry when it pertains to Mr. Gandhi and to Mr. Jinnah how 
do I join in idolizing Mr. Ranade ? These are very pertinent questions. True 


230 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


hero-worship is dying. Of that there is no doubt. It was dying even in the 
days of Carlyle who indignantly complained against his age saying— 


“This is an age that as it were denies the existence of great men : denies 
the inevitableness of great men.” 


“Show our critics a great man”, he said and “They begin to what they call 
“account for him'; not to worship him but take the dimensions of him.” 


But hero-worship is certainly not dead in India. India is still par excellence 
the land of idolatry. There is idolatry in religion, there is idolatry in politics. 
Heroes and hero-worship is a hard if unfortunate, fact in India's political life. 
I agree that hero-worship is demoralizing for the devotee and dangerous to 
the country. I welcome the criticism in so far as it conveys a caution that 
you must know that your man is really great before you start worshipping 
him. This unfortunately is not an easy task. For in these days, with the 
Press in hand, it is easy to manufacture great men. Carlyle used a happy 
phrase when he described the great men of history as so many Bank Notes. 
Like Bank Notes they represent gold. What we have to see is that they are 
not forged notes. I admit that we ought to be more cautious in our worship 
of great men. For in this country we have perhaps arrived at such a stage 
when alongside the notice boards saying “beware of pickpockets” we need to 
have notice boards saying “beware of great men”. Even Carlyle who defended 
the worship of great men warned his readers how : 


“Multitudes of men have figured in history as great men who were false and 
selfish.” He regretted deeply that “The World's wages (of homage) are pocketed 
(by these so-called great men), the World's work is not done. Heroes have gone 
out; quacks have come in.” 


Ranade never received the honours of apotheosis as these great men of 
India today are destined to receive. How could he ? He did not come with a 
message hot from Senai. He performed no miracles and promised no speedy 
deliverance and splendour. He was not a genius and he had no superhuman 
qualities. But there are compensations. If Ranade did not show splendour 
and dominance he brought us no catastrophe. If he had no superhuman 
qualities to use in the service of India, India was saved from ruin by its 
abuse. If he was not a genius, he did not display that perverse supersubtlety 
of intellect and a temper of mind which is fundamentally dishonest and which 
has sown the seeds of distrust and which has made settlement so difficult 
of achievement. There is nothing exuberant and extravagant in Ranade. 
He refused to reap cheap notoriety by playing the part of an extremist. 
He refused to mislead people by playing upon and exploiting the patriotic 
sentiments of the people. He refused to be a party to methods which are 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 231 


crude which have volume but no effect and which are neither fool-proof nor 
knave-proof and which break the back even of the most earnest and sincere 
servants of the country and disable them from further effort. In short Ranade 
was like the wise Captain who knows that his duty is not to play with his 
ship clever and masterful tricks, Just for effect and show in the midst of the 
ocean but to take it safely to its appointed port. In short Ranade was not 
a forged bank note and in worshipping him we have no feeling of kneeling 
before anything that is false. 


In the second place this celebration of Ranade's birthday is not all an 
act of hero-worship. Hero-worship in the sense of expressing our unbounded 
admiration is one thing. To obey the hero is a totally different kind of hero- 
worship. There is nothing wrong in the former while the latter is no doubt a 
most pernicious thing. The former is only man’s respect for everything which 
is noble and of which the great man is only an embodiment. The latter is 
the villain’s fealty to his lord. The former is consistent with respect, but 
the latter is a sign of debasement. The former does not take away one’s 
intelligence to think and independence to act. The latter makes one a perfect 
fool. The former involves no disaster to the State. The latter is the source 
of positive danger to it. In short in celebrating Ranade’s birthday we are 
not worshipping a boss who is elected by no one, accountable to no one and 
removable by no one, but paying our tribute of admiration to a leader who 
led and did not drive people, who sought to give effect to their deliberate 
judgment and did not try to impose his own will upon them by trickery or 
by violence. 


In the third place it is not for hero-worship for which this gathering has 
assembled. This is an occasion to remind ourselves of the political philosophy 
of Ranade. To my mind it has become necessary to remind ourselves of it 
from time to time. For his is a philosophy which is safe and sound, sure if 
slow. Even if it does not glitter it is nonetheless gold. Do any have doubt ? If 
they have let them ponder over the following utterances of Bismark, Balfour 
and Morley. Bismark the great German Statesman said : 


“Politics is the game of the possible.” 


Balfour in his Introduction to Walter Bagehot’s well-known book on the 
English Constitution says : 


“If we would find the true basis of the long drawn process which has 
gradually converted medieval monarchy into a modern democracy the 
process by which so much has been changed and so little destroyed, we 
must study temperament and character rather than intellect and theory. 
This is a truth which those who recommend the wholesale adoption of 
British Institutions in strange lands might remember with advantage. Such 
an experiment can hardly be without its dangers. Constitutions are easily 
copied; temperaments are not; and if it should happen that the borrowed 
constitution and the native temperament fail to correspond, the misfit may 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


have serious results. It matters little what other gifts a people may possess 
if they are wanting in these which, from this point of view, are of most 
importance. If, for example, they have no capacity for grading their loyalties 
as well as for being moved by them; If they have no natural inclination 
to liberty and no natural respect for law; If they lack good humour and 
tolerate foul play ; If they know not how to compromise or when ; If they have 
not that distrust of extreme conclusions which is sometimes misdescribed 
as want of logic; If corruption does not repel them; and if their divisions 
tend to be either too numerous or too profound, the successful working of 
British Institutions may be difficult or impossible. It may indeed be least 
possible where the arts of Parliamentary persuasion and the dexterities of 
party management are brought to their highest perfection.” 


Morley has observed : 


“To hurry on after logical perfection is to show one’s self-ignorant of the 
material of that social structure with which the politician has to deal. To 
disdain anything short of an organic change in thought or institution is 
infatuation. To be willing to make such changes too frequently, even when 
they are possible, is fool-hardiness. That fatal French saying about small 
reforms being the worst enemies of great reforms, is, in the sense in which 
it is commonly used, a formula of social ruin.” 


These are the principles on which success in Politics depends. Are they 
different from those which Ranade enunciated ? It bespeaks greatness 
in Ranade that he should have propounded them years before Bismark, 
Balfour and Morley. 


The generation which Ranade served was wise in taking him as its 
political guide, friend and philosopher. His greatness lies in the fact that 
he can be a guide, friend and philosopher to this present, nay even to 
future generations. 


There is one charge against Ranade which is frequently made and 
which I think must be met. It is said of Ranade that he believed that 
the conquest of India by the British was Providential, that it was in the 
best interest of India, that she should remain within the British Empire 
and that therein lay her final destiny. In short Ranade is accused of 
being opposed to India’s Independence. 


The charge is founded on the following utterances of Ranade : 


“It cannot be easily assumed that in God’s Providence, such vast 
multitudes as those who inhabit India were placed centuries together under 
influences and restraints of alien domination, unless such influences and 
restraints were calculated to do lasting service in the building up of the 
strength and character of the people in directions in which the Indian races 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 233 


were most deficient. Of one thing we are certain, that after lasting over five 
hundred years, the Mohammedan Empire gave way, and made room for the 
re-establishment of the old native races in the Punjab, and throughout Central 
Hindusthan and Southern India, on foundations of a much more solid character 
than those which yielded so easily before the assaults of the early Mohammedan 
conquerors.” 


“Both Hindus and Mohammedans lack many of those virtues represented 
by the love of order and regulated authority. Both are wanting in the love 
of municipal freedom, in the exercise of virtues necessary for civic life, and 
in aptitudes for mechanical skill, in the love of science and research in the 
love and daring of adventurous discovery, the resolution to master difficulties, 
and in chivalrous respect for womankind. Neither the old Hindus nor the old 
Mohammedan civilization was in a condition to train these virtues in a way 
to bring up the races of India on a level with those of Western Europe, and 
so the work of education had to be renewed, and it has been now going on for 
the past century and more under the Pax Brittanica with results—which all 
of us are witnesses to in ourselves.” 


A mere glance at these statements is enough to show that the charge is 
based on a misunderstanding if not on a misreading of the statements. The 
statements are plain and simple and they cannot even by inference be said 
to lead to the conclusion that Ranade was opposed to India's Independence. 
In that sense the charge is false and without foundation. 


These statements of Ranade far from casting any reflection upon his self- 
respect testify to his wisdom and to his sagacity. What did Ranade want to 
convey by these statements ? As I understand them, I think, Ranade wanted 
to convey two things. The first thing he wanted to convey was that the 
conquest of India by Britain has given India the time, the opportunity and 
the necessary shelter for rebuilding, renovating and repairing her economic 
and social structure, to refit herself for bearing the strain of any foreign 
aggression when she does become free. The second thing Ranade wanted to 
convey was that going out of the British Empire by India before she had 
satisfied and solidified herself into a single nation, unified in thought, in 
feeling, and charged with a sense of a common destiny, was to invite chaos 
and disruption in the name of independence. 


How very important these truths are ? People do not realize the part that 
shelter plays in the smooth working out of social, economic and political 
conflicts which are inevitable in every society which desires to advance. 
The late Prof. Maitland was once asked to explain why Parliamentary 
Institutions flourished in England but failed to take roots in Europe. His 
answer reveals the importance of shelter. He said the difference was due to 
the English channel. By this answer what he meant to convey was that by 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


reason of the English channel England was immune from foreign aggression 
while she was repairing her own body politic and therefore it became safe 
for people to fight against their King for Liberty and also safe for the King 
to allow it to his people. This importance of shelter was also emphasized by 
Abraham Lincoln. In a speech devoted to showing why American Political 
Institutions were destined to remain perpetual, Lincoln said : 


“All the armies of Europe, Asia and Africa combined. . . with a Bonaparte 
for a Commander, could not by force take a drink from Ohio, or make a track 
on the Blue Ridge in a trial of a thousand years.” 


In this Lincoln was also emphasizing the importance and the necessity 
for shelter for social reconstruction. India is not a sheltered country as 
England and America are. She lies across and on the roads, whether the 
roads are land routes, sea routes or air routes. As she has no shelter the 
fear is that she will be broken up if she is attacked from outside while she 
is engaged in refitting herself. India needs a dry dock as a shelter for the 
period of her refitting and the British Empire is a dry dock for her. Who 
can say that Ranade was not wise in asking his countrymen to bear in mind 
the importance of a shelter which the British Empire can give and which 
India needs so much? 


A servient nation is always eager to cut the knot and declare its 
independence of the dominant nation. But it seldom stops to consider the effect 
of independence on itself. Such a consideration is however very important. 
It is not often realized that the knot which binds the servient nation to 
the dominant nation is more necessary to the servient nation than to the 
dominant nation. It depends upon the conditions inside the servient nation. 
The servient nation may be one whole. The servient nation may consist of 
parts. The parts may be such that they will never become one whole. Or 
the parts may be such that they are not yet one whole but if held together 
longer they will become one whole. The effect which the cutting of the knot 
will have on the servient nation will depend upon the internal condition 
of the servient nation. There may be every good in cutting the knot by 
a servient nation which is one whole. Nothing good or nothing worse can 
happen—depends upon how one looks at it—by the cutting of the knot by a 
nation in which the parts can never become one whole. But there is positive 
danger in the third case. The premature cutting of the knot is sure to lead 
to disintegration where integration is desirable and possible. It would be a 
wanton act. This is the second danger which Ranade wanted to caution his 
countrymen against. 


Who can say that Ranade was not wise in giving this caution ? Those who 
are inclined to question its necessity have only to look to China. It is 30 years 
since the Chinese Revolution took place. Have the Chinese settled down ? No. 
People are still asking “when will the Chinese revolution stop revolving ?” 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 235 


and those who know the conditions in China cannot do better than say 
“Perhaps in another hundred years.” Has China found a stable Government 
having the allegiance of all Chinese ? Far from it. Indeed if truth be told, 
China after the revolution has been a land of disunity and disruption far 
more than she was ever before. The Revolution has produced a chaos of 
such magnitude that her very independence has been put in peril. Few 
Indians are aware of the fact that if China has not lost her independence 
as a result of the chaos caused by the Revolution it is only because she had 
too many enemies who could not agree as to which of them should devour 
her. The Chinese Revolution was a great mistake. That was the opinion of 
Yuan Shih-k'ai who said : 


“I doubt whether the people of China are at present ripe for a Republic or 
whether under present conditions a Republic is adapted to the Chinese people... 
The adoption of a limited monarchy would bring conditions back to the normal 
and would bring stability much more rapidly than that end could be attained 
through any experimental form of Government unsuited to the genius of the 
people or to the present conditions in China... My only reason for favouring the 
retention of the present Emperor is that I believe in a constitutional monarchy. 
If we are to have that form of Government, there is nobody else whom the 
people would agree upon for his place... My sole aim in this crisis is to save 
China from dissolution and the many evils that would follow.” 


Those who think that China should be rather a warning to Indians than 
an example will, far from accusing Ranade for opposing India's independence 
will be happy that he had the wisdom to foresee the evils of a premature 
revolution and warn his countrymen against taking a similar step. 


x 


Posterity is always interested in the last words and last regrets of great 
men. The last words of great men are not always significant of their experience 
of this world or their vision of the next. For instance the last thoughts of 
Socrates were to call Crito and say, “We owe a cock to Aesculapius; discharge 
the debt, and by no means omit it.” But their last regrets are always 
significant and worth pondering over. Take the case of Napoleon. Napoleon 
before his death at St. Helena showed evidence of being uneasy over three 
capital points which constituted his last regrets. They were: that he could 
not have died at some supreme moment of his career; that he left Egypt 
and gave up his Eastern ambitions ; and last but by no means the least his 
defeat at Waterloo. Had Ranade any supreme regrets? One thing is certain 
that Ranade if he had any, could not have the same regrets such as those 
which disturbed the peace of mind of Napoleon. Ranade lived for service and 
not for glory. It mattered very little to him whether the moment of his death 
was glorious or inglorious or whether he died as a hero, as a conqueror or 


236 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a master or whether he died as a common man sometimes does of common 
cold. As a matter of fact Ranade was not troubled by any regrets. So far as 
record goes Ranade does not seem to be conscious of any act or event about 
which he had any regrets. He died a happy and a peaceful death. But it is 
worth-while asking could Ranade have any regrets if he came to life today ? 
I am sure there is one matter over which he will feel extremely grieved— 
namely the present condition of the Liberal Party in India. 


What is the present position of the Liberal Party in India ? The Liberal 
Party is a casualty. Indeed this is a very mild expression. The Liberals are 
“the contemptibles” of Indian politics. To use the language of Norton used 
in another connection they are disowned by the people, unowned by the 
Government, having the virtues of neither, but possessing the vices of both. 
There was a time when the Liberal Party was the rival of the Congress. 
Today the relation of the Liberal Party to the Congress is that of a dog to 
his master. Occasionally the dog barks at his master but for the most part 
of his life he is content to follow him. What is the Liberal Party if not the 
tail of the Congress ? Many are asking, why do not the Liberals merge in 
the Congress—so useless has their existence become. How can Ranade help 
not regretting the collapse of the Liberal Party ? How can any Indian help 
regretting it ? 


The collapse of the Liberal Party is a tragedy to the Liberals. But it is 
really a disaster to the country. The existence of a party is so essential to 
a popular Government that it is impossible to conceive the possibility of 
getting on without it. As an eminent American historian says : 


“It is easier to imagine the demolition of any part of our constitutional 
organization, the submersion of a large part of what the constitution describes, 
than to imagine our getting on without political combinations : they are our 
vital institutions.” 


Indeed to attempt to govern a country by the mass of voters without the 
control and discipline of a Party is, to use the language of James Bryce : 


“Like attempting to manage a rail-board by the votes of uniformed share 
holders, or to lay the course of a sailing ship by the votes of the passengers.” 


It is undeniable that a party is an essential adjunct to Popular Government. 
But it is equally undeniable that the rule of a single party is fatal to Popular 
Government. In fact it is a negation of Popular Government. The case of 
Germany and Italy furnish the most cogent evidence on this point. Instead of 
taking a warning from the totalitarian States we are taking them as models 
to copy. The one party system is being hailed in this country in the name 
of national solidarity. Those who are doing so are failing to take note of the 
possibilities of tyranny as well as the possibilities of misdirection of public 
affairs which is inherent in the one party Government. To have Popular 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 237 


Government run by a single party is to let democracy become a mere 
form for despotism to play its part from behind it. How under one party 
Government the tyranny of the majority ceases to be an empty phrase 
and becomes a menacing fact has been our experience, in India, under 
the Congress Regime. Were we not told by Mr. Rajgopalachariar that the 
separation of the Executive and the Judiciary which was necessary under 
the British is no longer necessary? Does it not show the Despot's taste for 
blood ? Despotism does not cease to be despotism because it is elective. Nor 
does despotism become agreeable because the Despots belong to our own 
kindred. To make it subject to election is no guarantee against despotism. 
The real guarantee against despotism is to confront it with the possibility 
of its dethronement, of its being laid low, of its being superseded by a rival 
party. Every Government is liable to error of judgment, great many liable 
to bad administration and not a few to corruption, injustice and acts of 
oppression and bad faith. No Government ought to be free from criticism. 
But who can criticize a Government ? Left to individuals it can never be 
done. Sir Toby has left behind advice as to how one should deal with one's 
enemy. He said : “soon, so soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou 
drawest, swear horrible” But this is not possible for an individual who 
wants to stand up against a Government. There are various things against 
individuals successfully playing that part. There is in the first place what 
Bryce calls the fatalism of the multitude, that tendency to acquiesce and 
submit due to the sense of insignificance of individual effort, the sense of 
helplessness arising from the belief that the affairs of men are swayed by 
large forces whose movements cannot be turned by individual effort. In 
the second place there is possibility of the tyranny of the majority which 
often manifests in suppressing and subjecting to penalties and other social 
disabilities persons who do not follow the majority, of which some of us have 
good experience during the Congress regime. In the third place there is the 
fear of the C.I.D. The Gestapo and all the other instrumentalities which are 
at the disposal of the Government to shadow its critics and to silence them. 


The secret of freedom is courage, and courage is born in combination 
of individuals into a party. A party is necessary to run Government. But 
two parties are necessary to keep Government from being a despotism. A 
democratic Government can remain democratic only if it is worked by two 
parties—a party in power and a party in opposition. As Jennings puts it : 

“If there is no opposition there is no democracy. ‘His Majesty’s Opposition’ 
is no idle phrase. His Majesty needs an opposition as well as a Government.” 


In the light of these considerations who could deny that the collapse of 
the Liberal Party in India is not a major disaster ? Without the resusciation 
of the Liberal Party or the formation of another party the fight for freedom 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


will result in loss of freedom for despotism is antithetical of freedom whether 
the despotism is native or foreign. It is a pity Indians have lost sight of this 
fact. But I have no doubt those who are shouting that the Congress is the 
only party and that the Congress is the nation will live to rue their decision. 


Why has the Liberal Party collapsed? Is there something wrong in the 
Philosophy of Ranade ? Is there anything wrong with the men in the Liberal 
Party ? Or is the working of the Liberal Party at fault ? I for one hold that 
there is nothing fundamentally wrong with the philosophy of Ranade. Nor 
can it be said that of the two the Congress has the best cause and the 
Liberal Party the best men. The Liberal Party has both. To my mind what 
has brought about the collapse of the Liberal Party is the complete lack of 
organization. 


It may not be without interest to expose the weaknesses in the organization 
of the Liberal Party. 


As pointed out by Pendleton Herring in his volume on Politics of Democracy 
the organization of a party is spread over three concentric rings. The centre 
ring represents the oligarchy in control of the party organization—what is 
called the High Command. There are associated with it, its workers who 
are primarily concerned with securing their livelihood through the party 
organization whether as party officials or through public office. They are 
called professional politicians and constitute the party machine. Surrounding 
this inner group—the High Command and the machine—there is a large 
circle of persons bound to the party by ties of tradition and emotional 
loyalty. They think of the principles professed by the party. They are more 
concerned with its ideals and symbols than with the acts of the professional 
party workers and leaders. They vote for the party ideal rather than for the 
party record. Outside this second ring lies that vast body of people who are 
not attached to any party. It is a floating population. The reason for their 
being unattached is either because they are aimless, thoughtless or because 
they have particular interests which are not included in the platform of 
any party. Those outside the second ring constitute the most vital field of 
action for a political party. They are the prize which a party must capture. 
To capture this prize it is not enough to enunciate principles and formulate 
policies. Men are not interested in principles and policies. But they are 
interested in accomplishing things. What is necessary for a party is to bring 
about concerted action. For in the words of President Woodrow Wilson, given 
self-Government with a majority rule, things can be accomplished not by 
individual voice but by concerted action. Now for concerted action what is 
necessary is the crystallization of individual opinions into public opinion. 
This crystallization or building up of public opinion as a sanction behind a 
particular principle becomes the main functions of a party. Theoretically, 
political parties are agencies for the expression and execution of public 
opinion but in practice parties create, direct, influence and often control 


RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH 239 


public opinion. Indeed this is the chief function of a party. For this, a party 
must do two things. In the first place it must establish contact with the 
masses. It must go out among the masses with its wares—its principles, 
policies, ideas and candidates. In the second place it must carry on propaganda 
among the masses in favour of its wares. It must animate them and enlighten 
them, to quote Bryce again “Give the voters some knowledge of the political 
issues they have to decide, to inform them of their leaders, and the crimes 
of their opponents”. These are the basic factors from which concerted action 
can arise. A party which fails to forge concerted action has no right to call 
itself a party. 


Which of these things the Liberal Party has done as an organization? The 
Liberal Party has only the High Command. It has no machine. Not having 
any machine the high command is only a shadow. Its following is confined 
to that second concentric ring consisting of persons who are bound by ties 
of tradition. The leaders have nothing to evoke emotional loyalty. They have 
no war-cry to gather a crowd. The Liberal Party does not believe in mass 
contact. It would be difficult to imagine a party so completely isolated and 
insulated from the main mass of people. It does not believe in conversion. 
Not that it has no Gospel to preach ; but like the Hindu religion it is a 
non-proselytising creed. It believes in the formulation of principles and 
policies. But it does not work for giving effect to them. Propaganda and 
concerted action are anathema to the Liberal Party. Individual voices and 
annual meetings and clamour for invitation when a Cripps arrives or when 
the Viceroy decides to invite important individuals have become the limits 
of its political activity. 


Is there any wonder if the Liberal Party has fallen into disrepute ? The 
Liberal Party has forgotten the most elementary fact that organization is 
essential for the accomplishment of any purpose and particularly in politics 
where the harnessing of so many divergent elements in a working unity is 
so great. 


Who is responsible for this collapse of the Liberal Party in India? 
However much we may regret to have to say it, I think it will have to be 
admitted that the responsibility for this catastrophe does to some extent fall 
on Ranade. Ranade belonged to the Classes. He was born and bred among 
them. He never became a man of masses. The Liberal Party has no machine 
and the reason why it did not forge a machine is because it did not believe 
in mass contact. This aversion to mass contact is the legacy of Ranade. In 
avoiding mass contact the party is following the tradition left by Ranade. 
There is another legacy of Ranade to the Liberal Party and that relates to 
the false faith in the driving force of principles and policies. Mazzini once 
said : “You may kill men, you cannot kill a great idea.” To me it appears 
to be a most mistaken view. Men are mortal. So are ideas. It is wrong to 
hold that an idea will take roots pro prio-vigore. An idea needs propagation 


240 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


as much as a plant needs watering. Both will otherwise wither and die. 
Ranade agreed with Mazzini and did not believe that the fructification of 
an idea needed the resources of strenuous husbandry. If the Liberal Party 
1s content with mere formulation of principles and policies 1t is also because 
of this tradition of Ranade. 


What is the duty of the Liberals. All Liberals I know will say our duty 
is to follow the master. What else could be the attitude of a devout band of 
disciples ? But can anything be more mistaken or more uncritical ? Such an 
attitude implies two things. It means that a great man works by imposing 
his maxims on his disciples. It means that the disciples should not be wiser 
than the master. Both these conclusions are wrong. They do injustice to 
the master. No great man really does his work by crippling his disciple by 
forcing on them his maxims or his conclusions. What a great man does is 
not to impose his maxims on his disciples. What he does is to evoke them, 
to awaken them to a vigorous and various exertion of their faculties. Again 
the pupil only takes his guidance from his master. He is not bound to 
accept his master's conclusions. There is no ingratitude in the disciple not 
accepting the maxims or the conclusions of his master. For even when he 
reJects them he is bound to acknowledge to his master In deep reverence 
“You awakened me to be myself : for that I thank you.” The master is not 
entitled to less. The disciple is not bound to give more. 


It is therefore wrong to the master as well as to himself for the disciple 
to bind himself to the maxims and conclusions of his Master. His duty is to 
know the principles and if he is convinced of their value and their worth, 
to spread them. That is the wish of every Master. Jesus wished it, Buddha 
wished it. I am sure the same must be the wish of Ranade. It follows that 
if the Liberals have faith in, and love and respect for Ranade their supreme 
duty lies not merely in assembling together to sing his praises but in 
organising themselves for spreading the Gospel of Ranade. 


What hope is there of the Liberals coming forward to fulfil this duty? 
Signs are very depressing. In the last election the Liberals did not even 
contest the seats. That of course is in itself a matter of some surprise. But 
this pales into nothing when one recalls the announcement made by the 
Rt. Hon’ble Srinivas Shastri—the Leading Light of the Liberal Party— that 
he wished the Congress to succeed ! ! There is no parallel to this except 
in the treacherous and treasonous conduct of Bhishma who lived on the 
bounty of the Kauravas but wished and worked for success to their enemies 
the Pandavas. This shows even the Liberals had lost faith in the gospel of 
Ranade. If this is the general condition of health of the Liberal Party it is 
better if the party died. It would clear the way for a new orientation and 
spare us the tedium of idle clatter of liberals and liberalism. For such an 
event even Ranade may express satisfaction from his grave. 


PART IV 


ON CONSTITUTIONAL 
REFORMS 


7 


EVIDENCE BEFORE 
THE 
SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 
ON 
FRANCHISE 


Examined on : 27th January 1919 


From the Report of the Reforms Committee (Franchise) 
Vol. II, 1919 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE 
SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 


The Committee was constituted as under : 

The Rt. Hon. Lord Southborough, G.C.B., G.C.V.O., G.C.M.C. (Chairman). 

Sir Frank G. Sly, K.C.S.I., LCS. 

Sahibzada Aftab Ahmed Khan. 

The Hon’ble Babu Surendranath Banerjea. 

The Hon’ble Mr. M. N. Hogg. 

W. M. Hailey, Esq., C.S.I., C.I.E., LC.S. 

The Hon’ble Mr. Srinivasa Sastri (Not present on 25-1-1919 and 27-1-1919). 
And the following added members : 

L. C. Crump, Esq., I.C.S. 

K. Natarajan, Esq. 

P. C. Tallents, Esq., I.C.S. (Secretary). 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE 
SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 


WRITTEN STATEMENT 


“The most difficult and the most momentous question of Government 
(is) how to transmit the force of individual opinion and preference into 
public action. This is the crux of popular institutions.” So says Professor 
A.B. Hart. But this is only half the definition of popular Government. It 
is therefore necessary to emphasize the other half which is equal if not 
more in importance. As the Government is the most important field for the 
exercise of individual capacities, it is in the interest of the people that no 
person as such should be denied the opportunity of actively participating 
in the process of Government. That is to say popular Government is not 
only Government for the people but by the people. To express the same 
in a different way, representation of opinions by itself is not sufficient to 
constitute popular Government. To cover its true meaning it requires personal 
representation as well. It is because the former is often found without the 
latter that the Franchise Committee has to see in devising the franchises 
and constituencies for a popular Government in India, it provides for both, 
i.e., representation of opinions and representation of persons. Any scheme 
of franchise and constituency that fails to bring this about fails to create a 
popular Government. 


2. Success in this task will ultimately depend upon the accuracy of the 
de facto conception of the society which is to be given the popular form of 
Government. De facto India was well portrayed by Lord Dufferin when he 
described it as a ... 


“Population . . . composed of a large number of distinct nationalities, 
professing various religions, practising diverse rites, speaking different 
languages, while many of them ... still further separated from one another 
by discordant prejudices, by conflicting sources of usages, and even 
antagonistic material interests. But perhaps the most patent characteristic 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of our Indian cosmos is its division into two mighty political communities as 
distant from each other as the poles apart—On the one hand the Hindus—with 
their elaborate caste distinctions—on the other hand, the Mohammedans—with 
their social equality. To these must be added a host of minor nationalities 
most of them numbering millions—almost as widely differentiated from one 
another by ethnological or political distinctions as are the Hindus from the 
Mohammedans, such as Sikhs, with their warlike habits and traditions and 
their enthusiastic religious beliefs, the Rohillas, the Pathans, the Assamese, 
the Baluchis and other wild and martial tribes on our frontiers, the hillmen 
dwelling in the folds of the Himalayas, our subjects in Burma, Mongol in 
race and Buddhist in religion, the Gonds, Mhars, Bheels and other non- 
Aryan people in the centre and south of India, and the enterprising Parsees, 
with their rapidly developing manufactures and commercial interests. Again, 
amongst these numerous communities may be found, at one and the same 
moment, all the various stages of civilization through which mankind has 
passed from the pre-historic ages to the present days.” 


3. Englishmen have all along insisted that India is unfit for 
representative Government because of the division of her population into 
castes and creeds. This does not carry conviction with the advanced wing 
of Indian politicians. When they say that there are also social divisions 
im Europe as there are in India they are amply supported by facts. The 
social divisions of India are equalled, if not outdone, in a country like 
the United States of America. Corresponding to those in the former, we 
have in the latter men bonded together in a criminal conspiracy and trust 
or combinations that prey upon the public. Not only are there political 
sub-divisions but also industrial, scientific, and religious associations, 
differing in their aims and their attitudes towards each other. Apart 
from political parties with diverse ends, social sets, cliques and gangs 
we find in the United States of America more permanent divisions of the 
population such as the Poles, Dutch, Swedes, Germans, Russians, etc., 
each with its own language, religious and moral codes and traditions. If 
social divisions unfit a country for representative Government, it should 
unfit the United States of America as much as India. But if with all the 
social divisions, the United States of America is fit for representative 
Government, why not India ? Ask the Indian politicians, so entrenched, 
it is difficult to dislodge them, and show that the social divisions of India 
are of a different kind or grant them their contention. Without these two 
there is no third alternative possible. 


4. In my opinion their contention cannot be granted for the social 
divisions of India do matter in politics. How they matter can be best shown 
by understanding when they don't matter. Men live in a community by 
virtue of the things they have in common. What they must have in common 
in order to form a community are aims, beliefs, aspirations, knowledge, 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 249 


a common understanding; or to use the language of the Sociologists, 
they must be like-minded. But how do they come to have these things in 
common or how do they become like-minded? Certainly, not by sharing 
with another as one would do in the case of a piece of cake. To cultivate 
an attitude similar to others or to be like-minded with others is to be in 
communication with them or to participate in their activity. Persons do not 
become like-minded by merely living in physical proximity, any more than 
they cease to be like-minded by being distant from each other. Participation 
in a group is the only way of being like-minded with the group. Each group 
tends to create its own distinctive type of like-mindedness, but where there 
are more groups than one to be brought into political union, there would 
be conflict among the differently like-minded. And so long as the groups 
remain isolated the conflict is bound to continue and prevent the harmony 
of action. It is the isolation of the groups that is the chief evil. Where the 
groups allow of endosmosis they cease to be evil. For endosmosis among 
the groups makes possible a resocialization of once socialized attitudes. In 
place of the old, it creates a new like-mindedness, which is representative 
of the interests, aims, and aspirations of all the various groups concerned. 
Like-mindedness is essential for an harmonious life, social or political and, 
as has just been shown, it depends upon the extent of communication, 
participation or endosmosis. Applying this test to the divisions in India, 
we must pronounce upon them as constituting an obstacle in the path of 
realizing an harmonious political life. 


5. The groups or divisions each with its set like-mindedness that are sure 
to be in conflict may be given as follows : 


(1) Hindus; 

(2) Mohammedans ; 
(3) Christians ; 

(4) Parsees; 

(5) Jews, etc. 


Except the Hindus the rest of the divisions are marked by such complete 
freedom of communication from within that we may expect their members 
to be perfectly like-minded with respect to one another. Regarding the 
Hindus, however, the analysis must be carried on a little farther. The 
significant fact about the Hindus is that before they are Hindus they are 
members of some caste. The castes are so exclusive and isolated that the 
consciousness of being a Hindu would be the chief guide of a Hindu’s 
activity towards non-Hindu. But as against a Hindu of a different caste 
his caste-consciousness would be the chief guide of activity. From this, it is 
plain that as between two Hindus, caste-like-mindedness is more powerful 
than the like-mindedness due to their both being Hindus. Thus from within 
the Hindus, as from without, there is likely to be a conflict of like-minded 
persons. There are some who argue that this conflict runs through the whole 


250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


gamut of the caste system. But this is protesting too much. From the point of 
vlew of communication the Hindus, in spite of castes, divide themselves into 
two significant groups—the touchables and the untouchables. The touchables 
have enough communication between them to enable us to say that the 
conflict of like-mindedness so far as they are concerned is not much to be 
dreaded. But there is a real difference and consequent conflict between the 
like-mindedness of the touchables and the untouchables. Untouchability is 
the strongest ban on the endosmosis between them. Their complete isolation 
accounts for the acuteness of the difference of like-mindedness. 


The real social divisions of India then are : 
(1) Touchable Hindus. 

(2) Untouchable Hindus. 

(3) Mohammedans. 

(4) Christians. 

(5) Parsees. 

(6) Jews. 


6. It will not do good to ignore these real divisions in devising a system 
of policy, if the policy is to take the form of popular Government. But if the 
success of popular Government depends upon how well the constituencies 
and franchises transmit the social forces and how well they secure personal 
representation ; we must first study the form which the conflict between 
these groups will assume in an election. 


7. In a territorial constituency, which will group together voters 
belonging to the above groups, a majority of votes will declare a candidate 
to be a representative for the constituency in question. Now the question 
arises : is such a candidate, a true representative of the groups, covered 
by the territorial constituency? Is he a true mirror of the mind of the 
constituency ? Is he a representative of all the interests in the constituency ? 
To be concrete, will a Hindu candidate represent Mohammedan interests ? 
At this stage it must be recalled that the various divisions described above 
are held together by a community of interests which are non-secular or 
purely religious. We cannot say that each division is held together by a 
community of interests which are secular or material. If so, then for secular 
purposes the groups will be broken up. From the point of view of material 
interests, there are no such people as Mohammedans, Parsees, Hindus, etc. 
There will be in each of these groups landlords, labourers, capitalists, free 
traders, protectionists, etc., each of the groups having community of interests 
which are material will be composed of Hindus, Mohammedans, Parsees, 
etc. Consequently, a Hindu candidate can very well represent the material 
interests of the Mohammedans and vice versa. There is thus no conflict of 
material interest in the main among the communities as such. If we suppose 
that religious interests in future will occupy a subordinate place in the 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 251 


affairs of men, the secular interests of a group can be well represented by 
a candidate from another group. 


8. From this point of view a territorial constituency will be sufficient 
for a popular Government. A little more consideration will show that it 
will be sufficient for only one-half the definition of popular Government. 
How true it is, will be shown presently. In an electoral fight between the 
various groups in a territorial constituency the voters will discriminate in 
favour of a candidate with whom they are in sympathy. But with whom 
they will be in sympathy is determined for them in advance. Given two 
candidates belonging to different groups but purporting to represent the 
same interest, the voters will mark their votes on the person belonging to 
the same community. Any group yielding a large number of electors will 
have its own candidate elected. This discrimination on the part of the voters, 
though it may not leave unrepresented the interests of the members of the 
minor groups, leaves them without any chance of personal representation. 


9. To those who are busy in devising schemes for the proper and adequate 
representation of interests and opinions dilating on the importance of 
personal representation is likely to seem idle. But personal representation 
is not therefore unimportant. In recent times “Government for the people” 
has claimed more attention than “Government by the people”. In fact there 
are instances to show that “Government for the people” can exist in the best 
sense of the phrase without there being a “Government by the people.” Yet 
all political theorists will unanimously condemn such a form of Government. 
And the why of it is important to know. It will be granted that each kind 
of association, as it 1s an educative environment, exercises a formative 
influence on the active dispositions of its members. Consequently, what one 
is as a person is what one is as associated with others. A Government for 
the people, but not by the people, is sure to educate some into masters and 
others into subjects; because it is by the reflex effects of association that one 
can feel and measure the growth of personality. The growth of personality 
is the highest aim of society. Social arrangement must secure free initiative 
and opportunity to every individual to assume any role he is capable of 
assuming provided it is socially desirable. A new rule is a renewal and 
growth of personality. But when an association—and a Government is after 
all an association—is such that in it every role cannot be assumed by all, it 
tends to develop the personality of the few at the cost of the many—a result 
scrupulously to be avoided in the interest of Democracy. To be specific, it is 
not enough to be electors only. It is necessary to be law-makers ; otherwise 
who can be law-makers will be masters of those who can only be electors. 


10. Territorial constituencies are therefore objected to, and rightly, on 
the ground that they do nothing to prevent this absurd outcome. They 
erroneously suppose that electors will vote on the programmes of the 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


candidates without any regard for their persona. As a matter of fact, the 
electors before they are electors are primarily members of a group. The 
persona of the candidates does matter with them. Naturally, therefore, as 
members of a group they prefer the candidate who belongs to their group 
to another candidate who does not belong to their group though both of 
them claim to represent the same interest. As a result of this preference 
the electors of a large group are destined to rise to a higher position of 
becoming eventual law-makers, while the electors of a smaller group for no 
fault of theirs are doomed to a lower position of remaining electors. One crux 
of popular Government is the representation of Interests and opinions. The 
other crux is personal representation. Territorial constituencies fail to create 
popular Government because they fail to secure personal representation to 
members of minor groups. 


11. If this is a correct analysis as to how the social divisions operate to the 
prejudice of the political life of some communities, never was a more improper 
remedy advocated to meet the situation than proportional representation. 
Proportional representation is intended to give proportionate representation 
to views. It presupposes that voters vote for a candidate because of his views 
and not because of his persona. Proportional representation is ill-suited for 
the purpose in hand. 


12. We have therefore two possible methods of meeting the situation : 
either to reserve seats in plural constituencies for those minorities that cannot 
otherwise secure personal representation or grant communal electorates. Both 
have their usefulness. So far as the representation of the Mohammedans is 
concerned, it is highly desirable that they should participate in a general 
election with seats reserved for them in plural constituencies. The angularity 
of the division that separates the Hindus and Mohammedans is already 
sharp and communal representation, it may be urged, sharpens it the 
more. Communal election, however, seems to be a settled fact, so far as the 
Mohammedans are concerned and nothing is likely to alter it, even though 
alteration is likely to be beneficial. 


18. But this argument is mainly intended to concern itself with the 
representation of the Hindus in general, and of the untouchable Hindus in 
particular. The discussion of the representation of the Hindus may be best 
introduced by a quotation which expresses the newer consciousness that has 
arisen in the various Hindu groups. It is said : 


“A community may claim representation only on the ground of separate interests 
which require protection. In India, such interests are of three kinds only : either 
they arise out of religious antipathies which are pretty strong in India, or out of 
the backward state of a community in educational matters, or out of the socio- 
religious disabilities to which a community may be subject. Confining ourselves 
to the Hindu communities there are certain communities who, besides being very 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 253 


backward, are suffering under a great social tyranny. The untouchable classes 
must have their own men in the Council Hall to fight for the redress of their 
grievances. The non-Brahmins as a class are subjected to the social and 
intellectual domination of the Brahmin priesthood and may therefore rightly 
advocate separate representation.” 


14. From this it will be seen that the new consciousness among the Hindus 
while acknowledging the separate interests of the untouchables does not 
accept the position that the touchable Hindus form a group by themselves. 
The new consciousness insists on dividing the touchable group into Brahmins 
and non-Brahmins each with its own separate Interests. Separate electorates 
or reserved seats in mixed electorates are demanded for the three groups 
in which the Hindus are divided. Before dealing with the problems of the 
representation of the untouchables something will be said on the question 
of the Brahmins and non-Brahmins. 


15. That the non-Brahmins are “backward in educational matters” cannot 
be said in any way to be their special interest. It is the general interest of 
all even of those Brahmins who are educationally backward. “The intellectual 
and social domination of the Brahmins” is not a matter that affects the 
non-Brahmins alone. It affects all and it is therefore the interest of all. 
What remains then as a special interest for the non-Brahmins to require 
their protection ? 


The case for separate representation for non-Brahmins fails because they 
cannot prove to have a common non-Brahmin interest. 


16. But do they fail to secure personal representation ? 


This can be best shown by reference to figures— 


Group I Group II 
Caste of No. of voters Total No. of voters Total 
Local Board for the Local population forthe Local population 
voters Boards of the of the three Boards of of the two 
districts of districts the districts 
Belgaum, districts of 
Bijapur and Ratnagiri 
Dharwar 2 and 
Kolaba 
1 2 3 4 5 
Brahmins ga 4,600 85,739 4,477 89,786 
Lingayats ot 12,730 933,123 
Marathas T 1,074 255,526 3,667 446,077 
Mahars G 22 196,751 33 138,738 
Mohammedans a 661 295,838 1,169 106,273 
Others ers 4,241 1,065,821 2,837 1,016,930 


Total 3; 23,328 2,832,798 12,183 1,797,804 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Reducing the above figures to the basis of a thousand we have the following 


interesting result : 


Group I Group II 
Names of Castes Propor- Propor- Propor- Propor- Propor- Propor- 
tion of tion of tion of tion of tion of tion of 
popula- voters of voters of popula- votersof voters of 
tion of a caste a caste tion of a caste a caste 
a caste to every to every a caste to every to every 
to every thousand thousand to every thousand thousand 
thousand of the of voters thousand ofthe of voters 
of the popula- of the popula- 
popula- tion of popula- tion of 
tion the same tion the same 
covered caste covered caste 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Brahmins a 30.2 53.7 197.2 50.8 49.8 367.4 
Lingayats = 329.4 13.6 545.7 
Marathas ia 90.2 4.2 46.0 248.8 8.2 300.9 
Mahars s= 69.5 0.1 0.9 74.5 0.2 Bol 
Mohammedans .. 104.4 2.2 28.3 59.2 10.9 95.9 
Others is 376.2 3.9 181.3 562.2 2.8 232.8 


So arranged, the conclusions to be drawn from these figures are highly 


important. 


(1) The Brahmins, given a uniform franchise for all, though a small 
minority so far as numbers are concerned becomes a majority so far 
as the total of voters is concerned as is the case in Group II. 


(2) Though with an uniform franchise the non-Brahmin communities 
like the Lingayats and Marathas do not fail to figure on the voters’ 
list, the proportion of their voters to their population is insignificant 
as compared with the proportion which the Brahmin voters bear to 
the Brahmin population. 


17. The proportion of the Brahmins to their voters is really extravagant. 
It is justified neither by faith in them nor by their own numbers. The 
Lingayats though they can legitimately complain that the proportion of 
their voters is small will succeed in securing personal representation. The 
Marathas though larger in numbers than the Brahmins, besides the very 
small proportion of their voters suffer on the voters’ list and very likely will 
fail to secure personal representation for themselves. 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 255 


So argued, the case for special provision of the Marathas can be sustained 
and should be admitted. 


18. The question is im what form the provision should take. In my 
opinion such provision instead of taking the form of separate electorates of 
reserved seats should take the form of a low pitched franchise. The franchise 
for the non-Brahmin should be lower than that for the Brahmin. By this 
arrangement the Marathas would improve their position on the voters' list 
and the altogether favoured position of the Brahmin would be equalized. It is 
in the interest of all that the Brahmin should not play such a preponderant 
part in politics as he has been doing hitherto. He has exerted a pernicious 
influence on the social life of the country and it is in the interest of all that 
his pernicious influence should be kept at a minimum in politics. As he is 
the most exclusive he is most anti-social. 


19. Even the authors of the report on constitutional reforms are not in 
favour of a limited or uniform franchise. They say, “We consider that the 
limitations of the franchise, which it is obviously desirable to make as 
broad as possible, should be determined rather with reference to practical 
difficulties than to any prior considerations as to the degree of education 
or amount of income which may be held to constitute a qualification. It is 
possible that owing to unequal distribution of population and wealth it may 
be necessary to differentiate the qualifications for a vote not merely between 
provinces, but between different parts of the same province” (P. 147) To this 
I should like to add that we should differentiate the qualifications for a vote 
not merely between provinces or parts thereof but between communities 
of the same province. Without this differentiation some communities with 
a small but wealthy or educated population will secure more votes than a 
large community consisting of poor and uneducated members. Uniformity 
in franchise should be dispensed with. An important result will be that 
communal representation or reservation of seats for some non-Brahmin 
communities who are now clamouring for it would be avoided. 


20. The untouchables are usually regarded as objects of pity but they are 
ignored in any political scheme on the score that they have no interests to 
protect. And yet their interests are the greatest. Not that they have large 
property to protect from confiscation. But they have their very persona 
confiscated. The socio religious disabilities have dehumanized the untouchables 
and their interests at stake are therefore the interests of humanity. The 
interests of property are nothing before such primary interests. 


21. If one agrees with the definition of slave as given by Plato, who 
defines him as one who accepts from another the purposes which control 
his conduct, the untouchables are really slaves. The untouchables are so 
socialized as never to complain of their low estate. Still less do they ever 
dream of trying to improve their lot, by forcing the other classes to treat 


256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


them with that common respect which one man owes to another. The idea 
that they have been born to their lot is so ingrained in their mind that it 
never occurs to them to think that their fate is anything but irrevocable. 
Nothing will ever persuade them that men are all made of the same clay, 
or that they have the right to insist on better treatment than that meted 
out to them. 


22. The exact description of the treatment cannot be attempted. The 
word untouchable is an epitome of their ills and sufferings. Not only has 
untouchability arrested the growth of their personality but also it comes in 
the way of their material well-being. It has also deprived them of certain 
civil rights. For instance, in Konkan the untouchables are prohibited from 
using the public road. If some high caste man happens to cross him, he has 
to be out of the way and stand at such a distance that his shadow will not 
fall on the high caste man. The untouchable is not even a citizen. Citizen 
ship is a bundle of rights such as (1) personal liberty, (2) personal security, 
(3) rights to hold private property, (4) equality before law, (5) liberty of 
conscience, (6) freedom of opinion and speech, (7) right of assembly, (8) right 
of representation in a country's Government and (9) right to hold office under 
the State. The British Government by gradual growth may be said to have 
conceded these rights at least in theory to its Indian subjects. The right 
of representation and the right to hold office under the State are the two 
most important rights that make up citizenship. But the untouchability of 
the untouchables puts these rights far beyond their reach. In a few places 
they do not even possess such insignificant rights as personal liberty and 
personal security, and equality before law is not always assured to them. 
These are the interests of the untouchables. And as can be easily seen they 
can be represented by the untouchables alone. They are distinctively their 
own interests and none else can truly voice them. A free trade interest can 
be voiced by a Brahmin, a Mohammedan or a Maratha equally well. But 
none of these can speak for the interests of the untouchables because they 
are not untouchables. Untouchability constitutes a definite set of interests 
which the untouchables alone can speak for. Hence it is evident that we 
must find the untouchables to represent their grievances which are their 
interests and, secondly, we must find them in such numbers as will constitute 
a force sufficient to claim redress. 


23. Now, will a general territorial electorate provided for the adequate 
return of the untouchables to the law-making body? Referring back to 
the figures we find that the untouchables (represented in the table by the 
Mahars), though they formed 69.4 in every thousand of the population, did 
not claim even a voter from their class. Under such circumstances it is 
impossible for them to elect their own man in a general electorate. On the 
other hand they must despair of any votes being cast by the touchable Hindus 
for an untouchable candidate. The gradation of castes produces a certain 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 257 


theological basis which cuts the untouchables both ways : in the minds 
of the lower orders it creates a preference for the higher orders while it 
creates a contempt for the lower orders in the minds of the higher orders. 
Thus the ascending scale of preference and the descending scale of hatred 
and contempt beggars the untouchables both ways. Without giving a single 
vote to the untouchables the touchables are sure to make a large draft on 
the already meagre voting strength of the untouchables. 


24. So situated, the untouchables with the largest interests at stake will 
be the greatest sufferers in a general territorial electorate. To give them 
an opening, special provision shall have to be made for their adequate 
representation. But before a scheme can be outlined it is necessary to see 
how much is the untouchable population in the Bombay Presidency. The 
Census Report for the Bombay Presidency for the year 1911 gives the 
following figures for castes which “cause pollution” : 


Bhungis ki Eg si ia 93,691 
Chamars 
Mochis i si a ae 306,478 
Machigars 
Sochis 
Mhars ba Ge os ia 1,470,992 
Holiyas 
Dheds 
Mangs sd T a An 274,087 
Madigs ) 
Total +. 2,145,193 

To this must be added the 
Dhors amounting to ka. m 5 13,506 

Total Untouchables .. 2,158,699 


The following figures give the distribution of the untouchables by districts : 


District Total Total Total Percentage Percentage 
population Hindu untouchable of un- of un- 
1911 population Population touchables touchables 
to the total to the 
population Hindu 
population 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
British Districts (exclu- 19,628,477 14,920,267 1,627,980 8 10.9 
ding Aden). 
1. Bombay City ge 979,445 664,042 89,052 9 11.6 
Northern Division na 3,685,383 3,117,263 245,050 6.6 7.8 
2. Ahmedabad we 827,809 693,155 78,869 10 11.4 


3. Broach P 306,717 192,935 22,390 7 11.6 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


1 2 3 4 5 6 
4. Kaira .. 691,744 598,164 41,497 5.9 6.9 
5. Panch Mahals Wa 332,695 274,339 14,410 4 5 
6. Surat aa 654,109 571,745 36,509 5.6 6 
7. Thana aa 882,309 786,925 50,010 5.6 6 
Central Division a 6,387,064 5,993,828 7,738,184 12 13 
8. Ahmednagar p 945,305 855,676 116,929 12 13.6 
9. Khandesh (East) sa 1,034,886 902,131 112,391 10.8 12 
10. Khandesh (West) and 580,723 474,200 36,809 6 7.7 
11. Nasik au 905,030 843,705 97,740 10.7 11 
12. Poona .. 1,071,512 991,725 113.118 12.4 13.3 
13. Satara Pa 1,081,278 1,028,176 144,688 13 14 
14. Sholapur fe 768,330 703,215 129,063 16.7 18 
Southern Division hee 5,061,150 4,502,708 385,470 7.6 8.5 
15. Belgaum sts 943,820 817,797 83,199 8.8 10.1 
16. Bijapur Da 862,973 757,542 80,501 9 10.6 
17. Dharwar pi 1,026,005 872,885 52,540 5 6 
18. Kanara sa 430,548 383,624 10,767 2.4 2.9 
19. Kolaba a. 594,156 560,266 51,108 8.5 9.1 
20. Ratnagiri bas 1,203,638 1,110,594 107,354 8.9 9.7 
Sind (British zs 3,513,435 837,426 135,224 3.8 16 
Districts) 


25. The total population of the Bombay Presidency by the Census of 1911 
(British districts only) is 19,626,477. Of this the untouchable population is 
1,627,980 or 8 per cent of the total. Assuming for the present the Bombay 
Legislative Council to consist of 100 elected members, the untouchables should 
have 8 representatives to represent them in the Council. If we distribute one 
representative to every 200,000 of the people (which is just the ratio of 100 
representatives to the 20 millions of the population), then the untouchables 
can by right claim 8 representatives to themselves. But the untouchables 
of the Bombay Presidency may be allowed to elect 9 members in all. The 
election of one additional member will be justified later on. 


26. Allowing them to elect 9 members, the constituencies which are to 
elect them should be as follows: 


1. The various districts of the Presidency except the City of Bombay and 
the Province of Sind should be grouped together on a linguistic basis as 
follows: 


259 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 


89/01 
661‘E8 
g09‘08 


099 


vIeUueyy 
wnesjog 

Indelig 
IeMILYI 


sSJOLIISIP 
sutyeods-osoieuey `I 


€90‘6Z1 
OVL‘96 
8SIT'8FI 
SEL PPI 
I68°“%TI 
608°98 
666°911I 
FS98°L0T 
80L‘TS 


OTO‘OS 


andepoysg ` 
3MISEN ` 

Buoog ` 

BIBJBg ` 

‘yseq Ysepueyy ' 
ISM YSopueyy ' 
ieseupowyy ' 
WIseuyey ' 
BALTA ° 

Buru), ` 


sjJOLIISIPp 
sutyeods-1yyereyy “TT 


60S'98 
OTP PI 
L6b Ib 
06833 


696'8L 


yeang 


Seyen youeg 


Be 


yororg 


peqepowyy 


sJoLIISIp suryeods-1yyereMny 'I 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


260 


‘AQUOPISeIg SY) JO sə[qeuonoqun əy} Aq pəq5ə[ə oq 0} SoATZeJUOSeIded JO zəqumnu TLO, 


T IIA VGSSET GG GEL purg 
LOLOL Breuey `P 
OFS‘ZG TOMIBYC `€ osoreuey “TIT 
IA L00166 108“08 indelig `g 
661'E8 wnespg `T 
€90‘62I indepoyg ‘OT 
G A 698'907 frre Buood '6 
889FFI BIBIVS `98 
OFL‘L6 ISEN 'L 
4359M Ysopueyy 9 
6 AI 698°69E T6S°GIL ysey Ysopueyy 'G IEE] TT 
6Z6°911 aeseupəuruv `y 
188101 targeueq ‘E 
I HI GLV‘80G {sors BqelOy `ç 
OTO‘0S vues ` J 
60S‘9E Jeng `S 
OV FI Seyen youed ‘py 
I H SL9'S6T L6V'IY Bey `8 Tyyerelny ‘I 
068“ yoRold ‘g 
698°8L peqepawyy ‘T 
I I 790‘68 Z90‘68 ANO Leqwog 
9 S y € 6 I 
AoUANIT}SUOD əy} 
Aq pə1oələ aq 0} Kouənysuoo qormsrp YB 
soatyeyuosoider XKouəmnjnsuoo əy} uoeə ul 
jo toquinyy jo zoquinyy ul uorye[ndog uoryerndog PU əsensucvr'r 


Pale pfnoys A&ouən1insuoo 


YB yorym SoatyeyUosorder Jo aəqumu oy} pue sə[qeuonolun əu1 Jo SaloUNNzI}SUOD əy} əq P[NOYS SurAo[oJ OUT, “LST 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 261 


These 9 elected members should form a constituency to elect one member 
from among themselves to represent the untouchables of this Presidency in 
the Imperial Legislative Council. 


28. It may be objected that though 8 representatives are not in excess 
to the untouchable population it may be in excess to the voting strength of 
untouchables. That the untouchables are a poor community and that under 
the same franchise they yield per thousand a smaller proportion of voters 
than other communities is a fact. But if the grave position of the untouchables 
is admitted instead of restricting their number of representatives, the aim 
should be to increase the number of their voters, 1.e., we must aim at lowering 
the franchise so far as the untouchables are concerned. 


29. What the franchise should be is a very important question. There 
is a line of argument which urges that franchise should be given to those 
only who can be expected to make an intelligent use of it. As against this 
view it can be said in the words of Prof. L. T. Hobhouse that it is true 
that “the success of democracy depends on the response of voters to the 
opportunities given them. But conversely the opportunities must be given 
in order to call forth the response. The exercise of popular Government is 
itself all education ... enfranchisement itself may precisely be the stimulus 
needed to awaken interest. The ballot alone effectively liberates the quiet 
citizen from the tyranny of the shouter and the wire-puller. An impression of 
existing inertness alone is not a sufficient reason for with-holding responsible 
Government or restricting the area of sufferage.” Taking into consideration 
that sufferage is an education and that there are groups with unequal 
distribution of wealth and education among them and that these groups are 
not sympathetically like-minded, the authors of the reports rightly argue 
that the case for uniformity of franchise cannot be sustained. 


30. But in the case of the untouchables there are as few reasons for 
curtailing the number of their representatives as the reasons for widening 
their electorate are many. If under a given franchise the untouchables do 
not muster strong as electors, it is not their fault. The very untouchability 
attached to their person is a bar to their moral and material progress. The 
principal modes of acquiring wealth are trade, industry or service. The 
untouchables can engage in none of these because of their untouchability. 
From an untouchable trader no Hindu will buy. An untouchable cannot 
be engaged in lucrative service. Military service had been the monopoly 
of the untouchables since the days of the East India Company. They had 
joined the Army in such large numbers that the Marquis Tweedledale in 
his note which he submitted to the Indian Army Commission of 1859 wrote, 
“It should never be forgotten that India was conquered with the help of 
the low-caste men.”. But after the mutiny when the British were able to 
secure soldiers from the ranks of the Marathas, the position of the low-caste 
men who had been the prop of the Bombay Army became precarious, not 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


because the Marathas were better soldiers but because their theological 
bias prevented them from serving under low-caste officers. The prejudice 
was so strong that even the non-caste British had to stop recruitment from 
the untouchable classes. In like manner, the untouchables are refused 
service in the Police Force. In a great many of the Government offices it is 
impossible for an untouchable to get a place. Even in the mills a distinction 
is observed. The untouchables are not admitted in Weaving Departments of 
the Cotton Mills though many of them are professional weavers. An instance 
at hand may be cited from the school system of the Bombay Municipality. 
This most cosmopolitan city ruled by a Corporation with a greater freedom 
than any other Corporation in India has two different sets of schools ... one 
for the children of touchables and the other for those of the untouchables., 
This in itself is a point worthy of note. But there is something yet more 
noteworthy. Following the division of schools it has divided its teaching staff 
into untouchables and touchables. As the untouchable teachers are short of 
the demand, some of the untouchable schools are manned by teachers from 
the touchable class. The heart-killing fun of it is that if there is a higher 
grade open in untouchable school service, as there is bound to be because 
of a few untouchable trained teachers, a touchable teacher can be thrust 
into the grade. But if a higher grade is open in the touchable school service, 
no untouchable teacher can be thrust into that grade. He must wait till 
a vacancy occurs in the untouchable service ! ! ! Such is the ethics of the 
Hindu social life. Under it if the untouchables are poor, the committee, it 
may be hoped, will not deny them representation because of their small 
electoral roll but will see its way to grant them adequate representation to 
enable the untouchables to remove the evil conditions that bring about their 
poverty. At present when all the avenues of acquiring wealth are closed, it 
is unwise to require from the untouchables a high property qualification. 
To deny them the opportunities of acquiring wealth and then to ask from 
them a property qualification is to add insult to injury. Just what sort of 
franchise and just what pitch are required to produce sufficient voting strength 
from the untouchables ? In absence of data, I leave it to the Committee to 
decide. It would be better to pitch the franchise so low as to educate into 
political life as many untouchables as possible. They are too degraded to be 
conscious of themselves. I only wish to emphasize that in deciding upon the 
representation of the untouchables the Committee looking to their interests 
at stake will not let the extent of the electorate govern the number of 
representatives, but will rather let the number of representatives govern 
the extension of the electorate. 


31. In this connection it would not be improper to remind the Committee 
of Lord Morley who is reported to have said that “the object of Government 
was that the Legislative Councils should represent truly and effectively 
with reasonable approach to the balance of real social forces, the wishes 
and needs of the communities concerned. This could not be done by Algebra, 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 263 


Arithmetic, Geometry or Logic, but by a wide outlook. He saw no harm as to 
a compromise that while numbers should be the main factor in determining 
the extent of representation modifying causes might influence the number of 
representatives.” It is therefore proposed that the untouchables of the Bombay 
Presidency should be allowed to elect 9 members through the constituencies 
made up as above. These 9 members will further form a constituency to 
elect one member from among themselves to represent the untouchables 
in the Imperial Legislative Council leaving 8 members to represent the 
untouchables in the Bombay Legislative Council. 


32. Besides communal electorates there are other schemes in the field for 
the representation of the untouchables. It would not be proper to close this 
statement without a word of comment on those Schemes. 


33. The Congress has denied communal representation except in the case of 
Mohammedans and it also denies the extensive use of nomination ; the only 
way then left, open to the untouchables is to fight in a general electorate. 
Now this is as it should be if all were equally free to fight. To educate the 
untouchables by Shahtras into pro-touchables and the touchables into anti- 
untouchables and then to propose that the two should fight out at an open 
poll is to betray signs of mental aberration or a mentality fed on cunning. 
But it must never be forgotten that the Congress is largely composed of men 
who are by design political Radicals and social Tories. Their chant is that 
the social and the political are two distinct things having no bearing on each 
other. To them the social and the political are two suits and can be worn 
one at a time as the season demands. Such a psychology has to be laughed 
at because it is too interested to be seriously taken into consideration either 
for acceptance or for rejection. As it pays to believe in it, it will die a hard 
death. Starting from this unnatural premise the Congress activities have 
been quite natural. Those who attend the Congress do not care to attend 
the National Social Conference held in the same pandal. In fact those who 
attend the Congress had once started a campaign to refuse the use of the 
pandal to the Conference which was once refused the pandal in the city 
of Poona, the roosting place of the intelligentia of our Presidency, As the 
Congress is a non-national or anti-national body, its views on communal 
electorates are worthy of no serious consideration. 


34. The moderates in their separate meeting have been more kindly than 
just. They proposed the reservation of seats for backward communities in 
plural constituencies. They have not specified the number of seats for the 
untouchables. But the general sense of many enlightened moderates and 
others kindly inclined is that one or two representatives of the untouchables 
in the Legislative Council would suffice. It is impossible to agree with these 
gentlemen though they are entitled to gratitude for this much sympathy. 
One or two representatives of the untouchables are as good as having none. 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


A Legislative Council is not an old curiosity shop. It will be a Council 
with powers to make or mar the fortunes of society. How can one or two 
untouchables carry a legislative measure to improve their condition or 
prevent a legislative measure worsening their state? To be frank, the 
untouchables cannot expect much good from the political power to be given 
over to the high caste Hindus. Though the power may not be used against 
the untouchables and one cannot be altogether sure of this, it may not be 
used for their betterment. A Legislative Council may be sovereign to do 
anything it likes, but what it will like to do depends upon its own character. 
The English Parliament, we may be certain, though it is sovereign to do 
anything, will not make the preservation of blue-eyed babies illegal. The 
Sultan will not, though he can, change the religion of Mohammed just as 
the Pope will not, though he can, overthrow the religion of Christ. In the 
same way legislature, mainly composed of high caste men, will not pass 
a law removing untouchability, sanctioning inter-marriages, removing the 
ban on the use of public streets, public temples, public schools; in short, 
cleansing the person of the untouchables. This is not because they cannot, 
but chiefly because they will not. A legislature is the product of a certain 
social condition and its power is determined by whatever determines society. 
This is too obvious to be denied. What may happen in future can be guessed 
from what has happened in the past. The high caste men in the Council 
do not like any social question being brought before the legislature, as may 
be seen from the fact of the Resolution introduced by the Honourable Mr. 
Dadabhoy in 1916 in the Imperial Legislative Council. That it was adversely 
criticized by many who claimed to evince some interest in the untouchables 
is too well known to need repetition. But what is not well known is that 
though the resolution was lost the mover was not pardoned; for the very 
moving of such a nasty resolution was regarded as a sin. At a subsequent 
election the mover had to make room for the Honourable Mr. Khaparde, 
who once wrote in an article : “ Those who work for the elevation of the 
untouchables are themselves degraded.” 


Isn’t this sympathy of the higher castes for the untouchables, sympathy 
with a vengeance ? 


35. Those who tell that one or two members would suffice for the 
untouchables fail to grasp the true import of political right. The chief 
import of a political right though technically summed up in the power 
to vote does lie either in voting upon for laws or for those who make 
laws ; neither does it consist in the right to speak for or against a certain 
measure nor in being able to say “yea or nay” upon roll-call; to be able 
to put into a ballot-box a piece of paper with a number of names written 
thereon is an act which, like those mentioned above, of itself possesses no 
value which stamps it as inherently superior to many of the most ordinary 
transactions of daily life. They are educative but as much as any transaction 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 265 


1s. The chief significance of sufferage or a political right consists in a chance 
for active and direct participation in the regulation of the terms upon which 
associated life shall be sustained. Now the terms upon which the associated 
life between the touchables and untouchables is carried on today are the 
most ignominious to the former and highly detrimental to the latter. To make 
effective the capacities of a people there must be the power to fix the social 
conditions of their exercise. If the conditions are too obdurate, it is in the 
interest of the untouchables as well as of the touchables that the conditions 
should be revised. The untouchables must be in a position to influence the 
revision. Looking to the gravity of their interests, they should get their 
representation as proposed in proportion to their population. One or two is 
only kind but neither just nor sufficient. As Lord Morley says in an earlier 
quotation, needs not numbers should govern the extent of representations. 


36. Recently there is brought into the forefront a rival scheme for the 
representation of the untouchables by the Depressed Class Mission. The 
scheme is known as co-option. The scheme proposes that the representatives 
of the untouchables should be nominated by the co-option of the elected 
members of the Council. Whether one should laugh or cry at the solicitude 
of the Mission for the untouchables it is rather difficult to decide. To cry 
1s to believe that such a silly scheme would ever be adopted. The best way 
is to laugh it out. From the scheme can be easily seen that what is some 
times called benevolent interest in others may be an unwilling mask for an 
attempt to dictate to them what their good shall be, instead of an endeavour 
to agree with them so that they may seek and find the good of their own 
choice. The Mission, it must be said, was started with the intention of 
improving the condition of the Depressed Classes by emancipating them 
from the social tyranny of their high caste masters. But the Mission has 
fallen on such bad times that it is forced to advocate a scheme by which its 
wards or their representatives will be bounden slaves of their past masters. 
The masters and the mission have thus met and evolved a scheme which 
will keep the Depressed classes eternally depressed without any hope of 
deliverance. Such tactics do not deceive the untouchables ignorant as they 
are ; much less will they deceive the Franchise Committee. From another 
point of view the scheme of the Mission is unacceptable. It is aggravating to 
see the Mission proposing a scheme for the representation of the untouchables 
while persistently refusing to admit an untouchable in its governing council. 
Interested and officious as it is, its seheme must be rejected. 


37. Nomination even though by Government in itself to be preferred to the 
former kind of nomination, is to be objected to from the stand-point of the 
untouchables. Apart from restricting the freedom of the representatives it 
fails to give political education which is the urgent need of all communities, 
much more of the untouchables. 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


38. At this stage we must consider the argument against communal 
representation. The first argument raised by the authors of the report is to 
the effect “that the history of self-government among the nations who have 
developed it is decisively against” communal representation. But on an earlier 
page the authors say that the difference of caste and creeds must be taken 
“into account as presenting a feature of Indian Society which is out of harmony 
with the ideas on which elsewhere in the world representative institutions 
rest” (page 97). In writing the former the later analysis of the situation 
must have vanished from their minds, else we must say that the authors 
could hold two opposing views at the same time. Presented in juxtaposition, 
the authors must be expected to agree to communal representation on the 
score of an exceptional remedy required to meet an exceptional situation. 


39. Another and chief argument against communal representation is that 
it will perpetuate social divisions. The fun of it is that those who uphold the 
social divisions are the loudest in their expression of this adverse argument. 
The committee will please note that those who are the opponents of communal 
representation on this score are also the staunchest opponents of Mr. Patel's 
Inter-Caste Marriage Bill as a caste-breaking bill. The sincerity of those 
who bring forward this argument is seriously to be doubted. But as even 
the authors of the report have put it as a second count against communal 
representation, this particular argument must be met if possible. 


Does communal representation perpetuate social divisions ? If you look 
upon communal representation as making electoral Colleges of social divisions, 
the criticism may be said to be valid. This is true only if it is presupposed 
that the divisions are no real divisions and that they don't matter. This is 
as false a pre-supposition as that of inviting India which is made when it 
is said that Englishmen are unsocial. Communal Representation is a device 
to ward off the evil effects of the divisions. To those who, while agreeing 
to this particular benefit of communal representation, object to it on the 
score that it perpetuates the divisions it can be shown that there is another 
perspective from which it can be said that communal representation instead 
of perpetuating the social divisions is one of the ways of dissolving them. 


40. While communal electorates will be co-terminous with social divisions 
their chief effect will be to bring together men from diverse castes who would 
not otherwise mix together into the Legislative Council. The Legislative 
Council will thus become a new cycle of participation in which the 
representatives of various castes who were erstwhile isolated and therefore 
anti-social will be thrown into an associated life. An active participation 
in an associated life, in its turn, will not leave unaffected the dispositions 
and attitudes of those who participate. A caste or a religious group to-day 
is a certain attitude. So long as each caste or a group remains isolated its 
attitude remains fossilized. But the moment the several castes and groups 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 267 


begin to have contact and co-operation with one another the resocialization 
of the fossilized attitude is bound to be the result. If the Hindus become 
resocialized with regard to their attitude towards Mohammedans, Christians, 
etc., and the Mohammedans, Christians, etc., become resocialized with 
regard to their attitudes towards the Hindus, or the touchable Hindus with 
regard to the untouchables, caste and divisions will vanish. If caste is an 
attitude and it is nothing else, it must be said to be dissolved when that 
particular attitude symbolizing the caste is dissolved. But the existing set 
attitude representing the diverse castes and groups will be dissolved only if 
the diverse groups meet together and take part in a common activity. Such 
changes of disposition and attitudes will not be ephemeral but will, in their 
turn influence associated life outside the Council Hall. The more opportunities 
are created for such conjoint activities the better. The resocialization will 
then be on a larger scale and bring about a speedier end of caste and 
groups. Thus those who condemn communal representation on the score of 
perpetuating the existing divisions will welcome it, on reflection, as a potent 
solvent for dissolving them. 


41. The importance and necessity of communal and adequate representation 
of untouchables is beyond question. The depth of emotion with which the 
untouchables speak on this topic must have been easily gauged when the 
untouchables of the Madras Presidency told Mr. Montagu that there would 
be bloodshed if Home Rule for India was not accompanied by communal 
representation to the untouchables. The authors of the Report however are 
actuated by a faith in the intelligentsia to effect all reforms fox the elevation 
of the untouchables from permanent degradation and ostracism. They say 
“they find the educated Indian organizing effort not for political ends alone 
but for various forms of public and social service.”. As the authors have 
connived at the demands of the untouchables on this score it is but proper 
to investigate whether their faith is well grounded. On education and its 
social value the words of Joseph Addison are not too stale to be recalled. 
He said, “There can be no greater injury to human society than that good 
Talents among men should be held Honourable to those who are endowed 
with them without any regard how they are applied. The Gifts of Nature 
and the Accomplishments of Art are valuable but as they are exerted in the 
interest of virtue or governed by the Rules of Honour, we ought to abstract 
our minds from the observation of an excellence in those we converse with, 
till we have taken some notice or recelved some good information of the 
Disposition of their Minds, otherwise they make us fond of those whom our 
reason and judement will tell us we ought to abhor.” 


42. Statistics will show that the intelligentia and the Brahmin caste 
are exchangeable terms. The disposition of the intelligentsia is a Brahmin 
disposition. Its outlook is a Brahmin outlook. Though he has learned to 
speak in the name of all, the Brahmin leader is in no sense a leader of the 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


people. He is a leader of his caste at best, for he feels them as he does 
for no other people. It is not intended to say that there are no Brahmins 
who feel for the untouchables. To be just, there are a few more moderate 
and rational Brahmins who admit the frightful nature of the institution 
of untouchability in the abstract and perceive the dangers to society with 
which it is fraught. But the great majority of the Brahmins are those who 
doggedly deny the horrors of the system in the teeth of such a mass of 
evidence as never was brought to bear on any other subject and to which 
the experience of every day contributes its Immense amount; who, when they 
speak of freedom, mean the freedom to oppress their kind and to be savage, 
merciless and cruel, and whose inalienable rights can only have their growth 
in the wrongs of the untouchables. Their delicate gentility will neither bear 
the Englishmen as superior nor will it brook the untouchables as equal. “I 
will not tolerate a man above me, and of those below none must approach 
too near” sums up the true spirit of their social as well as political creed. 
Those who speak against the anti-social spirit of the Brahmin leaders are 
often cautioned that in their denunciation they do not pay sufficient regard 
to the existence of the first class of Brahmin leaders. This is no doubt the 
case. Noble but very rare instances of personal and pecuniary sacrifice may 
be found among them just as may be found to be tender in the exercise of 
their unnatural power. Still it is to be feared that this injustice is inseparable 
from the state of things with which humanity and truth are invoked to deal. 
The miserable state of the untouchables is not a bit more tolerable because 
some tender hearts are bound to show sympathy, nor can the indignant tide 
of honest wrath stand still because in its course it overwhelms a few who 
are comparatively innocent among a host of guilty. 


43. The trend of nationalism in India does not warrant us to believe that 
the few who are sympathetic will grow in volume. On the other hand it is 
the host of guilty that time is sure to multiply. With the growth of political 
agitation, the agitation for social reform has subsided and has even vanished 
The Prarthana Samaj, the Brahmo Samaj with their elevating influence have 
become things of the past. The future has few things like these in store. 
The growth of education if it is confined to one class, will not necessarily 
lead to liberalism. It may lead to the justification and conservation of class 
interest; and instead of creating the liberators of the down-trodden, it may 
create champions of the past and the supporters of the status quo. Isn't, 
this the effect of education so far ? That it will take a new course in future 
ceteris paribus, there is no ground to believe. Therefore, instead of leaving 
the untouchables to the mercy of the higher castes, the wiser policy would 
be to give power to the untouchables themselves who are anxious, not like 
others, to usurp power but only to assert their natural place in society. 


44, This gigantic world war, however motivated, has yielded what is 
known as the principle of self-determination which is to govern international 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 269 


relations of the future. It is happy to note that the pronouncement of the 
20th August 1917 declared the application of the principle to India — a 
principle which enunciates the rule that every people must be free to 
determine the conditions under which it is to live. It would be a sign of 
imperfect realization of the significance of this principle if its application were 
restricted to international relations, because discord does not exist between 
nations alone, but there is also discord between classes from within a nation. 
Wittingly our Indian politicians in their political speeches and harangues 
hold to the de jure conception of the Indian people. By the de jure conception 
they conceive of the Indian people as by nature one and emphasize the 
qualities such as praiseworthy community of purpose and welfare, loyalty 
to public ends and mutuality of sympathy which accompany this unity. How 
the de jure and de facto conceptions conflict, it is hoped, the committee will 
not fail to realize. As an instance the following may be noted. The moral 
evil to the Indian people of their conquest and subjugation by the British 
is a theme which is very attractive to the Brahmin politicians, who never 
fail to make capital out of it. The moral evils were once portrayed by John 
Shore in his “Notes on Indian Affairs” written in 1832. The late Honourable 
Mr. Gokhale once voiced the same feeling when speaking about the “excessive 
costliness of the foreign agency”. He said : 


“There is a moral evil which, if anything, is even greater. A kind of dwarfing 
or stunting of the Indian race is going on under the present system. We must 
live all the days of our life in an atmosphere of inferiority and the tallest 
of us must bend, in order that the exigencies of the existing system may be 
satisfied. The upward impulse, if I may use such an expression, which every 
schoolboy at Eton and Harrow may feel, that he may one day be a Gladstone 
or Napoleon or a Wellington, and which may draw forth the best efforts of 
which he is capable, is denied to us. The full height to which our manhood is 
capable of rising can never be reached by us under the present system. The 
moral elevation which every self-governing people feel cannot be felt by us. Our 
administrative and military talents must gradually disappear, owing to sheer 
disuse till at last our lot as hewers of wood and drawers of water in our own 
country, is stereotyped.”. 


45. I beg to invite the attention of the Committee whether these sentiments 
which have been voiced by a Brahmin (a noble Brahmin to be sure) to the 
disgrace of the British bureaucracy cannot be more fittingly voiced by the 
untouchables to the disgrace of the Brahmin oligarchy? May it be said to 
the credit of the bureaucracy, that it has disproved the charge of being 
wooden and shown itself susceptible to feeling by proposing changes in the 
system of the Government which has dwarfed the personality of those for 
whom it was devised. But can the oligarchy claim anything half as noble? 
Their belief is that the Hindu social system has been perfected for all time 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


by their ancestors who had the superhuman vision of all eternity and 
supernatural power for making infinite provision for future ages. This deep 
ingrained ethnocentrism has prevented a reconstruction of Hindu Society 
and stood in the way of a revision of vested rights for the common good. 
A farce of a conference for the removal of untouchability was enacted in 
March 1918 in Bombay. Doctor Kurtakoti, the Shankaracharya of Karvir 
fame, though promised to attend, left for Northern India just a day or two 
before the conference met, on some urgent business. Mr. Tilak is credited 
with a short speech at the conference which has for the good luck of 
Mr. Tilak remained unreported. But this was only lip sympathy shown to 
hoodwink the untouchables for when the draft of the proclamation removing 
untouchabilily was presented to Mr. Tilak, it is known on creditable evidence 
that he refused to honour it with his signature. 


46. Here is disclosed a patent disharmony within a nation and therefore 
a proper field for the application of the principle of self-determination. If 
the advanced classes are clamouring for its application to India and if the 
powers that be have sanctioned it, however partially, to ward off the future 
stunting and dwarfing of the Indian people, may not the untouchables with 
justice claim its benefit in their own interest ? Admitting the necessity of 
self-determination for the untouchables communal representation cannot be 
withheld from them, for communal representation and self-determination are 
but two different phrases which express the same notion. 


Supplementary Written Statement of Mr. Bhimrao R. Ambedkar 


1. The object of this supplement is primarily, to show how the scheme 
of representation which I have recommended for the untouchables of the 
Bombay Presidency in my previous statement can be fitted into the scheme 
of representation proposed by the Government of Bombay for the composition 
of the Legislative Council. 


2. First I wish to propose certain changes in number of seats assigned 
by the Government to the various main constituencies. The several changes 
proposed are indicated in the following table : 


Distribution of Seats among By Govt. By me 
(1) Zamindars and Jahagirdas of Sind Ss 1 1 
(2) Sardars of Gujarat A 1 1 
(3) Sardars of Deccan PS, ae 1 1 
(4) Bombay University ina sg 2 2 
(5) Europeans brite set 4 4 
(6) Sindh Hindus AT sins 3 4 
(7) Mohammedans eee kaa 18 10 
(8) Six cities A Za 18 T 
(9) Twenty-six Districts of the Presidency sss 52 60 


Total ia 100 100 


3. As regards the method of election proposed for I, II, III, IV & V of the 
above constituencies, I agree with the Government. 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 271 


4. The Government has reserved 3 seats for the Sindh Hindus. I have 
proposed 4 of them, one of which should be earmarked for the untouchables 
of Sind to be filled by a communal electorate. 


5. For the 6 cities I have reserved 17 seats. Of this I propose that Bombay 
should be given 10. Of the 10 seats the untouchables of the city should be 
given 1 seat, also to be filled by a communal electorate. 


6. So far it is shown how the Sind untouchables and their fellows in Bombay 
can be provided for. In addition to these two seats the untouchables of the 
Presidency proper, excluding the city of Bombay, should be given 7 seats. 
The constituencies among which these 7 seats are to be distributed, I have 
indicated on page 7 of my previous statement. It is in this fashion that the 
9 seats for the untouchables of the Presidency should be carved out. The 
Government of Bombay finds difficulty in defining the Depressed Classes. 


The difficulty is not a real difficulty, for, for all practical purposes the 
untouchables and the Depressed classes are the same. Knowing full well the 
degradation of the untouchables, the callousness of the Bombay Government 
is appalling. By refusing to make provision for the representation of the 
Depressed classes the Government have deliberately thrown the gravest 
of interests into the greatest of perils—a calamity which I am sure the 
Committee will avert. 


7. Having taken out 7 seats from the 60, I propose to distribute the 
remaining 53 among the touchable population of the 26 districts as follows : 


I allow, though cannot quite agree with the Government, that the 7 
districts of Sind should elect 14 members on the basis of 2 per district. 
But in the case of the 19 districts which are outside Sind I feel that a 
two-member constituency will not suffice, principally because the touchable 
Hindu population is not homogeneous. In order to satisfy the aspirations of 
the subdivisions of the touchable Hindus we must at least in some cases 
give up the principle of a two-member constituency. [91 (2)] To distribute 
the 39 seats among the 19 districts in question I should first group the 
districts on linguistic basis as follows : 


Districts Touchable 
Hindu Population 


I Gujarathi 
(1) Ahmedabad a Ses i 614, 286 
(2) Broach nae ad ete 170, 545 
(3) Kaira E eai mateo 556, 667 
(4) Panch Mahals iy Gaa ssa 259, 929 
(5) Surat sank ond iets 535, 236 
Total 21, 36, 663 

II Marathi 
(1) Thana Sa sine TE 736, 915 
(2) Kolaba iek pols eis 509, 158 
(3) Ratnagiri Pe A idan 1, 003, 240 


(4) Ahmednagar pak wees iow 738, 747 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Districts Touchable 
Hindu Population 


(5) Khandesh East aoe wee em 789, 740 
(6) Khandesh West ree ies ee 437, 391 
(7) Nasik ae ar D 745, 965 
(8) Satara os at oun 883, 488 
(9) Poona are tae! Paar 858, 607 
(10) Sholapur E. 574,152 

Total ssx 72, 77, 403 

III KANARESE 

(1) Belgaum set pis isan 734, 598 
(2) Bijapur TE pui ina 677, 041 
(3) Dharwar exon ae aor 820, 345 
(4) Kanara DA ie ean 372, 857 

Total as 26, 04, 841 


Grand total of touchable Hindus in the 19 Districts concerned 12,018,907. 


Of the 39 seats to be distributed I should give 8 seats to the Gujarati. 
23 to the Marathi and 8 to the Kanarese districts. 


The actual constituencies may be as under : 


Language Population in Number Number of 
Districts each constituency of the Representatives 
Constituency to be elected by 
the Constituency 
1 2 3 4 
I GUJARATHI 
(1) Ahmednagar .. 614, 286 I 2 
(2) Broach ws 127, 212 II 3 
(3) Kaira Se 
(4) Panch Mahais } .. 795, 165 Ill 3 
(5) Surat y 
II Marathi 
(1) Thana } .. 1, 246, 073 IV 4 
(2) Kolaba aes 
(3) Ratnagiri .. 1, 003, 240 V 2 
(4) Ahmednagar } .. 1, 484, 712 VI 3 
(5) Nasik = 
(6) Khandesh East 22, Ly 227, 131 VII Ə 
(7) Khandesh West ) z 
(8) Satara .. 883, 488 VIII £ 
(9) Poona .. 858, 607 IX 3 
(10) Sholapur .. 574,152 X 3 


*No Figure is shown against the Satara district in the original. 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 273 


al 2 3 4 
HI KANARESE 
(1) Belgaum .. 1,411,639 IX 4 
(2) Bijapur } 


(3) Dharwar } 
(4) Kanara 


Total number of representatives for the 19 districts 39. 


1,193,202 XII 4 


The Principal advantage of such a grouping is that the demand of the 
Marathas and the Lingayats can be satisfied without resorting to communal 
representation. There is no sacredness about a district that can plead against 
transcending its boundaries for political purposes when such a transcending 
enables us to minimise the field for communal representation. 


8. I have differed from the Government of Bombay on the number of 
representatives to be given to the Mohamedans. Of the two bases, population 
and the Congress Scheme, the Government of Bombay have preferred the 
latter without even making a show of reasoning. In doing so they have 
contravened the most considered opinion of the authors of the Reforms 
Scheme who say that there is no basis other than that of negotiation for 
the proportion of Mohammedan representation fixed in the Congress League 
Scheme. It must be urged that looking to its composition the Congress is a 
body whose vicarious promises can never be binding on the vast population 
who have played no part in its deliberations. 


9. The Mohammedans of this presidency form 20 per cent of the total 
population. On the basis of population therefore, they are entitled only to 
20 seats out of the 100 elective seats. But tempering population by need I 
think 24 seats ought to satisfy them. Any excess over this cannot be tolerated 
as it will be at the cost of the other communities. Of these 24, the 7 districts 
of Sind on the basis of 2 per district will return 14 Mohammedans. The 
other 10 seats may be distributed as follows : 


Population No. of 
Representatives 
(1) Bombay City ... 179,246 2 
(2) Northern Division ... 342, 696 2 
(3) Central Division ... 3867, 509 3 
(4) Southern Division ... 457, 997 3 
Total... 10 


I should prefer linguistic grouping to divisional grouping even in the case 
of the Mohammedans. I fail to see how a Mohammedan from Thana can 
have any affiliation with a Mohammedan of Surat though both the districts 
come under the same division. To group together for political purposes people 
who are ethnically different is absurd. 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Bhimrao R. Ambedkar called and examined 


Sir Frank Sly: He was a professor in the Sydenham College of Commerce. 
He graduated from the Elphinstone College, Bombay and was an M.A. of 
the Columbia University, New York. He was a Mahar by caste and his 
statement dealt largely with the depressed classes. 


So far as the Hindu community was concerned, he divided them into two 
classes, touchables and untouchables; a distinction which was unmistakable 
in practice and more convenient than a division by castes. He recognised 
also a distinction between Brahmins and non-Brahmins, but this was of 
less importance. The distinction between Brahmin and non-Brahmin would 
not make much difference as regards the attitude of voter to a candidate, 
but the distinction between touchable and untouchable would make a very 
great difference. 


He did not think there was any necessity for communal electorates for 
non-Brahmins as, if three-member constituencies were granted according to 
his supplementary statement, non-Brahmins would get some seats. From the 
figures in para 16 of his written statement he intended to show that on a 
uniform property qualification, a community which might be in a minority 
with regard to population might be in a majority in respect of voting strength ; 
some of the communities that he had mentioned might be minorities in the 
whole province, but majorities in particular districts. They should try to 
reduce the fever for communal representation as much as possible, and he 
therefore recommended three-member constituencies. 


He wanted a variation of the franchise for the untouchables; but, if 
constituencies with more than two members were adopted, the lowering of 
the franchise became a matter of less importance. In the case of a small 
constituency, for instance, the Marathas, it might be desirable to group them. 


If a particular community had a majority of votes in a constituency, there 
was no need for that community to have separate communal representation. 
If the untouchables had a majority of votes in a particular constituency, 
he would not ask for communal representation. It was because they were 
in a minority and would always remain so on a uniform franchise that he 
asked for separate representation. His justification for asking for a low 
franchise was that as a result of being untouchable, the untouchables had 
no property ; they could not trade because they could not find customers. He 
remembered a case in which a Mahar woman was taken to the police court 
for selling water-melons. He was not aware of the conditions outside the 
Bombay Presidency. In the mills in the Bombay Presidency the untouchables 
were not yet allowed to work in the weaving department; in one case an 
untouchable did work in the weaving department of a mill saying that he 
was a Mohammedan, and when found out, he was severely beaten. 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 275 


The definition of an “untouchable” as a person who would cause 
pollution by his touch, was a satisfactory one for electoral purposes. It 
was not the case that some castes were considered to be untouchable in 
some districts and touchable in others. 


According to his classification the untouchables amounted to about 
8 per cent of the population, but he had proposed 9 seats which would 
make about 9 per cent. These seats should be filled by separate communal 
election. 


He was aware that the untouchable in his present state of development 
was in no way qualified to give a responsible vote. In the whole Bombay 
Presidency there were one B.A. and 6 or 7 matriculates among the 
depressed classes. The proportion of those who were literate in English 
was very small, but not much smaller than in the case of the backward 
classes. The depressed classes, especially the Mahars and the Chamars, 
were fit to exercise the vote. He would also give them the votes by way of 
education. He could find at least 25 or more men amongst them who had 
passed the 6th or the 7th Standards of a High School, and, although the 
number was not large, the 9 seats which he suggested for the depressed 
classes could be filled from amongst them. Such a candidate in practical 
matters would be as good as a graduate although, the latter might be 
able to express himself better. 


He was opposed to any system under which the representatives of 
the depressed classes were drawn from other classes. Representation by 
missionaries, for instance, would not be representation in any real sense 
of the word. 


He suggested large constituencies for the depressed classes; if such 
large constituencies had been accepted for the Mohammedans he did not 
see why they were not practicable in the case of the depressed classes. 


In order to obtain the required number of seats for the depressed classes 
he would reduce the number of seats suggested by Government for the 
Mohammedans, from 18 to 10. This reduction was justifiable, as on the 
population basis the Mohammedans were only entitled to 20 per cent of 
the seats. He did not consider the Congress League Pact as binding on all. 


Mr. Hailey : Untouchables were persons to whom certain rights of 
citizenship had been denied. For instance, it was the right of every 
citizen to walk down the street, and if a man were prevented from doing 
so, even temporarily, it was an infringement of his right. Whether a 
man was prevented from exercising his rights by law or social custom, 
made very little difference to him. Government had recognised custom 
and persons belonging to the untouchable classes were not employed in 
Government service. 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


He suggested the lowering of the franchise qualification in the case of the 
depressed classes, as it should be the object of the Government to improve 
the lot of the community. 


From an examination of the Census Report he would say that the problem 
of touchable and non-touchable existed in Sind, as although the greater 
proportion of the population there were Mohammedans, there were also 
Hindus. If special provision was going to be made for the Hindus in Sind, 
he did not see why special provision should not be made for the depressed 
classes also. 


Mr. Banerjee: The depressed classes would be able to find 9 men who were 
able to speak English and who could represent their cause in the Council. 
The 6th standard was the class below the matriculation, and a man who had 
passed the 6th standard would be able to follow the debates in the Council. 
They had about 25 persons who had passed that standard. 


For political purposes there would be no difficulty in defining the depressed 
classes, who were the same as the untouchables. No one who was not a 
member of a depressed class would think of trying to make himself out to be 
such, though such a thing might occur in the case of the backward classes. 


He would accept 8 representatives as the minimum for the depressed 
classes, and they should be elected. Nominated representative would not be 
in a position adequately to represent their interests. 


Mr. Crump: He had no experience of the problem and conditions of the 
untouchable classes in Sind, and could not say anything with regard to the 
statement that there was only one such class, viz., the Bhangis, there- His 
information was that the total Hindu population in Sind was 837,426 and 
the total of the untouchable classes was 135,224. 


Mr. Natarajan: His view was that British rule in India was meant to 
provide equal opportunities for all, and that in transferring a large share 
of the power to popular assemblies, arrangements should be made whereby 
the hardships and disabilities entailed by the social system should not be 
reproduced and perpetuated in political institutions. As regards the exact 
position at present, he admitted that, for instance, at the Parel school which 
was meant for the depressed classes, there were many higher-caste pupils, 
who came there because 1t was a good school. Similarly as a professor he, 
being a member of a depressed class, had pupils of all classes and found no 
difficulty in dealing with his higher caste pupils. If the untouchable classes 
were recognized by Government by the grant of seats, their status would be 
raised and their powers would be stimulated. He was not very particular 
about the number of their seats; all he wanted was something adequate. 


EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE 277 


The following persons were called and examined at Bombay 
between 24 January 1919 and 31 January 1919: 


(1) L. C. Cramp, Esq., I.C.S. representing the Government of Bombay 
(24 January 1919). 
(2) The Hon’ble Major C. Fernandez, M. D. I. M. S. (Temporary) 
(24 January 1919). 
(3) The Rev. Cannon D. L. Joshi, representing the Bombay Indian 
Christian (Protestant) Association (24 January 1919). 
(4) Lieut. Colonel H.A.J. Gidney, I.M.S. (Retired), representing the 
Anglo-Indian Empire League (Bombay Branch) (25 January 1919). 
(5) Sir Jamsetjee Jeyjeebhoy, BART (25 January 1919). 
(6) W. A. Haig Brown, Esq., representing the Bombay Branch of the 
European Association (25 January 1919). 
(7) Mr. D. D. Sathaye, representing the Bombay National Union 
(25 January 1919). 
(8) The Hon’ble Mr. M. A. Jinnah (25 January 1919). 
(9) Mr. C. N. Wadia, representing the Bombay Millowners Association 
(27 January 1919). 
(10) Mr. V. R. Shinde (27 January 1919). 
(11) Mr. K. R. Koregawkar, representing the Maratha Aikyecchu Sabha 
(27 January 1919). 
(12) The Hon’ble Mr. M.A. Jinnah (27 January 1919). 
(13) Mirza Ali Muhamad Khan (27 January 1919). 
(14) Bhimrao R. Ambedkar Esq. (27 January 1919). 
(15) The Hon’ble Mr. V. J. Patel (28) January 1919). 
(16) The Hon’ble Sahib Hiralal Desaibhai Desai (28 January 1919). 
(17) The Hon’ble Mr. Chunilal V. Mehta (28 January 1919). 
(18) A. B. Latthe, Esq. (28 January 1919). 
(19) The Hon’ble Mr. R. P. Paranjpye (28 January 1919). 
(20) Mr. V. R. Kothari, representing the Deccan Ryots’ Association 
(28 January 1919). 
(21) Messrs. Umar Sobhani and S. G. Banker, representing the Bombay 
Home Rule League (29 January 1919). 
(22) H. N. Apte Esq., representing the Deccan Sabha, Poona (23 January 
1919). 
(23) N. C. Kelkar Esq. (29 January 1919). 
(24) The Hon’ble Mr. D. V. Belvi (29 January 1919). 
(25) Rao Bahadur Thakorram Kapilram (29 January 1919). 
(26) N. M- Joshi Esq., Member of the Servants of India Society 
(80 January 1919). 
(27) The Hon’ble Rao Bahadur Venkatesh Srinivas Naik (80 January 
1919). 
(28) Pandit R. Chikodi (80 January 1919). 


278 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(29) 


(80) 


(31) 


(32) 
(33) 
(34) 
(35) 
(36) 


The Hon’ble Mr. 8. J. Gillum and Sir Thomas Birkett, Kt., representing 
the Bombay Chamber of Commerce (30 January 1919). 


Mr. Ambalal Sarabhai with Mr. Kasturbhai Lalbhai, Dalpatbhai 
representing the Ahmadabad Miliowners’ Association (30 January 
1919). 


Devidas Madhavji Thakersey, Esq., representing the Bombay Native 
Piece-goods Merchants Association (80 January 1919). 


The Hon’ble Mr. Ghulam Hussain Hidayatulla (81 January 1919). 
Mr. B. V. Jadhav (31 January 1919). 

The Hon’ble Sir Pazulbhoy Currimbhoy, Kt., C.I.E. (81 January 1919). 
H. P. Mody Esq. (31 January 1919). 


Sardar V. N. Mutalik representing the Inamdars’ Central Association, 
Satara (31 January 1919). 


8 


TRACTS FOR THE TIMES: No. 3. 


FEDERATION 
VERSUS 
FREEDOM 


(Kale Memorial Lecture) 


Address delivered on 29th January 1989 
at 
the Annual Function 
of 
the Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics 
held in 
the Gokhale Hall, Poona 


“The distance you have gone is less important than 
the direction in which you are going today.” 


—Tolstoy 


First Published : 1989 
Reprinted from the first edition 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 


PREFACE 


A word or two as regards the origin of this tract and the motive 
which has led me to publish it at this time will, I think, not be out 
of place. 


Many in this country must be aware that there exists im Poona 
an institution which is called the Gokhale Institute of Politics and 
Economics, working under the direction of Dr. D. R. Gadgil. The 
Institute holds a function annually to celebrate what is called the 
Founder’s Day and invites some one to deliver an address on some 
subject connected with politics or economics. This year, I was asked 
by Dr. Gadgil to deliver an address. I accepted the invitation and 
chose the Federal Scheme as the subject of my address. The address 
covered both (1) the structure of the Federation and (2) a critique of 
that structure. The address was delivered on 29th January 1939 at 
the Gokhale Hall in Poona. The address as prepared had become too 
lengthy for the time allotted to me and although I kept the audience 
for two hours when usually the time allotted for such address is one 
hour I had to omit from the address the whole of the part relating 
to the Federal structure and some portion from the part relating to 
the criticism of the structure. This tract, however, contains the whole 
of the original address prepared by me for the occasion. 


So much for the origin of this tract. Now as to the reasons for 
publishing it. All addresses delivered at the Gokhale Institute 
are published. It is in the course of things that this also should 
be published. But there are other reasons besides this, which 
have prevailed with me to publish it. So far as the Federation 


282 PREFACE 


1s concerned, the generality of the Indian public seems to be living in 
a fog. Beyond the fact that there is to be a Federation and that the 
Federation is a bad thing the general public has no clear conception 
of what is the nature of this Federation and is, therefore, unable to 
form an intelligent opinion about 1t. It is necessary that the general 
public should have in its hand a leaflet containing an outline of the 
Federal structure and a criticism of that structure in small compass 
sufficient to convey a workable understanding of the Scheme. I feel 
this Tract will supply this need. 


I also think that the publication of this tract will be regarded as 
timely. Federation is a very live issue and it is also a very urgent 
one. Soon the people of British India will be called upon to decide 
whether they should accept the Federal Scheme or they should not. 
The premier political organization in this Country, namely, the 
Congress seems to be willing to accept this Federation as it has 
accepted Provincial Autonomy. The negotiations that are going on 
with the Muslim League and the manoeuvres that are being carried 
on with the Indian States give me at any rate the impression that 
the Congress is prepared to accept the Federation and that these 
negotiations and manoeuvres are designed to bring about a working 
arrangement with other parties so that with their help the Congress 
may be in the saddle at the Centre as it has been in the Provinces. 
Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose has even gone to the length of suggesting 
that the right wing of the Congress has committed itself to this 
Federation so far that it has already selected its cabinet. It matters 
not whether all this is true or not. I hope all this is untrue. Be that 
as it may, the matter is both grave and urgent, and I think all those 
who have anything to say on the subject should speak it out. Indeed 
I feel that silence at such a time will be criminal. That is why I have 
hastened to publish my address. I believe that I have views on the 
subject of Federation which even if they do not convince others will 
at least provoke them to think 


1-3-39 B. R. AMBEDKAR 
Rajgraha 
Dadar, Bombay 14 


I 
INTRODUCTORY 
Dr. Gadgil and students of the Gokhale Institute, 


I feel greatly honoured by your invitation to address you this evening 
You have met today to celebrate a day which is set out as your Founder's 
Day. I had the privilege of personally knowing the late Rao Bahadur 
R. R. Kale the founder of your Institute. He was my colleague in the old 
Bombay Legislative Council. I know how much care and study he used to 
bestow upon every subject which he handled. I am sure he deserves the 
gratitude of all those who care for knowledge and study for helping to 
“establish this Institute, whose main function as I understand is to dig for 
knowledge and make it ready for those who care to use it. For, first knowledge 
is power as nothing else is, and secondly, not all those who wish and care 
for knowledge have the leisure and the patience to dig for it. As one who 
believes in the necessity of knowledge and appreciates the difficulties in its 
acquisition I am glad to be associated in this way with him and with the 
Institute he has founded. 


The theme I have chosen for the subject matter of my address is the 
Federal Scheme embodied in the Government of India Act, 1935. The title 
of the subject might give you the impression that I am going to explain 
the Federal Constitution. That would be an impossible task in itself. The 
Federal Scheme is a vast thing. Its provisions are contained, first in 321 
sections of the Government of India Act, 1935, secondly in the 9 Schedules 
which are part of the Act, thirdly in 31 Orders-in-Council issued under 
the Act and fourthly the hundreds of Instruments of Accession to be 
passed by the Indian States. Very few can claim mastery over so vast a 
subject and if any did he would take years to expound it in all its details. 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I have set to myself a very limited task. It is to examine the scheme 
in the light of certain accepted tests and to place before you the results 
of this examination so that you may be in a position to form your own 
judgment regarding the merits of the scheme. It is true that I cannot 
altogether avoid setting out the outlines of the scheme. In fact, I am 
going to give an outline of the scheme. I realize that it is an essential 
preliminary without which my criticism might remain high up in the air. 
But the outline I am going to draw for my purpose will be the briefest 
and just enough to enable you to follow what I shall be saying regarding 
the merits of the scheme. 


II 
BIRTH AND GROWTH OF INDIAN FEDERATION 


There are five countries which are known in modern times to 
have adopted the federal form of Government. They are: (1) U.S.A., 
(2) Switzerland, (3) Imperial Germany, (4) Canada and (5) Australia. 
To these five it is now proposed to add the sixth which is the All-India 
Federation. 


What are the constituent units of this Federation ? For an answer to 
this question refer to section 5. It says: 


“5. (1) It shall be lawful for His Majesty, if an address in that behalf has 
Proclamation been presented to him by each House of Parliament and if 
of Federation the condition hereinafter mentioned is satisfied, to declare 
of India by Proclamation that as from the day therein appointed 

there shall be united in a Federation under the Crown, by 
the name of the Federation of India,— 


(a) The Provinces hereinafter called Governors' Provinces ; and 


(b) the Indian States which have acceded or may thereafter accede to 
the Federation ; and in the Federation so established there shall 
be included the Provinces hereinafter called Chief Commissioners' 
Provinces. 


(2) The condition referred to is that, States— 


(a) the Rulers whereof will, in accordance with the provision contained 
in Part II of the First Schedule to this Act be entitled to choose 
not less than fifty-two members of the Council of State ; and 


(b) the aggregate population whereof, as ascertained in accordance 
with the said provisions, amounts to at least one-half of the 
total population of States, as so ascertained, have acceded to the 
Federation.” 


Leaving aside the conditions prescribed by this Section for the 
inauguration of the Federation 1t is clear that the Units of the Federation 
are (1) The Governors’ Provinces, (2) Chief Commissioners’ Provinces and 
(3) The Indian States. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 285 


What is the size of this Indian Federation ? 


Many people when they speak of the Indian Federation do not seem to 
realize what an enormous entity it is going to be— 


Population Area Units 

U.S.A. 122,775,040 2,978,778 48 States plus 
1 Federal Dist. 

Germany 67,000,000 208,780 25 

Switzerland 466,400 15,976 22 

Canada 10,376,786 3,729,665 9 

Australia 6,629,839 2,974,581 6 

India 352,837,778 1,808,679 162 


The Indian Federation in point of area is 3/5th of U.S.A. and of Australia 
and half of Canada. It is 9 times of Germany and 120 times of Switzerland. 
In point of population it is 3 times of U.S.A., 5 times of Germany, 35 times 
of Canada, 58 times of Australia and 88 times of Switzerland. Measured 
by the Units which compose it, it is 3 times larger than U.S.A., 6% times 
larger than Germany, 8 times larger than Switzerland, 18 times larger than 
Canada and 27 times larger than Australia. Thus the Indian Federation is 
not merely a big federation. It is really a monster among federations. 


What is the source from which the Federation derives its Governmental 
Powers and Authority ? 


Section 7 says that the executive authority of the Federation shall be 
exercised on behalf of His Majesty by the Governor-General. That means that 
the Authority of the Federation is derived from the Crown. In this respect 
the Indian Federation differs from the Federation in the U.S.A. In the U.S.A., 
the powers of the Federation are derived from the people. The people of the 
United States are the fountain from which the authority is derived. While 
it differs from the Federation in the U.S.A. the Indian Federation resembles 
the Federations in Australia and Canada. In Australia and Canada the 
source of the Authority for the Federal Government is also the Crown and 
Section 7 of the Government of India Act is analogous to section 61 of the 
Australian Act and section 9 of the Canadian Act. That the Indian Federation 
should differ in this respect from the American Federation and agree with 
the Canadian and Australian Federation is perfectly understandable. The 
United States is a republic while Canada and India are dominions of the 
Crown. In the former the source of all authority are the people. In the latter 
the source of all authority is the Crown. 


From where does the Crown derive its authority ? 


Such a question is unnecessary in the case of Canada and Australia, 
because the Crown is the ultimate source of all authority and 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


there is nothing beyond or behind, to which his authority is referable. 
Can this be said of the Indian Federation ? Is the Crown the ultimate 
source of authority exercised by the Federation ? Is there nothing beyond 
or behind the Crown to which this authority needs to be referred ? The 
answer to this question is that only for a part of the authority of the 
Federation the Crown is the ultimate source and that for remaining part 
the Crown is not the ultimate source. 


That this is the true state of affairs is clear from the terms of the 
Instrument of Accession. I quote the following from the draft Instruments :— 


“Whereas proposals for the establishment of a Federation of India 
comprising such Indian States as may accede thereto and the Provinces 
of British India constituted as Autonomous Provinces have been discussed 
between representatives of His Majesty's Government of the Parliament of 
the United Kingdom, of British India and of the Rulers of the Indian States; 


And Whereas those proposals contemplated that the Federation of India 
should be constituted by an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom 
and by the accession of Indian States ; 


And Whereas provision for the constitution of a Federation of India has 
now been made in the Government of India Act, 1935; 


And Whereas that Act provided that the Federation shall not be established 
until such date as His Majesty may, by proclamation, declare, and such 
declaration cannot be made until the requisite number of Indian States have 
acceded to the Federation ; 


And Whereas the said Act cannot apply to any of my territories save 
by virtue of my consent and concurrence signified by my accession to the 
Federation; 


Now, therefore, I (insert full name and title), Ruler of (insert name of 
State), in the exercise of my sovereignty in and over my said State for 
the purpose of co-operating in the furtherance of the interests and welfare 
of India by uniting in a Federation under the Crown by the name of the 
Federation of India with Provinces called Governors' Provinces and with 
the Provinces called Chief Commissioners' Provinces and with the Rulers of 
other Indian States do hereby execute this my Instrument of Accession, and 
hereby declare that subject to His Majesty's acceptance of this Instrument, 
I accede to the Federation of India as established under the Government 
of India Act, 1935.” 


This is a very important feature of the Indian Federation. What has brought 
about this difference between the Indian Federation and the Canadian and 
Australian Federation ? For what part is the Crown the ultimate source 
and for what part is it not? To understand these questions you must take 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 287 


note of two things. First, the Indian Federation comprises two distinct areas : 
British India and Indian States. This will be clear if you refer to section 5. 
Second, the relationship of these two areas with the Crown is not the same. 
The area known as British India is vested in the Crown while the area 
comprised in an Indian State is not vested in the Crown but is vested in 
the Ruler. This is clear if you refer to sections 2 and 311. The territory of 
British India being vested in the Crown the sovereignty over it belongs to 
the Crown and the territory of an Indian State being vested in the Ruler of 
the State the sovereignty over the State belongs to the Ruler of the State. 


You will now understand why I said that in the Indian Federation 
the Crown is the ultimate source for a part of its authority and for the 
remaining part the Crown is the ultimate source of authority of the Indian 
Federation in so far as British India is part of the Federation. The Indian 
Ruler is the ultimate source of authority in so far as his State is part of this 
Federation. When therefore section 7 says that the Executive Authority of 
the Federation shall be exercised by the Governor-General on behalf of the 
Crown it must be understood that Crown's authority which is delegated by 
him to the Governor-General in the working out of the Indian Federation 
is partly its own and partly derived from the Rulers of the Indian States. 


What is the process by which the Crown acquires the authority which 
belongs to the Ruler of an Indian State? The process is known under the 
Indian Act as Accession. This Accession is effected by what is called an 
Instrument of Accession executed by the Ruler of a State. The provisions 
relating to the Instrument of Accession are contained in section 6(1). That 
section reads as follows :- 


“6. A State shall be deemed to have acceded to the Federation if His Majesty 
has signified his acceptance of an Instrument of Accession executed by the Ruler 
for himself, his heirs and successors— 


(a) declares that he accedes to the Federation as established under this 
Act, with the intent that His Majesty the King, the Governor-General 
of India, the Federal Legislature, the Federal Court and any other 
Federal Authority established for the purposes of the Federation 
shall by virtue of his Instrument of Accession, but subject always 
to the terms thereof, and for the purposes only of the Federation, 
exercise in relation to his State such functions as may be vested in 
him by or under this Act; and 


(b) assumes the obligation of ensuring that due effect is given within 
his State to the provisions of this Act so far as they are applicable 
therein by virtue of his Instrument of Accession.” 


It is this Instrument of Accession which confers authority upon the Crown 
in the first instance so far as an Indian State is part of the Federation and 


288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


1t is because of this that the Crown's Authority in and over this Federation 
1s derivative in part. 


This is the law as to the birth of the Federation. What is the law as 
to the growth of this Federation ? In other words what is the law as to 
change? The law as to change is contained in section 6(1)(a), Schedule II 
and section 6(5). 


Section 6(1)(a) makes it clear that the accession by a Prince, effected 
through his Instrument of Accession, is “to the Federation as established 
by this Act.” Schedule II deals with future amendment of the Constitution. 
It declares what are the provisions in the Government of India Act an 
amendment of which will be deemed to affect the Instrument of Accession 
and what are the provisions an amendment of which will not affect the 
Instrument of Accession by the States. 


Section 6(5) does two things. In the first place it provides that the 
Instrument of Accession shall be deemed to confer upon Parliament the 
right to amend these provisions which are declared by Schedule II as open 
to amendment without affecting the Instrument of Accession. In the second 
place 1t provides that although Parliament may amend a provision of the Act 
which is declared by Schedule II as open to amendment without affecting 
the Instrument of Accession such an amendment shall not bind the States 
unless it is accepted as binding by the State by a supplementary Instrument 
of Accession. 


To sum up, the units of this Federation do not form one single whole 
with a common spring of action. The units are separate. They are just held 
together. For some purposes the position of the units cannot be altered at 
all. For some purposes alteration is permissible but such alteration cannot 
bind all the units alike. Some will be bound by it but some will not be 
unless they consent to be bound. In other words in this Federation there is 
no provision for growth. It is fixed. It cannot move. A change by evolution is 
not possible and where it is possible it is not binding unless it is accepted. 


III 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE FEDERATION 
(a) The Federal Legislature 


The Federal Legislature is a bicameral legislature. There is a Lower 
House which is spoken of as the Legislative Assembly and there is an Upper 
House which is called the Council of State. The composition of the two 
Chambers is a noteworthy feature. They are very small Chambers compared 
with other legislatures having regard to the population and the area as 
the total membership of the Federal Assembly is 375 and of the Council of 
State 260. These seats are divided in a certain proportion between British 
India and the Indian States. Of the 375 seats in the Federal Assembly 250 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 289 


are allotted to British India and 125 to the Indian States. In the Council of 
State, out of the 260 seats, 156 are allotted to British India and 104 to the 
Indian States. It may be noticed that distribution between British India and 
the Indian States is not based upon an equalitarian principle. It is possible 
to take the population as the basis of representation. It is also possible to 
take the revenue as the basis of representation. But neither of these has 
been taken as the basis of distribution of seats. Whether you take population 
as the basis or whether you take revenue as the basis, you will find that 
British India has been under-represented, while the Indian States have been 
over-represented in the two Chambers. The method of filling the seats is also 
noteworthy. The representatives of the British India in both the Chambers 
will be elected. The representatives of the Indian States, on the other hand, 
are to be appointed i.e., nominated, by the Rulers of the States. It is open 
to a Ruler to provide that the representatives of his State, though appointed 
by him, may be chosen by his subjects but this is a matter which is left to 
his discretion. He may appoint a person who is chosen by his people or he 
may, if he pleases, do both, choose and appoint. In the final result a State's 
representative is to be appointed by the Ruler as distinguished from being 
elected by the people. In the case of British India, the representatives are 
to be elected, but here again there is a peculiarity which may be noticed. 
In the case of all bi-cameral Legislatures the Lower House being a popular 
house is always elected directly by the people, while the Upper House being 
a revising Chamber is elected by indirect election. In the case of the Indian 
Federation this process is reversed. The Upper Chamber will be elected by 
direct election by the people and it is the Lower Chamber which is going to 
be elected indirectly by the Provincial Legislatures. The life of the Federal 
Assembly is fixed for a term of five years, although it may be dissolved 
sooner. The Council of State on the other hand is a permanent body not 
liable to dissolution. It is a body which lives by renewal of a third part of 
its membership every three years. 


Now the authority of the two Chambers to pass laws and to sanction 
expenditure may be noted. With regard to the authority to pass laws some 
constitutions make a distinction between money bills and other bills and 
provide that with regard to money bills the Upper Chamber shall not have 
the power to initiate such a bill, and also that the Upper Chamber shall 
not have the authority to reject it. It is given the power only to suspend 
the passing of the bill for a stated period. The Indian constitution makes no 
such distinction at all. The money bills and other bills are treated on the 
same footing and require the assent of both the Chambers before they can 
become law. The only distinction is that while according to section 30(1) a 
bill which is not a money bill may originate in either Chamber, a money 
bill, according to section 37, shall not originate in the Upper Chamber. But 
according to section 3(2) a money bill needs the assent of the Upper Chamber 
as much as any other bill. 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


With regard to the authority to sanction expenditure: here again there 
is a departure made in the accepted principles of distributing authority 
between the two Chambers when a Legislature is bi-cameral. 


According to section 31(1) the Annual Financial Statement of estimated 
receipts and expenditure shall be laid before both Chambers of the Federal 
Legislature and shall, of course, be open to discussion in both the Chambers. 
Not only are they open to discussion in both the Chambers, they are also 
subject to the vote of both the Chambers. Section 34(2) requires that the 
expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the 
Federal Assembly and thereafter to the Council of State and either Chamber 
shall have the power to assent to or refuse any demand, or to assent to any 
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein. 


It will thus be seen that the two Chambers are co-equal in authority, 
both in the matter of their authority to pass laws and in the matter of 
sanctioning expenditure. A conflict between the two Chambers cannot end 
by one Chamber yielding to the other if that Chamber does not wish so to 
yield. The procedure adopted for the resolving of differences between the 
two Chambers is the method of joint sessions. Section 31(1) deals with 
the procedure with regard to joint sessions where the conflict relates to a 
bill. Section 34(3) relates to the procedure where the conflict relates to the 
differences with regard to sanctioning of expenditure. 


(b) The Federal Executive 


The constitution of the Federal Executive is described in section 7(1). 
According to this section the executive Authority of the Federation is handed 
over to the Governor-General. It is he who is the Executive Authority for the 
Federation. The first thing to note about this Federal Executive is that it is 
a unitary executive and not a corporate body. In India ever since the British 
took up the civil and military government of the country, the executive has 
never been unitary in composition. The executive was a composite executive. In 
the Provinces it was known as the Governor-in-Council. At the Centre it was 
known as the Governor-General-in-Council. The civil and military government 
of the Provinces as well as of India was not vested either in the Governor or 
in the Governor-General. The body in which it was vested was the Governor 
with his Councillors. The Councillors were appointed by the King and did not 
derive their authority from the Governor-General. They derived their authority 
from the Crown and possessed co-equal authority with the Governor and the 
Governor-General and, barring questions where the peace and tranquillity of 
the territory was concerned, the Governor and the Governor-General were 
bound by the decision of the majority. The constitution, therefore, makes a 
departure from the established system. I am not saying that this departure is 
unsound in principle or it is not Justified by precedent or by the circumstances 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 291 


arising out of the necessities of a federal constitution. All I want you to note 
1s that this is a very significant change. 


The next thing to note about the Federal Executive is that although the 
Governor-General is the Executive Authority for the Federation, there are 
conditions laid down for the exercise of his powers as the Federal Executive. 
The constitution divides the matters falling within his executive authority into 
four classes and prescribes how he is to exercise his executive authority in 
respect of each of these four classes. In certain matters the Governor-General 
(1) is to act in his own discretion ; (2) In certain matters he is to act on the 
advice of his Ministers ; (3) in certain matters he is to act after consultation 
with his Ministers, and (4) in certain matters he is to act according to his 
individual judgment. A word may be said as to the de jure connotation that 
underlies these four cases of the exercise of the executive authority by the 
Governor-General. The best way to begin to explain this de jure connotation 
is to begin by explaining what is meant by “acting on the advice of his 
ministers.” This means, in those matters the government is really carried 
on, on the authority of the Ministers and only in the name of the Governor- 
General. To put the same thing differently, the advice of the Ministers is 
binding on the Governor-General and he cannot differ from their advice. 
With regard to the matters where the Governor-General is allowed “to act 
in his discretion” what is meant is that the Government is not only carried 
on in the name of the Governor-General, but is also carried on the authority 
of the Governor-General. That means that there can be no intervention or 
interference by the Ministers at any stage. The Ministers have no right to 
tender any advice and the Governor-General is not bound to seek their advice ; 
or to make it concrete, the files with regard to these matters need not go to 
the Ministers at all. “Acting in his individual Judement” means that while the 
matter is within the advisory jurisdiction of the Minister, the Minister has 
no final authority to decide. The final authority to decide is the Governor- 
General. The distinction between “in his discretion” and “in his individual 
judgment” is this that while in regard to matters falling “in his discretion” 
the Ministers have no right to tender advice to the Governor-General, the 
Ministers have a right to tender advice when the matter is one which falls 
under “his individual judgment”. To put it differently in regard to matters 
which are subject to his individual judgment the Governor-General is bound 
to receive advice from his ministers but is not bound to follow their advice. 
He may consider their advice, but may act otherwise and differently from the 
advice given by the Ministers. But in respect of matters which are subject 
to his discretion he is not bound even to receive the advice of his Ministers. 
The phrase “after consultation” is a mere matter of procedure. The authority 
in such matter vests in the Governor-General. All that is required is that 
he should take into account the wishes of the Ministers. Cases relating to 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“acting after consultation” may be distinguished from cases relating to 
“individual judgment” in this way. In cases relating to “individual judgment” 
the authority vests in the Ministers. The Governor-General has the power 
to superintend and, if necessary, overrule. In the cases falling under “after 
consultation”, the authority belongs to the Governor-General and the Ministers 
have the liberty to say what they wish should be done. 


(c) The Federal Judiciary 


The Government of India Act provides for the constitution of a Federal 
Court as part of the Federal Constitution. The Federal Court is to consist of a 
Chief Justice and such Puisne Judges as His Majesty thinks necessary, their 
number not to exceed six until an address is presented by the Legislature 
asking for an increase. The Federal Judiciary has original as well as appellate 
jurisdiction. Section 204, which speaks of the Original Jurisdiction of the 
Federal Court, prescribes that, that Court shall have exclusive Original 
Jurisdiction in any dispute between the Federation, the Provinces and the 
federated States which involves any question of law or fact on which the 
existence or extent of a legal right depends. This section, however, provides 
that if a State is party then the dispute must concern the interpretation of 
the Act or an Order in Council thereunder, or the extent of the legislative or 
executive authority vested in the Federation by the Instrument of Accession 
or arise under an Agreement under Part VI of the Act for the administration 
of a federal law in the States, or otherwise concern some matter in which 
the Federal Legislature has power to legislate for the States or arise under 
an agreement made after federation with the approval of the Representative 
of the Crown between the States and the Federation or a Province, and 
includes provision for such jurisdiction. Even this limited jurisdiction of 
the Federal Court over the States is further limited by the proviso that no 
dispute is justiciable if it arises under an agreement expressly excluding 
such jurisdiction. 


The appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court is regulated by section 
205 and section 207. Section 205 says that an appeal shall le to the 
Federal Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in 
British India if the High Court certified that the case involves a substantial 
question of law as to the interpretation of this Act or an Order in Council 
made thereunder. Section 207 relates to appeal from decision of Courts of 
the Federated States. It says that an appeal shall be to the Federal Court 
from a Court in a federated State on the ground that a question of law has 
been wrongly decided, being a question which concerns the interpretation of 
this Act or of any Order in Council made thereunder or the extent of the 
legislative or executive authority vested in the Federation by virtue of the 
Instrument of Accession of that State or arises under an Agreement made 
under Part VI of this Act in relation to the administration in that State of 
a law of the Federal Legislature ; but sub-section (2) to section 207 provides 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 293 


that an appeal under this section shall be by way of a special case to be 
stated for the opinion of the Federal Court by a High Court, and the Federal 
Court may require a case to be so stated. 


Two further points with regard to the Federal Judiciary may be noted. 
The first is the power of the Federal Court to execute its own orders. The 
Federal Court has no machinery of its own to enforce its orders. Section 
210 provides that the orders of the Federal Court shall be enforceable by 
all courts and authorities in every part of British India or of any Federated 
State as if they were orders duly made by the highest court exercising civil 
or criminal jurisdiction as the case may be in that part. The instrumentality, 
therefore, which the Federal Court can use for the enforcement of its own 
orders consists of the administrative machinery of the units of the Federation. 
The units of the Federation are bound to act in aid of the Federal Court. This 
is different to what prevails for instance, in the United States of America, 
where the Supreme Court has its own machinery for enforcing its own orders. 


The second point to note with regard to the Federal Court is the question 
of the powers of the Executive to remove the judges and the power of the 
Legislature to discuss their conduct. In this respect also the Federal Court 
stands on a different footing from the Federal Courts in other Federations. 
The Constitution does not give the Governor-General the power to suspend 
a Judge of the Federal Court. It forbids any discussion of a judge's judicial 
conduct by the Legislature. This, no doubt, gives the judge of the Federal 
Court the greatest fixity of tenure and immunity from interference by the 
Executive or by the Legislature. To remove the Judiciary from the control of 
the Executive it has been found necessary that the tenure of a judge must 
not be subject to the pleasure of the Executive. All constitutions, therefore, 
provide that the tenure of a judge shall be during good behaviour and that 
a judge shall be removeable only if address is presented by the Legislature 
pronouncing that he is not of good behaviour. Some such authority must be 
vested in somebody which should have the power to pronounce upon the good 
behaviour of a judge. This provision is absent in the Federal Constitution, 
so that a Judge of the Federal Court once appointed is irremoveable from 
his place till retirement, no matter what his conduct during that period 
may be. Instead of this, power is given to His Majesty under section 
200(2)(b) to remove a Judge of the Federal Court on the ground of 
misbehaviour or infirmity of body or mind if the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council reports that he may be removed on any such ground. 


IV 
POWERS OF THE FEDERATION 


Before I describe the powers of the Federal Government it might be 
desirable to explain what is the essence of a Federal Form of Government, 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


There is no simpler way of explaining it than by contrasting it with the 
Unitary Form of Government. 


Although the Federal Form of Government is distinct from the Unitary 
form, it is not easy to see distinction. On the other hand, there is, outwardly 
at any rate, a great deal of similarity between the two. The Government 
of almost every country in these days is carried on by an inter-related 
group of Administrative Units operating in specific areas and discharging 
specific public functions. This is true of a country with a Federal Form of 
Government and also of a country with a Unitary form of Government. In 
a Federal Constitution there is a Central Government and there are inter- 
related to it several Local Governments. In the same way in an Unitary 
Constitution there is a Central Government and there are inter-related to 
it several Local Governments. On the surface, therefore, there appears to 
be no difference between the two. 


There is, however, a real difference between them although it is not 
obvious. That difference lies in the nature of the inter-relationship between 
the Central and the Local Administrative Units. This difference may be 
summed up in this way. In the Unitary Form of Government, the powers of 
the local bodies are derived from an Act of the Central Government. That 
being so the powers of the Local Government can always be withdrawn by 
the Central Government. In the Federal form of Government the powers of 
the Central Government as well as of the Local Government are derived 
by the law of the Constitution which neither the Local Government nor 
the Central Government can alter by its own Act. Both derive their powers 
from the law of the Constitution and each is required by the Constitution to 
confine itself to the powers given to it. Not only does the Constitution fix the 
powers of each but the constitution establishes a judiciary to declare any Act 
whether of the Local or the Central Government as void if it transgresses 
the limits fixed for it by the Constitution. This is well stated by Clement in 
his volume on the Canadian Constitution in the following passage: 


“Apart from detail, the term federal union in these modern times implies 
an agreement .................... terma u a asa people to the control of one 
common government in relation to such matters as are agreed upon as of common 
concern, leaving each local government still independent and autonomous in 
all other matters, as a necessary corollary the whole-arrangement constitutes 
a fundamental law to be recognised in and enforced through the agency of the 
Courts. 


“The exact position of the line which is to divide matters of common 
concern to the whole federation from matters of local concern in each 
unit is not of the essence of federalism. Where it is to be drawn in 
any proposed scheme depends upon the view adopted by the federating 
communities as to what, in their actual circumstances, geographical, com- 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 295 


mercial, racial or otherwise, are really matters of common concern and as 
such proper to be assigned to a common government. But the maintenance 
of the line, as fixed by the federating agreement, is of the essence of modern 
federalism; at least, as exhibited in the three great Anglo Saxon federations 
today, the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Australia, and 
the Dominion of Canada. Hence the importance and gravity of the duty 
thrown upon the Courts as the only constitutional interpreter of the organic 
instrument which contains the fundamental law of the land.”. 


Thus to draw a line for the purpose of dividing the powers of Government 
between the Central and Local Governments by the law of the Constitution 
and to maintain that line through the judiciary are the two essential 
features of the Federal Form of Government. It is these two features 
which distinguish it from the Unitary Form of Government. In short 
every federation involves two things : (1) Division of Powers by metes and 
bounds between the Central Government and the Units which compose 
it by the law of the Constitution, which is beyond the power of either 
to change and to limit the action of each to the powers given and (2) a 
Tribunal beyond the control of either to decide when the issue arises as 
to whether any particular act of the Centre or of the Unit, Legislative, 
Executive, Administrative or Financial is beyond the powers given to it 
by the Constitution. 


Having explained what is meant by Federal Government, I will now 
proceed to give you some idea of the Powers which are assigned by the 
constitution to the Federal Government. 


(a) Legislative Powers of the Federation 


For the purposes of distributing the Legislative Powers the possible 
subjects of Legislation are listed into three categories. The first category 
includes subjects, the exclusive right to legislate upon which is given to 
the Federal Legislature. This list is called the Federal List. The second 
category includes subjects, the exclusive right to legislate upon which is 
given to the Provincial Legislature. The list is called the Provincial List. 
The third category includes subjects over which both the Federal as well 
as the Provincial Legislature have a right to legislate. This list is called 
the Concurrent list. The scope and contents of these lists are given in 
Schedule VII to the Government of India Act. 


In accordance with the fundamental principles of Federation a law made 
by the Federal Legislature if it relates to a matter which is included in 
the Provincial List, would be ultra vires and a nullity. Similarly, if the 
Provincial Legislature were to make a law relating to a matter falling 
in the Federal List such a Provincial Law would be ultra vires and 
therefore a nullity. This is, however declared by statute and section 107 is 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


now the law on the point. Cases of conflict of legislation touching the Federal 
List and the Provincial List are not likely to occur often. But cases of conflict 
between the two are sure to arise in the concurrent field of legislation. The 
law as to that you will find in section 107. Sub-section (1) lays down when a 
Federal Law shall prevail over a Provincial Law. Sub-section (2) lays down 
as to when a Provincial Law shall prevail over the Federal Law. Reading 
the sub-sections together the position in law is this. As a rule a Federal Law 
shall prevail over a Provincial Law if the two are in conflict. But in cases 
where the Provincial Law, having been reserved for the consideration of 
the Governor-General or for the signification of His Majesty's pleasure, has 
received the assent of the Governor-General or His Majesty, the Provincial 
Law shall prevail until the Federal Legislature enacts further legislation with 
respect to the same matter. 


With regard to the question of this distribution of powers of legislation every 
Federation is faced with a problem. That problem arises because there can be 
no guarantee that enumeration of the subjects of legislation is exhaustive and 
includes every possible subject of legislation. However complete and exhaustive 
the listing may be there is always the possibility of some subject remaining 
unenumerated. Every Federation has to provide for such a contingency and 
lay down to whom the powers to legislate regarding these residuary subjects 
shall belong. Should they be given to the Central Government or should they 
be given to the Units ? Hitherto there has been only one way of dealing with 
them. In some Federations, these residuary powers are given to the Central 
Government, as in Canada. In some Federations they are given to the Units, 
as in Australia. The Indian Federation has adopted a new way of dealing 
with them. In the Indian Federation they are neither assigned to the Central 
Government nor to the Provinces. They are in a way vested in the Governor- 
General by virtue of section 104. When a Legislation is proposed on a subject 
which is not enumerated in any of the three lists it is the Governor-General, 
who is to decide whether the powers shall be exercised by the Federal 
Legislature or by the Provincial Legislature. 


(b) Executive Powers of the Federation 


The first question is, what is the extent of the executive powers of the 
Federation? Is it co-extensive with the legislative powers? In some of 
the Federations this was not made clear by statute. It was left to judicial 
decision. Such is the case in Canada. The Indian Constitution does not leave 
this matter to courts to decide. It is defined expressly in the Act itself. The 
relevant section is section 8(1). It says that the executive authority of the 
Federation extends— 


(a) to matters with respect to which the Federal Legislature has powers 
to make laws; 


(6) to raising in British India on behalf of His Majesty of naval, military 
and air forces and to the governance of His Majesty’s forces borne on 
the Indian establishment; 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 297 


(c) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are 
exercisable by His Majesty by treaty, grant, usage, sufference, or 
otherwise in and in relation to the tribal areas. 


There is no difficulty in following the provisions of this sub-section. There 
might perhaps be some difficulty in understanding sub-clause (a). It says 
that the executive powers must be co-extensive with the legislative powers 
of the Federation. Now the legislative power of the Federation extends not 
only to the Federal List but also to the Concurrent List. Does the executive 
power of the Federation extend to subjects included in the Concurrent List ? 
Two points must be borne in mind before answering this question. First, the 
Concurrent List is also subject to the legislative authority of the Province. 
Second, according to section 49(2) that the executive authority of each 
Province extends to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the 
Province has power to make laws. The answer to the question whether the 
executive authority of the Federation extends also to the Concurrent list is 
that the Executive Authority in respect of the Concurrent List belongs to 
the Federal Government as well as to the Provincial Government. This is 
clear from the terms of section 126(2). It belongs to Provincial Government 
except in so far as the Federal Legislature has covered the field. It belongs 
to the Federal Government except in so far as the Provincial Legislature 
has covered the field. 


The Concurrent List is not the only list which is subject to Legislation by 
the Federal Legislature. The Federal Legislature has the right to legislate 
even on Provincial subjects under Section 102 in cases of emergency and under 
Section 106 to give effect to international agreements. Does the Executive 
Authority of the Federation extend to such matters also? The answer is 
that when a field is covered by Federal Legislation that field also becomes 
the field of Executive Authority of the Federation. 


(c) Administrative Powers of the Federation 


The Administrative Powers of the Federation follow upon the Executive 
Powers of the Federation just as the Executive Powers of the Federation 
follow upon the Legislative Powers of the Federation. 


To this there is one exception. That exception relates to the administration 
of subjects included in the Concurrent List. The Concurrent List is a list 
to which the Legislative Authority of the Federation extends by virtue of 
Section 100. As has already been pointed out the executive authority of the 
Federation extends in so far as Federal Legislation has covered the field. 
But the administrative powers for subjects falling in the Concurrent List do 
not belong to the Federation. They belong to the Provinces. 


(d) Financial Powers of the Federation 


The revenues of the Federal Government are derived from four different 
sources: (1) Revenue from Commercial Enterprise, (2) Revenue from 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Sovereign Functions; (8) Revenue from Tributes; and (4) Revenue from 
Taxes. 

Under the first head fall all revenues from Posts and Telegraphs. Federal 
Railways, banking profits and other commercial operations. Under the second 
head come revenues from currency and coinage, from bona vacantia and 
territories administered directly by the Federal Government. Under the third 
head are included Contributions and Tributes from the Indian States. 


The classification of Revenue from taxes follows upon the Powers of Taxation 
given to the Federal Government by the Constitution. The Powers of Taxation 
given to the Federal Government fall into three main categories. In the first 
category fall those powers of taxation which is wholly appropriable by the 
Federal Government. In the second category, fall those powers of taxation 
which are exercisable for raising revenue which is divisible between the Federal 
Government and the Provincial Governments. 

The heads of revenue which fall under the first category of Taxing Powers 
cover those which are specifically mentioned in the Federal List— 

1. Duties of customs, including export duties. 
2. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced 
in India except— 
(a) alcoholic lquors for human consumption ; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, non- 
narcotic drugs ; 
(c) medical and toilet preparations containing alcoholic, or any sub- 
stance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry. 
Corporation tax. 
Salt. 
State lotteries. 


Taxes on income other than agricultural income. 


NS ot RB Po 


Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land 
of individuals and companies ; taxes, on the capital of companies. 


8. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land. 


9. The rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, 
promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance 
proxies and receipts. 


10. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway or air ; taxes 
on railway fares and freights. 


11. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this list but not including fees 
taken in any court. 


In connection with this, attention might be drawn to the following items 
in the Concurrent List : 


1. Marriage and divorce. 
2. Wills, intestacy and succession. 


3. Transfer of Property and other agricultural lands. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 299 


Being in the Concurrent list, the Federal Legislature has power to 
legislate upon with respect to these. Can the Federal Legislature also while 
legislating upon them raise revenue from them ? The Act does not seem to 
furnish any answer to this question. It may however be suggested that the 
rules contained in section 104 regarding the exercise of Residuary Powers 
will also apply here. 


The sources of revenue which are made divisible by the Constitution are : 
(1) Income Tax other than Corporation Tax and (2) Jute Export duty. Those 
which are made divisible according to the Federal Law are: (1) Duty on 
Salt, (2) Excise duty on Tobacco and other goods and (3) Duties of Export. 


In respect of the financial powers of the Federation there is one feature 
which by reason of its pecularity is deserving of attention. The Act in giving 
the Federal Government the right to tax, makes a distinction between power 
to levy the tax and the right to collect it and even where it gives the power 
to levy the tax it does not give it the right to collect it. This is so in the 
case of surcharge on Income tax and the Corporation tax. The Income tax 
is only leviable in the Provinces and not in the States although it is a tax 
for Federal purposes. The State subjects are liable to pay only a Federal 
surcharge on Income Tax because such a surcharge is leviable both within 
the Provinces as well as the States. But under section 138(3) the Federal 
Government has no right to collect it within the States. The collection is 
left to the Ruler of the State. The Ruler, instead of collecting the surcharge 
from his subjects, may agree to pay the Federation a lump sum and the 
Federation is bound to accept the same. Similar is the case with regard to 
the Corporation tax. The Federation can levy it on State subjects but cannot 
collect it directly by its own agency. Section 139 provides that the collection 
of the Corporation tax shall as of right be the function of the Ruler. 


V 
CHARACTER OF THE FEDERATION 
(1) The Nature of the Union 


How does the Indian Federation compare with other Federations ? This is 
not only a natural inquiry but it is also a necessary inquiry. The method of 
comparison and contrast is the best way to understand the nature of a thing. 
This comparison can be instituted from points of view. There is no time for 
a comparison on so vast a scale. I must confine this comparison to some 
very moderate dimensions. Therefore I propose to raise only four questions : 
(1) Is this Federation a perpetual Union ? (2) What is the relationship of 
the Units to the Federal Government ? (3) What is the relationship of the 
Units as between themselves ? (4) What is the relationship of the people 
under the Units ? 


There is no doubt that the accession of the Indian States to the Federation 
is to be perpetual so long as the Federation created by the Act is in 


300 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


existence. While the Federation exists there is no right to secede. But that 
is not the real question. The real question is, will the federation continue 
even when the Act is changed ? In other words the question is, is this a 
perpetual Union with no right to secede or, is this a mere alliance with a 
right to break away? In my opinion the Indian Federation is not a perpetual 
union and that the Indian States have a right to secede. In this respect the 
constitution of the United States and this Indian Federation stand in clear 
contrast. The constitution of the United States says nothing as to the right 
of secession. This omission was interpreted in two different ways. Some said 
that it was not granted because it was copy recognized. Others said it was 
not excluded because it was not negatived. It was this controversy over the 
question namely whether the right of secession was excluded because it was 
not recognized which led to the Civil War of 1861. The Civil War settled 
two important principles : (1) No State has a right to declare an Act of the 
Federal Government invalid ; (2) No State has a right to secede from the 
Union. In the Indian Federation it would be unnecessary to go to war for 
establishing the right to secession because the Constitution recognizes the 
right of the Indian States to secede from the Indian Federation if certain 
eventualities occur. What is a perpetual Union and what is only a compact 
is made nowhere so clear as by Blackstone in his analysis of the nature of 
the Union between England and Scotland. To use his language the Indian 
Federation is not an incorporate Union because in a Union the two contracting 
States are totally annihilated without any power of revival. The Indian 
Federation is an alliance between two contracting parties, the Crown and 
the Indian States, in which neither is annihilated but each reserves a right 
to original Status if a breach of condition occurs. The Constitution of the 
United States originated in a compact but resulted in a union. The Indian 
Federation originates in a compact and continues as a compact. That the 
Indian Federation has none of the marks of a Union but on the other hand 
it has all the marks of a compact is beyond dispute. The distinguishing 
marks of a Union were well described by Daniel Webster, when in one of 
his speeches on the American Constitution he said— 


“...The constitution speaks of that political system which is established as ‘the 
Government of the United States'. Is it not doing a strange violence to languages 
to call a league or a compact between sovereign powers a Government ? The 
Government of a State is that organisation in which political power resides”. 


“ ...The broad and clear difference between a government and a league 
or a compact is that a government is a body politic; it has a will of its 
own; and it possesses powers and faculties to execute its own purposes 
Every compact looks to some power to enforce its stipulations. Even 
in a compact between sovereign communities, there always exists this 
ultimate reference to a power to ensure its execution; although in such 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 301 


a case, this power is but the force of one party against the force of another; 
that is to say, the power of war. But a Government executes its decisions by 
its own supreme authority. Its use of force in compelling obedience to its own 
enactments is not war. It contemplates no opposing party having a right of 
resistance. It rests on its power to enforce its own will; and when it ceases to 
possess this power it is no longer a Government”. 


In the light of this the following facts should be noted. The Act does not 
ordain and establish a Federal Government for British India and the Indian 
States. The Act ordains and establishes a Federal Government for British 
India only. The Federal Government will become a Government for the 
States only when each State adopts it by its Instrument of Accession. Again 
note that the subjection of the States to the Federal Government is not to 
be for all times. It is to continue only under certain circumstances. It is to 
continue so long as certain provisions of the Act are continued without a 
change. Thirdly, where change in the provisions is permissible such change 
shall not bind the State unless it agrees to be bound by it. 


All these are unmistakable signs which show that the Indian Federation 
is a compact and not a perpetual Union. The essence of a compact is that 
it reserves the right to break away and to return to the original position. 


In this respect therefore the Indian Federation differs from the Federations 
in U.S.A., Canada and Australia. It differs from the U.S.A., because the 
right to secede is recognized by the Indian Constitution if the constitution is 
altered, while it is not recognized by the Constitution of the U.S.A., even if 
the constitution is altered against the wishes of a particular State. In regard 
to Australia and Canada such a question cannot really arise and if it did, a 
civil war would be quite unnecessary to decide the issue. In these federations 
the sovereignty, whether it is exercised by the Federal Governments or the 
Units belongs to the Crown and the maintenance of the Federation or its 
breakup remains with the King and Parliament. Neither the Federation nor 
the Units could decide the issue otherwise than with the consent of Parliament. 
If a break-up came, it would be a mere withdrawal of the sovereignty of the 
Crown and its re-distribution which the Crown is always free to do. The 
break up could be legal and even if it was perpetrated by non-legal means it 
could give sovereignty to the rebellious units because it belongs to the Crown. 
The same would have been the case, if the Indian Federation had been the 
Federation of British Indian Provinces only. No question of secession could 
have arisen. The Provinces would have been required to remain in the position 
in which the Crown might think it best to place them. The Indian Federation 
has become different because of the entry of the Indian States. The entry 
of the Indian States is not for all times and under all circumstances. Their 
entry is upon terms and conditions. That being so the Indian Federation 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


could not be a perpetual union. Indeed, the Indian States would not enter 
into matrimony with the Indian Provinces unless the terms of divorce were 
settled before-hand. And so they are. That is why the Indian Federation is 
a compact and not a union. 


(2) Relationship of the Units to the Federal Government 


That each separate unit should have approximately equal political rights 
is a general feature of federations. Equality of status among the different 
units 1s a necessity. To make them unequal in status is to give units the 
power to become dominant partners. The existence of dominant partners 
in a federation, as observed by Dicey is fraught with two dangers. Firstly, 
the dominant partners may exercise an authority almost inconsistent with 
federal equality. Secondly, it may create combinations inside the Federation 
of dominant units and subordinate units and vice versa. To prevent such 
an unhealthy state of affairs, all federations proceed upon the principle of 
equality of status. How far does this principle obtain in the Indian Federation? 


(a) In the matter of Legislation 


As you know for purposes of Legislation the field is divided into three 
parts and there are three lists prepared which are called the Federal List, 
the Concurrent List and the Provincial List. 


The Federal List contains 59 items as subjects of legislation. The Concurrent 
List contains 36 items. 


The first thing to note is that both these lists are binding upon the 
Provinces. They cannot pick and choose as to the matters in these two lists 
in respect of which they will subject themselves to the authority of the 
Federation. The Provinces have no liberty to contract out of these two lists. 
The position of a Federating State is quite different. A Federating State can 
wholly keep itself out of the Concurrent List. Under section 6(2) there is no 
objection to the Ruler of any Indian State to agree to federate in respect 
of matters included in the Concurrent List. But there is no obligation upon 
them to do so. Such an agreement is not a condition precedent to their 
admission into the Federation. 


With regard to the Federal List, there is no doubt an obligation on 
the Ruler of a State to subject himself to the legislative authority of 
the Federation in respect of the Federal List, but his subjection to the 
Federation will be confined to matters specified by him in his Instrument 
of Accession. There are as I stated altogether 59 items in the Federal List. 
There is no obligation upon the Prince to accept all subjects in the Federal 
List as a condition precedent for his entry into Federation. He may accept 
some only or he may accept all. Again one Ruler may accept one item 
and another Ruler may accept another. There is no rule laid down in the 
constitution that some items must be accepted by every Ruler who chooses 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 303 


to enter the Federation. The Federation, therefore, while it affects British 
India and the Provinces uniformly and completely so far as the legislative 
authority of the Federation is concerned, it touches different States im 
different degrees. A Ruler may federate in respect of one subject yet he is 
as good a member of the Federation as a Ruler who accepts all the fifty- 
nine items in the Federal List. 


The Provincial List is a list which is subject to the exclusive Legislative 
authority of the Provinces. There is no corresponding State List given in the 
Act for the Federated States. It cannot be given. But it can be said that it 
includes all these subjects which are not surrendered by the State to the 
Federation. Now with regard to the exclusive authority of the Provincial 
Legislature, still in the event of emergency it is open to the Federal Legislature 
to make laws for a Province or any part thereof with respect to any of the 
matters enumerated in the Provincial List, it the Governor-General has 
in his discretion declared under section 102 by proclamation that a grave 
emergency exists whereby the security of India is threatened whether by 
way of war or by internal disturbances. There is no such provision in respect 
of the Indian States. A grave emergency which threatens India may quite 
well arise within a State as it may within the territories of a Province. It 
is thus clear that while the Federal Legislature can intervene and make 
laws for a Province when there is emergency, it cannot intervene and make 
laws for the Federated States under similar circumstances. 


(b) In the matter of the Executive 


Again in the matter of the Executive, the States and the Provinces do 
not stand on the same footing. Section 8 defines the scope of the executive 
authority of the Federation which according to section 7 is exercisable by 
the Governor-General on behalf of His Majesty. According to sub-section (1) 
to sub-clause (a) the authority of the Federal Executive extends to matters 
with respect to which the Federal Legislature has power to make laws, 
but this clause has not the same application with respect to the States as 
it has with respect to the provinces. With regard to the provinces it has 
authority in all matters which are included in the Federal Legislative List. 
It has also exclusive authority with respect to certain matters included in 
the Concurrent List subject to certain limitations ; but with regard to the 
States the case is very different. With regard to the States the Federation 
can have no executive authority in respect of subjects in the Concurrent 
List, but also the Federation is not entitled to have exclusive authority with 
respect to matters included in the Federal Legislative List. Sub-clause 2 of 
section 8 is very important. It says: 


“The executive authority of the Ruler of a Federated State shall, 
notwithstanding anything in this section, continue to be exercisable in that 
State with respect to matters with respect to which the Federal Legislature 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


has power to make laws for that State except in so far as the executive authority 
of the Federation becomes exercisable in the State to the exclusion of the 
executive authority of the Ruler by virtue of a federal law.”. 


In plain language what the sub-section means is this— With regard to a 
province the executive authority of the Federation extends to all matters 
over which the Federation has legislative authority. With regard to the 
State the position is different. The mere fact that the federal legislature has 
authority to legislate in respect of a subject does not give the Federation any 
executive authority over the State in respect of that subject. Such executive 
authority can be conferred only as a result of a law passed by the Federation. 
Whether it is possible to pass such a law is problematic in view of the large 
representation which the States have in Federal Legislature. Whatever may 
be the eventuality, in theory the executive authority of the Federation does 
not extend to a Federated State. The position is that while with regard to 
the provinces the Federation can legislate as well as execute, in the case of 
the Federated States, the Federation can legislate, but cannot execute. The 
execution may be with the State. 


(c) In the matter of administration 


When you begin to examine the constitution from the point of view of 
administration you will find certain sections in the Act which lay down rules 
for the guidance of the Federal Government, of the Provincial Governments 
and of the State Governments. The purpose of the sections is to tell them how 
they should exercise the executive authority belonging to them respectively. 
These sections are 122, 126 and 128. 


Section 122 is addressed to the Federal Government. It reads as follows: 


“122. (1) The executive authority of every Province and Federated State shall 
be so exercised as to secure respect for the laws of the Federal Legislature 
which apply in that Province or State. 


(2) The reference in sub-section (1) of this section to laws of the Federal 
Legislature shall, in relation to any Province, include a reference to any existing 
Indian Law applying in that Province. 


(8) Without prejudice to any of the other provisions of this part of this Act, 
in the exercise of the executive authority of the Federation in any Province or 
Federated State regard shall be had to the interests of that Province or State.”. 


Section 126 is addressed to the Provincial Governments. It provides that— 


“126 (1) The executive (authority of every Province shall be so exercised 
as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the 
Federation, and the executive authority of the Federation shall extend to the 
giving of such directions to a Province as may appear to the Federal Government 
to be necessary for that purpose.”. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 305 


Section 128 is addressed to the States. It runs as follows : 


“128. (1) The executive authority of every Federated State shall be so 
exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority 
of the Federation so far as 1t 1s exercisable in the State by virtue of the law 
of the Federal Legislature which applies therein. 


(2) If it appears to the Governor-General that the Ruler of any Federated 
State has in any way failed to fulfil his obligations under the preceding sub- 
section, the Governor-General, acting in his discretion, may after considering 
any representations made to him by the Ruler, issue such directions to the 
Ruler as he thinks fit: 


Provided that if any question arises under this section as to whether the 
executive authority of the Federation is exercisable in a State with respect 
to which it is so exercisable, the question may, at the instance either of the 
Federation or the Ruler, be referred to the Federal Court for determination by 
that Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction under this Act.’ 


All these sections would have been very useful if there was any possibility 
of conflict in the exercise of their executive authority by these agencies. 
But these will be quite unnecessary because there would be as a matter 
of fact no conflict of executive authority which can arise only when such 
executive authority is followed by administrative act. When administration 
is divorced from Executive Authority there is no possibility of conflict and 
the admonitions contained in such sections are quite unnecessary. 


Now it is possible that in the Federal Constitution the Federal Government 
may be altogether denuded of its powers of administration and may be made 
just as a frame without any spring of action in it. The constitution provides 
that the Governor-General of the Federal Legislature may provide that the 
administration of a certain law passed by it instead of being carried on by 
the Federal Executive might be entrusted to Units ie. to the Provincial 
Governments and the Indian States. This is clear from the terms of section 
124: 


“124. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Governor-General may, 
with the consent of the Government of a Province or the Ruler of a Federated 
State, entrust either conditionally to the Government or Ruler or to their 
respective Officers, functions in relation to any matter to which the executive 
authority of the Federation extends. 


(2) An Act of the Federal Legislature may, notwithstanding that it relates 
to a matter with respect to which a Provincial Legislature has no power to 
make laws, confer powers and impose duties upon a Province or officers and 
authorities thereof. 


(8) An Act of the Federal Legislature which extends to a Federated State 
may confer powers and impose duties upon the State or officers and authorities 
thereof to be designated for the purpose by the Ruler. 


306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(4) Where by virtue of this section powers and duties have been conferred 
or imposed upon a Province or a Federated State or officers or authorities 
thereof, there shall be paid by the Federation to the Province or State such 
sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined 
by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of any 
extra cost of administration incurred by the Province or State in connection 
with the exercise of those powers and duties.” 


It is quite possible for States and Provinces to combine to rob the 
Federation of all administrative powers and make it only a law making 
body. 


A more staggering situation however is created by section 125. It is 
in the following terms: 


“125. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, agreements may, and, if 
provision has been made in that behalf by the Instrument of Accession of 
the State, shall be made between the Governor-General and the Ruler of 
a Federated State for the exercise by the Ruler or his officers of functions 
in relation to the administration in his State of any law of the Federal 
Legislature which applies therein. 


(2) An agreement made under this section shall contain provisions enabling 
the Governor-General in his discretion to satisfy himself, by inspection or 
otherwise that the administration of the law to which the agreement relates 
is carried out in accordance with the policy of the Federal Government and, 
if he is not so satisfied, the Governor-General, acting in his discretion, may 
issue such directions to the Ruler as he thinks fit. 


(3) All courts shall take judicial notice of any agreement made under 
this section.”. 


This section means that a State by its Instrument of Accession may 
stipulate that the administration of Federal laws in the State shall be 
carried out by the State agency and not by the agency of the Federation 
and if it does so stipulate then the Federation shall have no administrative 
power inside the State. The benefit of a law depends upon its administration. 
A law may turn out to be of no avail because the administration is 
either inefficient or corrupt. To deprive the Federal Government of its 
administrative powers is really to cripple the Federal Government. There 
is no Federation in which some units of the Federation are permitted to 
say that the Federal Government shall have no administrative powers in 
their territory. The Indian Federation is an exception. Not only is there a 
difference between the Provinces and the States in this matter but they 
also differ in their liability to supervision and direction by the Federal 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 307 


Government in the matter of the exercise of their executive authority. That 
difference will be clear if you will compare section 126 with section 128. 


Section 126 enacts that the executive authority of every province shall 
be exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive 
authority of the Federation and the executive authority of the Federation 
shall extend to the giving of such directions to a Province as may appear 
to the Federal Government to be necessary for that purpose. Section 128 
is a section which enacts a similar rule with respect to a Federated State, 
but there is a significant difference between the two sections. Section 126 
says that the executive authority of the Federation extends to the giving of 
such directions to a province as may appear to the Federal Government to 
be necessary for that purpose, while section 128 does not give such a power. 
That means that the Federation does not possess the inherent executive 
authority to glve a direction to the Ruler of a Federated State to prevent 
him from so exercising the executive authority of the State as to impede 
or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the Federation. That 
is one very significant difference. Such authority, instead of being given to 
the Federation, is given to the Governor-General, who, of course, under the 
law is distinct from the Federal Government and it is the Governor-General 
who is empowered to issue such directions to the Ruler as he thinks fit. 
A further distinction is also noticeable. When directions are issued to the 
Governor of a province under section 126 he is bound to carry them out. He 
has no right to question the necessity of the directions nor can he question 
the capacity of the Governor-General to issue such directions. With regard 
to the Ruler of a State, however, the position is entirely different. He can 
question such a direction, and have the matter adjudicated in the Federal 
Court, because the proviso to sub-section 2 of section 128 says that if any 
question arises under this section as to whether the executive authority 
under this section of the Federation is exercisable in a State with respect 
to any matter or as to the extent to which it is so exercisable, the question 
may at the instance either of the Federation or the Ruler be referred to the 
Federal Court for determination by that Court. 


(3) In the matter of Finance 


Coming to the question of Finance, the disparity between the Provinces 
and the States is a glaring disparity. Take the case of the taxing authority 
of the Federation over the Provinces and the States. It may be noted that 
the revenues of the Federation are derivable from sources which fall under 
two main heads—those derived from taxation and those not derived from 
taxation. Those not derived from taxation fall under six heads— 


(1) Fees in respect of matters included in the Federal List. 


(2) Profits, if any, on the work of the Postal Services, including Postal 
Savings Banks. 


(3) Profits, if any, on the operation of Federal Railways. 


308 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(4) Profits, if any, from Mint and Currency operations. 


(5) Profits, if any, from any other Federal enterprise, such as Reserve 
Bank, and 


(6) Direct contribution to the Crown from Federated or non-Federated 
States. 


As regards the revenues derived from taxation under the Government of 
India Act, they fall under two heads; Ordinary taxation and Extraordinary 
taxation. Ordinary taxation includes levy from following sources : 


(1) Customs duties; 

(2) Export duties; 

(3) Excise duties; 

(4) Salt; 

(5) Corporation tax; 

(6) Tax on income, other than agricultural; and 


(7) Property Taxes i.e., taxes on Capital value of the individual assets 
or a property. 


The extraordinary revenue falls under following heads : 
(1) Surcharges on Income-tax. 
(2) Surcharges on succession duties. 


(3) Surcharges on terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by rail 
or air and all taxes on railway freights. 


(4) Surcharges on Stamp duties, etc. 


Now, while the provinces are liable to bear taxation under any of these 
heads whether the taxation is of an ordinary character or is of an extraordinary 
character, the same is not true of the States. For instance, the States are 
not liable in ordinary time to ordinary taxes falling under heads 6 and 7, 
while the Provinces are liable, 


With regard to extraordinary taxation, the States are not liable to 
contribute even in times of financial stringency the taxes levied under 
items 2, 3 and 4 and even where they are liable to contribute under head 
1 of the extraordinary sources of revenue, 1t must be certified that all other 
economies have been made. 


There is another difference from the financial point of view between the 
States and the Provinces. The field of taxation for provincial Governments 
has been defined in the Act. A provincial Government cannot raise revenue 
from any source other than those mentioned in the Act. Such is not the 
case with the State. There is nothing in the Government of India Act, 
which defines the powers of a Federated State with regard to its system 
of taxation. It may select any source of taxation to raise revenue for the 
purpose of internal administration and may even levy customs duties upon 
articles entering its territory from a neighbouring province although that 
neighbouring province is a unit of the Federal Government of which the 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 309 


Federated State is also a unit. This is a most extraordinary feature of this 
Indian Federation and also one of its worst features. One of the results of 
a Federation, if not its primary object, has been the freedom of trade and 
commerce inside the territory of the Federation. There is no federation known 
to history which has permitted one unit of the Federation to levy customs 
duties or raise other barriers with a view to prevent inter-State commerce. 
The Indian Federation is an exception to that rule and this is a feature of 
the Indian Federation which makes it stand out in glaring contrast with 
other federations with which people are familiar today. 


One of the characteristics of a Federal Constitution is that although the 
territory comprised in the Federation is distributed or held by different units, 
still they constitute one single territory. At any rate for customs purposes 
the territory is treated as a single unit. Every Federal Constitution contains 
powers and prohibitions to prevent trade and customs barriers being erected 
by one unit against another. 


The American constitution by Section 9 of Article II prohibits a State from 
preventing the import or export of goods or from levying import or export 
duties upon goods passing in or out of the State boundary. Section 8(3) of 
Article II gives the Federal Government the power of regulating trade or 
commerce between the States of the Union. 


In Australia by virtue of Section 92 of its Constitution both the States and 
the Federal Government are bound so to exercise their power of regulation 
as not to transgress the fundamental guarantee of the Constitution embodied 
in Section 92 that “trade and commerce among the States whether by means 
of internal carriage or ocean navigation shall be absolutely free”. 


In Canada section 121 enacts that “all articles of the growth, produce 
or manufacture of any one Province shall, from and after the Union, be 
admitted free into each of the other Provinces.” 


In the Indian Constitution the provision relating to freedom of trade 
and commerce within the Federation is contained in Section 297. It reads 
as follows : 


“297. (1) No Provincial Legislature or Government shall— 


(a) by virtue of the entry in the Provincial Legislative List relating to 
trade and commerce within the Province, or the entry in that list 
relating to the production, supply, and distribution of commodities, 
have power to pass any law or take any executive action prohibiting 
or restricting the entry into, or export from, the Province of goods 
of any class or description ; or 


(b) by virtue of anything in this Act have power to impose any tax, cess, 
toll, or due which, as between goods manufactured or produced in 
the Province and similar goods not so manufactured or produced, 
diseriminates in favour of the former, or which, in the case of goods 
manufactured or produced outside the Province, discriminates between 


310 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


goods manufactured or produced in one locality and similar goods 
manufactured or produced in another locality. 


(2) Any law passed in contravention of this shall, to the extent of the 
contravention, be invalid.” 


Now it will be clear from the terms of this section that the freedom of 
trade and commerce is confined only to the provinces. That means the Indian 
States are free to prohibit the entry of goods from the Provinces absolutely 
or subject them to duty. This is quite contrary to the fundamental idea 
underlying a federal union. To allow one unit of the Federation to carry on 
commercial warfare against another unit is nothing but negation of federation. 


(4) Relationship of the People under the Federation 


Before I enter into this question it is necessary to clear the ground by 
pointing out certain distinctions. The words ‘State’ and ‘Society’ are often 
presented as though there was a contrast between the two. But there is no 
distinction of a fundamental character between a State and a society. It is 
true that the plenary powers of the State operate through the sanction of law 
while society depends upon religious and social sanctions for the enforcement 
of its plenary powers. The fact, however, remains that both have plenary 
powers to coerce. As such, there is no contrast between state and society. 
Secondly, the persons composing society are persons who are also members 
of the State. Here again, there is no difference between State and Society. 


There is, however, one difference, but it is of another kind. Every person, 
who is a member of society and dwells in it, is not necessarily a member 
of the State. Only those who dwell within the boundary of the State do 
not necessarily belong to the State. This distinction between those, who 
belong to the State and those who do not, is very crucial and should not be 
forgotten because it has important consequences. Those who belong to State 
are members and have the benefits of membership which consists of the 
totality rights and duties which they possess over against the State. From 
the side of duty the relation is best indicated by the word subject, from 
the side of rights it is best designated by the word citizen. This difference 
involves the consequence that those who dwell in the State without belonging 
to it have no benefit of membership which means that they are foreigners 
and not citizens. 


Theoretically, the task of differentiating the foreigners from the citizens 
of a State would seem to be an easy task, in fact, almost a mechanical task. 
This is particularly true of an Unitary State. Here there is a simple question : 
What is the relation of this State as against any and all foreign States ? In 
a Federal State the matter is complicated by the fact that every individual 
stands in a dual relationship. On the one hand, he sustains certain relations 
to the Federal State as a whole; and on the other he sustains certain 
relations to the State in which he may reside. The moment an attempt is 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 311 


made to define the status of a person in a Federal State, therefore, not 
one question, but several must be answered : What is the relation of this 
person to the Federal State, as against any and all foreign States ? What 
is the relation of this person to the State in which he resides ? Further is 
it possible to be a citizen of one State and not a citizen of Federal State ? 


Such questions did not arise in Canada and Australia when they became 
federations. The reason was that persons residing in their respective units 
were natural born British subjects—a status which remained with them when 
the Federation came. After the Federation the powers of naturalization was 
given to the Federation and consequently every one who is naturalized by 
the Federation is a citizen of the Federation and therefore of every unit in it. 


Such questions however did arise in the U.S.A., Switzerland and Germany, 
because before the Federation their units were all foreign States and their 
subjects were foreign subjects. But it is noteworthy that in all these cases a 
common citizenship was established as a part of the federation. A rule was 
established whereby it was accepted that a citizenship of one unit carried 
with it a citizenship of the Federation. 


The case of the Indian Federation is similar to that of the U.S.A., Germany 
and Switzerland. The subject of an Indian State is a foreigner in British 
India as well as in another Indian State. The subject of a British Indian 
Province is a foreigner in every Indian State. 


What does the Indian Federation do with regard to this matter ? Does 
it forge a common Citizenship for all Units which become members of the 
Federation ? The answer is no. A British Indian will continue to be a foreigner 
in every Indian State even though it is a Federal State after the Federation, 
as he was before the Federation. Similarly a subject of a Federated Indian 
State will be a foreigner in every British Indian Province after the Federation 
as he was before Federation. There is no common nationality. The whole 
principle of the Federation is that the ruler of a Federated State shall remain 
the ruler of the State and his subjects shall remain his subjects and the 
Crown as the ruler of the Federated Provinces shall remain the ruler of the 
Provinces and his subjects shall remain his subjects. 


This difference in citizenship manifests itself in two specific ways. 


Firstly, it manifests itself in the matter of right to serve. Federation being 
established under the Crown, only persons who are subjects of the Crown are 
entitled to serve under it. This is recognized by Section 262. This of course 
is an injustice to the subjects of the States. To prevent this injustice which 
of course is a logical consequence of difference of citizenship, power is given 
to the Secretary of State to declare the subjects of the Indian States eligible 
for service under the Federation. This is an anomalous state of affairs and 
although the injustice to Indian State subjects is mitigated, the injustice 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


against British Indians in the matter of right to employment in Indian States 
continues. For, Indian States are not required to declare that British Indians 
shall be deemed to be eligible for service under them. That notwithstanding 
Federation such an anomaly should exist shows that this Federation is a 
freak. 


Secondly, this difference in citizenship shows itself in the terms of the 
oath prescribed for members of the Legislature by Schedule IV. 


In the case of a member who is a British subject the form of the oath 
is as under: 


“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated or appointed) a member of this 
Council (or Assembly), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will be faithful 
and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the King, Emperor of India, His heirs 
and successors, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am 
about to enter.” 


In the case of a person who is a subject of a Ruler of an Indian State 
the form of the oath is as follows: 


“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated or appointed) a member of this 
Council (or Assembly), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that saving the faith and 
allegiance which I owe to C.D., his heirs and successors, I will be faithful and 
bear true allegiance in any capacity as Member of this Council (or Assembly) 
to His Majesty the King, Emperor of India, His heirs and successors, and that 
I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.” 


The subject of an Indian State, it is obvious from the terms of the oath, 
owes a double allegiance. He owes allegiance to the ruler of his State and 
also to the King. Superficially the position seems not very different from 
what one find in the United States. In the United States the individual is 
a citizen of the Union as well as of the State and owes allegiance to both 
powers. Each power has a right to Command his obedience. But ask the 
question, to which, in case of conflict, is obedience due and you will see the 
difference between the two. On this question this is what Bryce has to say: 


“The right of the State to obedience is wider in the area of matters which it 
covers. Prima facie every State-law, every order of a competent State authority 
binds the citizen, whereas the National government has but a limited power; it 
can legislate or command only for certain purposes or on certain subjects. But 
within the limits of its power, its authority is higher than that of the State, 
must be obeyed even at the risk of disobeying the State. 


“Any act of a State Legislature or a State Executive conflicting with 
the Constitution, or with an act of the National Government, done under 
the Constitution, is really an act not of the State Government, which 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 313 


cannot legally act against the Constitution, but of persons falsely assuming 
to act as such government, and is therefore ipso Jure void. Those who disobey 
Federal authority on the ground of the commands of a State authority are 
therefore insurgents against the Union who must be coerced by its power. The 
coercion of such insurgents is directed not against the State but against them 
as individuals though combined wrongdoers. A State cannot secede and cannot 
rebel. Similarly, it cannot be coerced.”. 


Can the Federal Government in India take the stand which the Union 
Government can when there is a conflict of allegiance ? There can be no 
doubt that it cannot, for the simple reason that the allegiance to the King 
saves the allegiance to the Ruler. This is a very unhappy if not a dangerous 
situation. 


(5) Strength of the Federal Frame 


The existence in the country of one Government which can speak and act 
in the name of and with the unified will of the whole nation is no doubt the 
strongest Government that can be had and only a strong Government can 
be depended upon to act in an emergency. The efficiency of a Governmental 
system must be very weak where there exists within a country a number of 
Governments which are distinct centres of force, which constitute separately 
organized political bodies into which different parts of the nation's strength 
flows and whose resistance to the will of the Central Government is likely to 
be more effective than could be the resistance of individuals, because such 
bodies are each of them endowed with a government, a revenue, a militia, 
a local patriotism to unite them. The former is the case where the unitary 
system of Government prevails. The latter is the case where the Federal 
form of Government prevails. 


The Indian Federation by reason of the fact that it is a Federation 
has all the weaknesses of a Federal form of Government. But the Indian 
Federation has its own added weaknesses which are not to be found in 
other Federations and which are likely to devitalize it altogether. Compare 
the Indian Federation with the Federation of the United States. As Bryce 
says, “the authority of the national Government over the citizens of every 
State is direct and immediate, not exerted through the State organization, 
and not requiring the co-operation of the State Government. For most 
purposes the National Government ignores the States, and it treats the 
citizens equally bound by its laws. The Federal Courts, Revenue Officers 
and Post Office draw no help from any State Officials, but depend directly 
on Washington. anna nak There is no local self-Government in Federal 
Matters: Sin dahan the Federal authority, be it executive or judicial, 
acts upon the citizens of a State directly by means of its own officers who 
are quite distinct from and independent of State Officials. Federal indirect 
taxes, for instance, are levied all along the coast and over the country by 
Federal custom-house collectors and excisemen acting under the orders 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of the treasury department at Washington. The judgments of Federal Courts 
are carried out by U.S. Marshals, likewise dispersed over the country and 
supplied with a staff of assistants. This is a provision of the utmost importance, 
for it enables the central, national Government to keep its fingers upon 
the people everywhere, and make its laws and the commands of its duly 
constituted authorities respected whether the State within whose territory 
it acts be heartily loyal or not, and whether the law which is being enforced 
be popular or abnoxious. The machinery of the national Government ramifies 
over the whole union as the nerves do over the whole body, placing every 
point in direct connection with the Central executive.”. 


Not one of these things can be predicated of the Indian Federation. It 
is a dependent Government and its relation with the people is not direct. 


In the United States, the States as States have no place in the Central 
Government and although the States elect representatives to the Federal 
Legislature, political action at the centre does not run in State channels. 
There is no combination of States into groups and it is not the fashion for 
States to combine in an official way through their State organizations. How 
different is the Indian Federation! States, as such, have been given de jure 
recognition, they have been given de jure exemptions, and immunities from 
law. There are great possibilities of combined action and counteraction by 
States and Provinces over these exemptions and immunities. This is another 
reason which leads to the feeling that the Indian Federation will have very 
little vitality. 


VI 
BENEFITS OF THE FEDERAL SCHEME 


The protagonists of the Federal Scheme have urged three grounds in 
favour of the acceptance of the Scheme. The first ground is that it helps to 
unite India. The second ground is that it enables British India to influence 
Indian India and to gradually transform the autocracy that is prevalent 
in Indian India into the democracy that exists in British India. The third 
ground is that the Federal Scheme is a scheme which embodies what is 
called Responsible Government. 


These three arguments in favour of the Federal Scheme are urged in 
such seriousness and the authority of those who urge them is so high that 
it becomes necessary to examine the substance that underlies them. 


1. Federation and the Unity of India 


The advantages of common system of Government are indeed very real. 
To have a common system of law, a common system of administration and 
a feeling of oneness are some of the essentials of good life. But they are all 
the results which follow from a common life led under a common system of 
Government. Other things being equal, a federation as a common system 
of Government for the whole of India should be welcome. But does this 
Federation unite under one governmental system the whole territory called 
India in the Government of India Act, 1935 ? Is this an All India Federation ? 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 315 


That this fededation includes British India is of course true; when Provinces 
are declared to be the units of the Federation it means that British India is 
included in the Federation. Because the Provinces which are declared to be 
the units of the Federation compromise what is called Indian India. Indian 
India is no small tract. The following figures of area and population will 
give a comparative idea of the extent of British India and this Indian India: 


Area in square miles Population 
(1931) (1931) 
British India excluding Burma and Aden. 8,62,630 2,56,859,787 
Indian States Pe A 7,12,508 81,310,845 


It will be seen that Indian India comprises 39 per cent of the population 
and 31 per cent of India as a whole. 


How much of this Indian India is going to be brought under this Federation? 


Many will be inclined to say that as this is spoken of as an All India 
Federation every inch of this area will be included in the Federation and will 
be subject to the authority of the Federal Government Such an impression 
is no doubt created by the wording of Section 6(1) which relates to the 
accession of the states. This section speaks of a Ruler declaring his desire 
to join the Federation and thereby suggesting that every State is entitled 
to join the Federation. If this is true, then no doubt the Federation can in 
course of time be an All India Federation. But this impression is wrong. 
Such an impression cannot arise if Section 6(1) is read with Schedule I of 
the Act Schedule I is merely thought of as a schedule which contains a Table 
of Seats for the Rulers. This is a very incomplete reading of the Schedule. 
The Schedule does more than that. It not only gives a table of seats, but 
also enumerates the States which are entitled to join the Federation and 
thereby fixes the maximum number of States which can come within the 
Federation if they wish to do so. In other words it is not open to every 
State to join the Federation. Only those enumerated can join. This is the 
significance of the Table of Seats given in Schedule I. 


What is the total number of the states which can join the Federation ? 
Schedule I limits the number to 147. A number of questions crop up by 
reason of this limit fixed by the Schedule. According to official figures there 
are in all 627 States in India. That means 480 States will remain outside 
the Federation and can never become part of the Federation. Can this 
be called an All India Federation? If it is to be an All India Federation, 
why are these States excluded? What is the position of these excluded 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


States ? If they are not States with sovereignty why are they allowed to join 
the federation ? If they are not States with sovereignty and if the sovereignty 
is with the Crown, why has the Crown not transferred its sovereignty to 
the Federation in respect of these territories ? What will be the ultimate 
destiny of such excluded States? Will these be merged in some Indian States 
or will these be merged in some Indian Provinces? I mention all this, firstly 
because I want to show that this Federation is not an All India Federation 
and secondly because I want to draw attention to the move of some Indian 
States to get these excluded States to merge into them. 


A second question may be raised. Will this Federation help to unite the 
people of British India and the Indian States into one nation ? 


A Federation is necessarily a composite body. Within it are units which are 
smaller political communities. Above the units is a larger political community 
called the Federation. Whether these different political communities will 
remain merely political associations or whether they will develop a common 
social fabric leading ultimately to the formation of a nation will depend upon 
what form their association takes. As Bryce points out— 


“When within a large political community smaller communities are found 
existing, the relation of the smaller to the larger usually appears in one or other 
of the two following forms. One form is that of the League, in which a number 
of political bodies, be they monarchies or republics are bound together so as 
to constitute for certain purposes, and especially for the purpose of common 
defence, a single body. The members of such a composite body or league are not 
individual men but communities. It exists only as an aggregate of communities, 
and will therefore vanish so soon as the communities which compose it separate 
themselves from one another. Moreover it deals with and acts upon these 
communities only. With the individual citizen it has nothing to do, no right of 
taxing him, or judging him, or making laws for him, for in all these matters 
it is to his own community that his allegiance is due. 


“In the second form, the smaller communities are mere sub-divisions of that 
greater one which we call a nation. They have been created, or at any rate 
they exist, for administrative purposes only. Such powers as they possess are 
powers delegated by the nation, and can be overridden by its will. The nation 
acts directly by its own officers, not merely on the communities, but upon every 
single citizen and the nation, because it is independent of these communities, 


> 


would continue to exist were they all to disappear .............. I 


The former is the case where the form of Government is a confederation. 
The latter is the case where there exists a unitary form of Government. A 
Federal Government is between the two. It must not however be assumed 
that nationalism is compatible only with a Unitary Government and 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 317 


incompatible with a Federal form of Government. It must be borne in mind 
that as a nation may be found in being, so also a nation, may be brought into 
being. In a Federal Government there may be at the start no nation, it may 
be a collection of heterogeneous communities. But it is possible to have in 
the end a nation even under a Federal Government. The most striking case 
1s that of the United States of America. Mr. Bryce relates a story which is 
both interesting as well as instructive. This is the story and I give it in his 
own words. “Some years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was 
occupied at its triennial Convention in revising its liturgy. It was thought 
desirable to introduce among the short sentence a prayer for the whole people; 
and an eminent New England Divine proposed the words, ‘O Lord, bless our 
nation'. Accepted one afternoon on the spur of the moment, the sentence 
was brought up next day for reconsideration, when so many objections were 
raised by the laity to the word ‘nation’, as importing too definite a recognition 
of national unity, that it was dropped, and instead there were adopted the 
words, “O Lord, bless these United States.’ Notwithstanding this prayer to 
the Lord, notwithstanding the reluctance to encourage the idea of a nation 
over against the idea of the states and notwithstanding the federal form oi 
Government the United States is a nation. That it is a nation in the social 
sense of the word is incontrovertible.” 


How has this happened in the United States ? Can we hope to see this 
happen in India under the Federal Scheme? Bryce explains how this 
happened in America. He points out that in America “The Central or National 
Government is not a mere league, for it does not wholly depend on the 
component Communities which we call the States. It is itself a Commonwealth 
as well as a Union of Commonwealths, because it claims directly the obedience 
of every citizen, and acts immediately upon him through its Courts and 
executive officers”. It can tax him, make law for him and judge him. In short 
it is the process of Government which is responsible largely if not wholly for 
moulding the Americans into a nation and that this was possible because 
in the Federal Form of Government of the United States there is a direct 
contact between the National Government and the individual. 


Is this possible under the Indian Federal Scheme? My answer is that 
such a thing is not possible. The people in the Indian States remain the 
subjects of the States. The Federal Government cannot deal with them 
directly. Everything has to be done through the State. There is no contact 
between the two, not even for purposes of taxation. How can a feeling 
that they belong to the national Government grow in the subject of the 
Indian States if they are excluded from any and every influence and are 
not even made to feel the existence of the National Government ? I am 
afraid this United States of India will not be more than a mere body 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of United States. It has no potentiality of forging a nation out of these States 
and probably the framers of the Scheme have had no such intention at all. 


2. Democratization of Autocracies 


The other advantage of the Federal Scheme which is claimed by its 
protagonists is that it brings beneath the dome of a single political edifice the 
new democracies of British India and the ancient autocracies of the Indian 
States and that by bringing the two under one edifice it provides contact 
between democracy and autocracy and thus enables the democracy in British 
India to democratize the autocracies in the Indian States. To examine this 
argument and to see how much force there is behind it, it is well to note 
that the Indian States and the British Indian Provinces are geographically 
contiguous. There is regular intercourse between them. The people of British 
India and those of the Indian States racially, linguistically and culturally form 
parts of one whole. With all these contacts and with all the unity of race, 
religion, language and culture British India has not been able to influence 
at all the forms of government which are prevalent in the Indian States. On 
the contrary while British India has advanced from autocracy to democracy, 
the Indian States have remained what they were with their fixed form of 
government. Unless therefore there is something special in the Act itself 
which enables British India to exercise its influence on the Indian States 
through the legislature and through the executive, this argument can have 
no substance at all. Is there anything in the Act which gives British India 
power to influence the States ? In this connection reference may be made to 
section 34(1) which deals with the procedure in the legislature with respect 
to the discussion and voting of the Budget estimates. 


From an examination of this Section it will be clear that the estimates 
relating to para (a) and para (/) of sub-section (3) of section 33 cannot even 
be discussed by the Federal legislature. Para (a) of sub-section (3) refers to 
the salary and allowances of the Governor-General and other expenditure 
relating to his office for which estimate is required to be made by Orders 
in Council, and para (/) relates to the sums payable to His Majesty under 
this Act out of the revenue of the Federation in respect of the expenses 
incurred in discharging the functions of the Crown in its relations with 
the Indian States. Another section which has a bearing upon this point is 
Section 38. Section 33 is a section which deals with the making of the rules 
by the Federal legislature for regulating its procedure in the conduct of its 
business. While this section permits the Federal legislature to make its own 
rules it allows the Governor-General to make rules — 


(c) or prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any 
matter connected with any Indian State, other than a matter with 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 319 


respect to which the Federal legislature has power to make laws for 
the State, unless the Governor-General in his discretion is satisfied 
that the matter affects Federal interest or affects a British subject 
and has given his consent to the matter being discussed or the 
question being asked ; 


(d) For prohibiting — 


(D the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter 
connected with relations between His MajJesty or the Governor- 
General and any foreign State or Prince ; or 


(ii) the discussion, except in relation to estimates of expenditure of, 
or the asking of questions on, any matter connected with the 
tribal area or the administration of any excluded area; or 


(iii) the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, the personal 
conduct of the ruler of any Indian State, or of a member of the 
ruling family thereof; 


and the section further provides that if and so far as any rule so 
made by the Governor-General is inconsistent with any rules made by 
the Chamber, the rules made by the Governor-General shall prevail. 


Another section having a bearing on this point is section 40. It says: 
“No discussion shall take place in the Federal legislature with respect to the 
conduct of any judge of the Federal Court or a High Court in the discharge 
of his duties and provides that in this sub-section the reference to a High 
Court shall be construed as including a reference to any court in a Federated 
State which is a High Court for any of the purposes of Part 9 of this Act.” 
Similar provisions are contained in that part of the Act which relates to 
the constitution of the provincial legislatures. Section 84 is a counterpart of 
section 38 and prevents any member of a Provincial legislature from asking 
any question with regard to the personal conduct of the ruler of any Indian 
State or the affairs of a State. Section 86 is a counterpart of section 40. 


Now it is obvious that the two most important ways open to a Legislature 
for influencing the conduct of the administration is by discussion of the 
Budget and by asking questions. The discussions on the budget had its 
origin in the theory which postulates that there can be no supply given to 
the executive unless the grievances of the people were redressed. The slogan 
of democracy has been: Redress of grievances before supplies of moneys. The 
discussion on the budget is the one opportunity of placing the grievances 
of a people before the executive. It is therefore a very valid privilege, as 
will be seen from section 34, the legislature is prevented but from placing 
the grievances of the subjects of the States before the executive on the 
floor of the House. Similarly, the right to interrogate and ask questions 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is also valid privilege, but that also is denied. The right to criticise on a 
proper motion the conduct of the judiciary is always open to the legislature, 
but that also has been excluded. It is difficult to see exactly in what way 
the Federal legislature could influence the internal administration of the 
Indian States. Not only the representatives of British India are prevented 
from asking any question or moving any resolution with regard to the 
internal administration of the States, but the same disability is imposed 
upon the representatives of the States themselves who are the victims of 
this maladministration. 


Compare with this the influence which the Federated States are in a 
position to exercise over British India. 


In the first place there is no restriction on the representatives of the 
Federated States in the matter of asking any question or raising any matter 
in the Federal Legislature. The fact that the question or matter touches 
British India and relates to internal administration of British India is not 
a bar against the representatives of the Federated States from raising such 
an issue. 


Secondly, there is no restraint upon the representatives of the Federated 
States in the matter of discussing and voting upon the financial proposals 
of the Federal Government. The fact that any such proposal affects British 
India only and does not affect the States can cause no legal impediment 
in their way. 


Thirdly, in the matter of Legislation the Representatives of the Federated 
States are free to vote upon any measure brought before the Federal 
Legislature. There are two lists over which the legislative authority of the 
Federation extends—The Federal list and the Concurrent list. The provinces 
are wholly bound by the Federal List. A Federated State is not wholly bound 
by it. The provinces are wholly bound by the concurrent list. A Federated 
State may not be bound at all. Yet the State represenatives have a right to 
vote upon any measure falling under either of the two lists. In other words 
the Federal Scheme gives the States the right to legislate for British India, 
while British India gets no such right to legislate for the States except to 
the extent to which the States choose to subject themselves to these two 
legislative lists. 


The scope of this Legislative influence by the States over British India is 
by no means small nor is it inconsequential. To Confine to the Concurrent 
list only, it includes 36 subjects. Among the 36 are such subjects as, Criminal 
Law, Criminal and Civil Procedure, Professions, Newspapers, Books and 
Printing Press etc. It is clear that these subjects are vital subjects. They 
affect the liberties of the people in the Provinces. Now as the States have a 
right to participate and vote upon all legislation within the Concurrent list, 
the Indian States will have the right and the authority to pass legislation 
affecting the rights, privileges and liberties of British Indians in the Provinces. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 321 


Further in the Legislative sphere, so far as it relates to the Concurrent 
List the States have obtained authority without any obligation. They are free 
to legislate and need not consider their own case in doing so because they 
are not bound, by the laws they make. Their conduct can be as irresponsible 
as they may choose to make 1t. 


It is however an understatement to say that the States have only a right 
to influence administration and Legislation in British India. The truth is 
that the States can dominate British India because they can maintain in 
office a ministry in the Federal Government although it is defeated by a 
majority of the representatives of British India on a matter purely affecting 
India. This is because they have a right to vote upon any motion including 
a non-confidence motion irrespective of the question whether the motion 
relates to a matter which affects them or not If this does not vest control 
over British India in Indian States I wonder what will. 


The injustice and anomaly of the States taking part in the discussions of 
the internal affairs of British India while the representatives of British India 
having no corresponding right to discuss the affairs of the States was sought 
to be remedied by limiting the rights of the States to discuss and vote upon 
such questions as did not relate to internal affairs of British India, but the 
Princes and their representatives have always been against such distinction 
being drawn and they insisted that on any matter on which the fate of the 
Ministry depended they must have the right to decide upon the future of 
that Government. The constitution has given effect to the point of view of 
the Princes and set aside the point of view of British India. 


This comparison shows that the States are placed by law in a position 
to control the affairs of British India and by the same law British India is 
disabled from exercising any influence over the States. That this is the true 
state of facts must be admitted by all. In other words the Federal Scheme does 
not help, indeed hinders British India from setting up in motion processes 
which would result in the democratisation of the Indian States. On the 
other hand it helps the Indian States to destroy democracy in British India. 


3. Federation and Responsibility 


Let us examine the plea of Responsibility. From the stand-point of British 
India it is of more decisive importance than the two other pleas and must 
be scrutinized more carefully. 


It cannot be denied that the Federation has some degree of responsibility. 
The question is what is the degree of that responsibility and whether within 
its sphere it is a responsibility which can be called real. 


Let us ask, how much responsibility is there in this Federation ? To be 
able to answer this question, you should read sections 9 and 11 together, 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


By reading them together you will get an idea of the extent of this 
responsibility. According to these two sections the field of Governmental 
Authority is divided into two categories. In one category are put four 
subjects (1) Defence, (2) Ecclesiastical affairs, (3) External affairs, and 
(4) the Administration of Tribal Areas. The rest of the subjects within the 
executive authority of the Federation are put in another and a separate 
category. The executive authority for both these categories is vested in the 
Governor-General. But a distinction is made between them in the matter of 
Governmental Authority. The Governmental Authority in respect of the four 
subjects falling in the first category is under the Act the Governor-General 
in his discretion. The Governmental Authority in respect of the rest of the 
subjects put in the second category is under the Act, the Governor-General 
acting on the advice of the Minister. In the case of the first four subjects 
the Government is not responsible to the Legislature, because the Governor- 
General in whom the Governmental Authority in respect of these four 
subjects is vested is not removable by the legislature. In the case of the rest 
of the subjects the Government is responsible to the Legislature, because 
the ministers on whose advice the Governmental Authority is exercisable 
are removable by the Legislature. The responsiblity in the Federal scheme 
is therefore a case of limited responsibility. The responsibility does not 
extend to Defence and Foreign Affairs which after all are the most important 
subjects from social, political and financial point of view. The scheme has 
a close resemblance to dyarchy with the division of subjects into Reserved 
and Transferred such as was the basis of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, 
which was embodied in the Provincial Constitution under the Government 
of India Act of 1919. The scheme of resposibility in the Federal Constitution 
under the Act of 1935 is an exact replica of the scheme of responsibility in 
the Provincial Constitution under the Act of 1919. 


Is this responsibility real? My answer is in the negative. I will give you 
my reasons. Firstly the field of responsibility besides being limited is not a 
free field of activity for ministers. To realize how fettered this limited field 
of responsibility is, we must note certain restraints which have been imposed 
upon the powers of the Ministers when acting in the field of responsibility. 


The first set of restraints imposed upon the authority of the Ministers 
when acting in the field of responsibility arises from what are called the 
special responsibilities of the Governor-General. 


There exist another set of restraints on the authority of the Ministers while 
exercising the Governmental Authority in respect of transferred subjects. To 
understand this you must understand one special feature of this Federal 
constitution. The constitution classifies subjects from the stand-point of 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 323 


Governmental Authority and that this classification has resulted in that 
division of subjects which for brevity’s sake may be designated as Transferred 
and Reserved. The Constitution does not stop here. It goes further and 
proceeds to divide the category of Transferred subjects into two classes. 
(1) subjects over which the Ministers’ Governmental Authority carries with it 
administrative control and (2) subjects over which the Governmental Authority 
of Ministers does not carry with it administrative control. As an illustration 
of this classification may be mentioned the case of Railways. Railways are 
a transferred subject. The Governmental Authority of the Ministers extends 
to Railways. But the Ministers have no right to exercise any administrative 
control over the Railways. The administrative control over Railways is vested 
in what is called the Railway Authority. The distinction between Governmental 
Authority with Administrative Control and Governmental Authority without 
administrative control is not a distinction without difference. On the other 
hand the difference between the two positions is very real. That difference 
is made clear in sub-clause (2) of section 181 in the matter of Railways. 
That distinction is the distinction between authority to lay down a policy 
and competency to act. It is for those who plead for this Federation to say 
whether there is reality of responsibility in a Scheme of Government where 
there is a divorce between competence to act and authority to lay down policy. 


Two things are clear in regard to this Responsibility in the Federal 
Scheme. First is that this responsibility is limited in its ambit. Secondly it 
is not real because it is fettered by the restraints arising from the special 
responsibilities of the Governor-General and from the withdrawal from the 
Ministers Governmental Authority of their competence to act in certain 
subjects such as the Railways, although they are Transferred subjects. 


I have stated that the system of responsibility in the Federal Scheme 
resembles the system of dyarchy introduced into the provinces under the 
Act of 1919. But if the Scheme of responsibility in the Federation was 
compared with the system of dyarchy introduced into the Provinces it will 
be found that the former is designed to yield less responsibility than the 
latter. There are two things introduced in the Federal Scheme which were 
not to be found in the dyarchy in the Provinces and there existed one thing 
in the dyarchy which is absent in the Federation. The presence of the two 
and the absence of one makes this dyarchy in the Federation worse than 
the dyarchy in the Provinces. 


Of the two things that are new in the Federal Scheme one is the 
principle of special responsibilities of the Governor-General in respect of 
the Transferred field and the other is the separation between Governmental 
Authority from administrative control in respect of matters falling within 
the Transferred field. These two are new things and did not exist in the 
dyarchical constitution in the provinces. 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


It may be said that the special responsibilities of the Governor-General 
is simply another name for the Veto power, that is the power to overrule 
the Ministers and that even in the English Constitution the King has 
such a Veto power. On the face of it, this view of special responsibilities 
of the Governor-General appears to be correct. But in reality it involves a 
misconception of the conditions and circumstances under which the King's 
Veto power can be exercised. 


To my knowledge no one has explained the relationship of the King and 
his Ministers in a system of responsible Government better than Macaulay. 
To use his language— 


“In England the King cannot exercise his Veto power unless there is some 
Minister to take responsibility for the King's act. If there is no Minister to take 
responsibility the King must yield, fight, or abdicate.” The Governor-General 
stands in a different position. He need not yield. He can act even if there is 
no Minister to take responsibility for his act. That is the difference between 
the King’s Veto and the Veto of the Governor-General. What is however more 
important to note is that this Veto power exists in respect of the Transferred 
field. In the dyarchical constitution in the Provinces the Transferred field was 
not subject to such a Veto power of the Governor. In other words there were 
no special responsibilities of the Governor. If the Governor-General can overrule 
Ministers even in the Transferred field, question is what substance is there in 
Ministerial responsibility. I see very little. 


The second thing which is new is the separation between Governmental 
Authority and administrative control. Such a provision did not exist in the 
dyarchical constitution in the Provinces. In the dyarchical constitution of the 
Provinces when a subject was transferred both Governmental Authority as well 
as Administrative control was transferred to the Minister. You will ask yourself 
what substance is there in Ministerial responsibility if a Minister can only issue 
directions and cannot control the action taken thereunder ? I see very little. 


The provision which existed in the dyarchical constitution of the Provinces 
and which has been omitted from the Federal Constitution relates to the 
financing of the Reserved subjects. Section 72D of the old Act of 1919 and 
sections 33 and 34 of the present Act may be usefully compared in this 
connection. Section 72D, sub-section (2) reads as follows: 


“The estimates of annual expenditure and revenue of the Province shall 
be laid in the form of a statement before the Council in each year, and 
the proposals of the local Government for the appropriation of provincial 
revenues and other moneys in any year shall be submitted to the vote of 
the Council in the form of demands for grants. The Council may assent, 
or refuse its assent, to a demand, or may reduce the amount therein 
referred to, either by a reduction of any of the items of expenditure 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 325 


of which the grant is composed.” Compare with this section 34 of the present 
Act of 1935 ; sub-section (1) of section 34 reads as follows: 


“So much of the estimates of expenditure as relates to expenditure charged 
upon the revenues of the Federation shall not be submitted to the vote of the 
Legislature, but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing 
the discussion in either chamber of the Legislature of any of these estimates 
other than estimates relating to expenditure referred to im paragraph (a) or 
paragraph (f) of sub-section (3) of section 33.” 


According to section 33 expenditure charged on the revenues of the 
Federation includes expenditure on the reserved subjects. On a comparison 
between the provisions of the two Acts, it is clear that under the old Act no 
distinctions were made by section 72D between Transferred and Reserved 
subjects, so far as the powers of the Legislature in regard to the granting 
of supply were concerned and the expenditure on Reserved subjects was not 
only open to discussion but was also subject to the vote of the Legislature. 
Under the provisions of section 34, of the new Act the Federal Legislature can 
only discuss the expenditure on the reserved subjects but cannot vote upon 
it. This is a very important distinction. Under the old constitution even the 
reserved subjects were amenable to the financial powers of the Legislature. 
Under the present constitution they arc independent of the financial powers 
of the Federal Legislature. It is true that in the provincial Constitution the 
vote of the Legislature with regard to expenditure on reserved subjects was 
not final. That under a proviso to section 72D the Governor was given the 
power “in relation to any such demand to act as if it had been assented 
to, notwithstanding the withholding of such assent or the reduction of the 
amount (by the Legislature) if the demand relates to reserved subject, and 
the Governor certifies that the expenditure provided for by the demand is 
essential to the discharge of his responsibility for the subject”. It is also true 
that in the Government of India Act, 1935 the amount of expenditure on 
reserved subjects is fixed to 42 crores. But the same difference exists, namely 
that under the old constitution the reserved subjects were amenable to the 
financial control of the Legislature while in the new constitution they are 
not. This difference is not a small difference. The power to grant supplies is 
the most effective mode of enforcing the responsibility of the executive. The 
power of certification might have deprived the Legislature of control of the 
reserved subjects. But it did not altogether destroy its influence. Under the 
present constitution the Legislature has not only no control over reserved 
subjects but also it cannot have any influence over them. There can therefore 
be no doubt that there was more responsibility in the dyarchy in the old 
Provincial Constitution than there is in this dyarchy in the Federation. 


The fact that the Executive is not responsible to the Legislature is 
simply another way of stating that in the Federal Scheme the Executive 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is supreme. This supremacy of the Executive may be maintained in various 
ways. It may be maintained by curtailing the powers of the Legislature or it 
may be maintained by planning the composition of the Legislature in such a 
way that the Legislature will always be at the beck and call of the Executive. 


The Federal Scheme adopts both these means. In the first place, it limits 
the powers of the Federal Legislature. I have already described how greatly 
the Federal Scheme curtails the financial powers of the Federal Legislature. 
The Federal Legislature has no right to refuse supplies to any expenditure 
which is declared to be a charge on the revenues. 


The Federal Scheme also curtails the Legislative powers of the Federal 
Legislature. These restraints are specified in section 108 which reads as 
follows : 


“108. (1) Unless the Governor-General in his discretion thinks fit to give 
his previous sanction, there shall not be introduced into, or moved in, either 
Chamber of the Federal Legislature, any Bill or amendment which— 


(a) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any provisions of any Act of 
Parliament extending to British India; or 


(b) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor-General’s or 
Governor’s Act, or any ordinance promulgated in his discretion by 
the Governor-General or a Governor; or 


(c) affects matters as respects which the Governor-General is, by or 
under this Act, required to act in his discretion; or 


(d) repeals, amends or affects any Act relating to any police force ; or 


(e) affects the procedure for criminal proceedings in which European 
British subjects are concerned ; or 


(f) subjects-persons not resident in British India to greater taxation 
than persons resident in British India or subjects companies not 
wholly controlled and managed in British India to greater taxation 
than companies wholly controlled and managed therein ; or 


(g) affects the grant of relief from any Federal tax on income in respect 
of income taxed or taxable in the United Kingdom. 


(2) Unless the Governor-General in his discretion thinks fit to give his 
previous sanction, there shall not be introduced into, or moved in a Chamber 
of a Provincial Legislature any Bill or amendment which— 


(a) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any provisions of any Act of 
Parliament extending to British India ; or 


(b) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor-General’s Act, or 
any ordinance promulgated in his discretion by the Governor-General; 
or 


(c) affects matters as respects which the Governor-General is by or 
under this Act, required to act in his discretion ; or 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 327 


(d) affects the procedure for criminal proceedings in which European 
British subjects are concerned ; 


and unless the Governor of Province in his discretion thinks fit to give his 
previous sanction, there shall not be introduced or moved any Bill or amendment 
which— 


(i) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor’s Act, or any 
ordinance promulgated in his discretion by the Governor; or 


Gi) repeals, amends or affects any Act relating to any police force. 


(3) Nothing in this section affects the operation of any other provision in 
this Act which requires the previous sanction of the Governor-General or of 
a Governor to the introduction of any Bill or the moving of any amendment.” 


The Federal Scheme does not stop with merely curtailing the power of 
the Federal Legislature as a means of maintaining the supremacy of the 
Executive. Under it the composition of the Federal Legislature is so arranged 
that the Legislature will always be at the beck and call of the Executive. In 
this connection it is necessary to bear in mind what the actual composition 
of the Federal Legislature is. As has already been pointed out there are 375 
members in the Legislative Assembly and of them 125 have been assigned 
to the Indian States and 250 to British India. In the Council of State the 
total is 260 and of them 104 are assigned to the States and 156 are alloted 
to British India. The seals assigned to the States are to be filled by the 
Princes by nomination. The scats assigned to British India are to be filled 
by election. The Federal Legislature is therefore an heterogeneous legislature 
partly elected and partly nominated. 


The first question to be considered is how the Princes’ nominees in the 
Federal Legislature will behave. Will they be independent of the Federal 
Executive or will they be subservient to it? It is difficult to prophesy. But 
certain influences which are likely to play a part in the making of these 
nominations may be noted- It is an indisputable fact that the British 
Government claims what are called rights of paramountcy over the States 
“Paramountcy”’ is an omnibus term to denote the rights which the Crown 
can exercise through the Political Department of the Government of India 
over the States. Among these rights is the right claimed by the Political 
Department to advise the Indian Princes in the matter of making certain 
appointments. It is well known that what is called “advice” is a diplomatic 
term for dictation. There is no doubt that the Political Department will 
claim the right to advise the Princes in the matter of filling up these places. 
Should this happen, what would be the result ? The result would be this that 
the Princes’ representatives would be simply another name for an official 
block owing allegiance, not to the people and not even to the Princes, but to 
the Political Department of the Government of India. Two things must be 
further noted. First is that Paramountcy is outside the Federal Government. 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


That means that the Ministers, will have no right to give any advice in the 
matter of the nomination of the Princes' Representatives and the Legislature 
will have no right to criticise it. They will be under the control of the 
Viceroy as distinct from the Governor-General. Secondly, this official block 
of the Princes is not a small block. In the Lower House a party which has 
187 seats can command a majority. In the Upper Chamber a party which 
has 130 seats can command a majority. In the Lower House the Princes 
have 125 seats. All that they need is a group of 62 to make a majority. 
In the Upper Chamber they have 104; all that they need is 26. All this 
vast strength the Executive can command. How can such a Legislature be 
independent ? The Reserved half can control the Transferred half with this 
strength in its possession. 


How will the representatives of British India behave ? I cannot make any 
positive statement. But I like it to be borne in mind that in some States 
there is no such thing as a regular budget and there is no such thing as 
independent audit and accounts. It would not be difficult for the Princes to 
purchase support from British India representatives. Politics is a dirty game 
and British India politicians cannot all be presumed to be beyond corruption 
and when purchases can be made without discovery the danger is very real. 


Look at the Federal Scheme any way you like and analyze it as you may 
its provisions relating to responsibility, you will see that of real responsibility 
there is none. 


VII 
THE BANE OF THE FEDERAL SCHEME 


There is no one who does not recognize that this Scheme for an All Indian 
Federation is full of defects. A difference of opinion arises only when the 
question is asked what shall we do about it. The answers given to this 
question by prominent Indians from time to time disclose that broadly 
speaking, there are two quite different attitudes to this Federation. There 
is the attitude of those who think that bad as it is, we should accept the 
Federation and work it so as to derive whatever good it can yield. On the 
other hand, there is the attitude of those who think that certain changes 
must be made in the Constitution of the Federation before it can be accepted 
and worked. It is agreeable to find that both the Congress as well as the 
Liberal Federation are one on this issue. Both have declared that certain 
changes must be made before they will accept to work the Federation. 


That this Federation is not acceptable to a large majority of the Indian 
people is beyond question. The question is in what respects should we 
require the Constitution to be amended? What are the changes which we 
should demand ? We may take as our starting point the resolutions passed 
by the Congress and the Liberal Federation relating to this question. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 329 


The Congress at its session held at Haripura in 1938 passed the following 
resolution: 


“The Congress has reJected the new Constitution and declared that a 
Constitution for India, which can be accepted by the people, must be based 
on Independence and can only be framed by the people themselves by means 
of a Constituent Assembly, without interference by any foreign authority. 
Adhering to this policy of rejection, the Congress has, however, permitted the 
formation in provinces of Congress Ministries with a view to strengthen the 
nation in its struggle for independence. In regard to the proposed Federation, 
no such considerations apply even provisionally or for a period, and the 
imposition of this Federation will do grave injury to India and tighten the 
bonds which hold her in subjection to imperialist domination. This scheme 
of Federation excludes from the sphere of responsibility vital functions of 
Government. 


The Congress is not opposed to the idea of Federation ; but a real 
Federation must, even apart from the question of responsibility consist of free 
units enjoying more or less the same measure of freedom and civil liberty, 
and representation by the democratic process of election. The Indian States 
participating in the Federation should approximate to the provinces in the 
establishment of representative institutions and responsible Government, 
civil liberties and method of election to the Federal Houses. Otherwise the 
Federation as it is now contemplated, will, instead of building up Indian 
unity, encourage separatist tendencies and involve the States in internal 
and external conflicts. 


The Congress therefore reiterates its condemnation of the proposed Federal 
Scheme and calls upon the Provincial and Local Congress Committees and 
the people generally, as well as the Provincial Governments and Ministries, 
to prevent its inauguration. In the event of an attempt being made to impose 
it, despite the declared will of the people, such an attempt must be combated 
in every way and the Provincial Governments and Ministries must refuse to 
co-operate with it. In case such a contingenncy arises, the All India Congress 
Committee is authorised and directed to determine the line of action to be 
pursued in this regard.”. 


The resolution passed by the National Liberal Federation at its last session 
held in Bombay was in the following terms: 


“The National Liberal Federation reiterates its opinion that the Constitution, 
especially as regards the Centre as embodied in the Government of India Act, 
1935, is utterly unsatisfactory and in several respects retrogade. While the 
National Liberal Federation accepts a federal form of Government for India 
as the only natural ideal for our country, the Federation considers that vital 
changes are required in the form of the Federation as laid down in the Act 


330 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


especially in the direction of (a) clearing up the position of the Princes and 
securing the subjects of States the right of election of States’ representatives, 
(b) doing away with the safeguards regarding the monetary policy and 
commercial discrimination, (c) introducing direct elections for the members 
of the Federal Assembly by the Provinces and (d) making Constitution 
sufficiently elastic so as to enable India to attain Dominion Status within 
a reasonable period of time. 


The National Liberal Federation considers that the present position when 
there is an irresponsible Government in the Centre coupled with responsible 
Governments in the Provinces is altogether untenable and earnestly urges on 
Parliament to make immediate changes in the Federal part of the Constitution 
so as to make it generally acceptable. 


The Federation is further of opinion that these modifications are essential 
for the successful working of the Federal Constitution.” 


Should these changes demanded by the Congress or by the Liberal 
Federation suffice to alter the present attitude of rejection into one of 
acceptance of Federation? Speaking for myself I have no hesitation in saying 
that the changes asked for in these Resolutions even if they are made will not 
convert me. To my mind whether the British Parliament is prepared to alter 
this, that or the other detail of the Federal Scheme immediately is a very 
unimportant consideration. In the view I take of the matter the objections 
to the Federal Scheme will not be removed in the least even if the British 
Parliament will be ready to grant every one of the demands contained in 
these Resolutions. To me the fundamental question is whether this Federal 
Scheme is capable of so evolving that in the end India will reach her goal 
and it is from this point of view that I want you and every one interested 
to examine the Federal Scheme. 


What is the goal of India’s political evolution? There does not seem to 
any fixity or definiteness about it. The Congress which claims to voice the 
political aspirations of the Indian people began with good Government as 
its goal. It moved from good Government to Self-Government or Responsible 
Government ; from Responsible Government to Dominion Status and from 
Dominion Status it advanced to Independence. There the Congress stopped 
for some time in a mood of self-examination. Then there was period of 
vaccilation. Now it seems to have come back to Dominion Status and we 
shall not be very wrong if we take that to be the goal of India according to 
the Congress. Now the question is, can the Federal Scheme blossom in due 
course into Dominion Status ? 


Many Indians seem to think that the question of Dominion Status is 
a matter of gift which lies in the hands of the British Parliament. If the 
British Parliament were to make up its mind to grant it, nothing can stand 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 331 


in the way. They contend that if India has no hope of Dominion Status, it 
is because the British Parliament refused to grant it. In support of their 
opinion they refer to the refusal of The British Parliament to add a Preamble 
to the Act of 1935 declaring Dominion Status as the goal for India. 


It must be granted that the demand for such a preamble was a very 
proper one. In 1929 Lord Irwin with the consent of all the political parties 
in the British Parliament declared that the goal of India's political evolution 
was Dominion Status. What the Indians therefore wanted was not new. It 
had already been so stated authoritatively by the Governor-General and 
Viceroy, but the British Government refused to put such a preamble. The 
refusal was therefore a strange piece of conduct on the part of the British 
Government. But the grounds urged in support of the refusal were stranger 
still. The British Government sought to justify their conduct in not having 
a preamble in those terms on various grounds. 


The first ground was that a preamble was a futility and that it had no 
operative force, but that argument was easily met. All Acts of Parliament 
have had Preambles expressing the purpose and the intention of Parliament. 
It is true that it has no legal effect, but all the same Courts have not held 
that a preamble is a futile thing. On the other hand, wherever there is any 
doubt with regard to the wording of a section, Courts have always resorted to 
the preamble as a key to understand the purpose of the enactment and made 
use of it for resolving any doubtful construction. Driven from this position, 
the British Government took another position and that was to repeal the Act 
of 1919 but to retain the Preamble to that Act. This again is a very queer 
thing. In the first place if the Preamble is a futility, there is no necessity 
to save the Preamble enacted as part of the Act of 1919. Secondly if the 
Preamble to the Act of 1919 was a necessity, it should have been enacted 
afresh as a part of this Act of 1935, which the British Government would 
not do. Instead it preferred to present the strange spectacle of the head 
separated from the trunk. The head is now to be found in the repealed Act 
of 1919 and the trunk is to be found in the present enactment of 1935. In 
the third place, what the Indian people wanted was a preamble promising 
Dominion Status and that is what the declaration of Lord Irwin contained. 
The preamble to the Act of 1919 speaks only of Responsible Government. 
It does not speak of Dominion Status and the retention of the Preamble to 
the Act of 1919 was to say the least the silliest business possible. 


Why did the British Parliament refuse to enact a Preamble defining 
Dominion Status as the goal? Why did the British Parliament run from 
pillar to post rather than grant the demand ? The explanation offered is 
of course the usual one namely, the perfidy of the Albion ! My own view 
is different. The British Parliament did not promise Dominion Status by 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


enacting a preamble because it realized that it would be beyond its power to 
fulfil such a promise. What the British Parliament lacked was not honesty. 
Indeed it was its honesty which led it to refuse to enact such a preamble 
because it knew that it could not give effect to such a preamble. What it 
lacked was courage to tell the Indians that the Federal Scheme left no way 
for Dominion Status. 


Why is Dominion Status impossible under the Federal Scheme? It is 
impossible because it is not possible to have Responsible Government. It 
must be borne in mind that to reach Dominion Status, India must first attain 
Responsible Government. To attain Responsible Government the subjects 
which are reserved must become transferred. That is the first stage in the 
process of evolution towards Dominion Status. 


Some of you will want to know the reasons why I say that the reserved 
subjects cannot become transferred. They are sure to recall that there were 
Reserved subjects in the Provincial Scheme as they are in the Federal 
Scheme and will ask that if the reserved subjects have become transferred 
in the course of say 20 years what difficulty can there be in the similar 
things happening in the Federation. As the question is important, I proceed 
to give my reason. In the first place, the analogy of the Provinces is false. 
It is important to note why the analogy is false. It is false because in the 
Provincial Scheme the distinction between the reserved and the transferred 
subjects was based upon the requirements of administrative efficiency. That 
the distinction between the reserved and the transferred subjects in the 
Federal Scheme is based upon legal necessity and not upon administrative 
efficiency needs no proof. One of the reasons why the Simon Commission did 
not recommend dyarchy at the Centre was that it felt that administratively 
it was not possible to divide subjects into two water-tight compartments, one 
reserved and the other transferred, without affecting the efficiency of all ; 
and the Government of India's despatch on the Simon Commission entirely 
agreed with the view. The division, therefore, is not administrative in its 
basis. It is the result of a legal necessity. This is a fundamental distinction 
and ought never to be lost sight of. 


How does this legal necessity arise? I say the legal necessity for treating 
certain subjects as reserved arises because of the Indian States. I go further 
and say that there would be necessity for treating certain subjects as 
reserved if the Federation was confined to the British India Provinces only. 
The reservation of certain subjects is a direct consequence of the entry of 
the Indian States into the Federation. 


What is it, in the position of the Indian States which compels certain 
subjects to be treated as reserved ? To be able to answer this question I 
must first draw your attention to section 180 of the Government of India 
Act. Section 180 says — 


“Any contact made before the commencement of Part III of this 
Act by or on behalf of the Secretary of State in Council solely in 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 333 


connection with the exercise of the functions of the Crown in its relations 
with Indian States, shall, as from the commencement of Part III of this Act. 
have effect as if it had been made on behalf of His Majesty and references 
in any such contract to the Secretary of State in Council shall be construed 
accordingly.” 


This section gives statutory form to the contention put forward by 
the Princes before the Butler Committee and accepted by them, that the 
treaties of the Indian States were with the Crown of England as such and 
not with the Government of India. 


The next step is to note what follows from this theory. Now what follows 
from this theory is very crucial, but has been unfortunately allowed to 
pass without due care and attention. The Princes have contended that as 
treaty relations of the Indian States are with the Crown of England, the 
duty and responsibility of fulfilling the obligations arising under those 
treaties lay solely upon the Crown of England and the Crown of England 
must at all times maintain itself in a position to fulfil those obligations. 


What is the obligation which the treaties with the Princes impose upon 
the Crown of England ? The Principle of obligation imposed upon the Crown 
of England and which the Crown of England has undertaken by the treaties 
is to protect the Princes from internal commotion and external aggression. 


How can the Crown fulfil this obligation ? The only way, it is argued, 
that the Crown can fulfil this obligation is to reserve external affairs and 
the Army under its exclusive control. 


You can now understand why I say that the necessity of reserved 
subjects is due to a legal necessity. That legal necessity flows from the 
treaty obligations of the Crown and so long as the basis of the treaty 
relations remains what Section 180 says it is, the reserved subjects cannot 
become transferred subjects. And as the reserved subjects cannot become 
transferred, there is no scope even for Responsible Government much less 
for Dominion Status. 


From the analysis I have made of the Constitution, from the stand- 
point of the ultimate goal, few, I believe, will have any hesitation to say 
that this Constitution is a fixed and rigid constitution. It cannot change 
and therefore it cannot progress. It is a constitution which is striken at 
the very base and it is for the people of India to consider whether they 
will accept it. 


I have examined the Constitution from the stand-point of our goal at 
so considerable a length that I feel I owe you an apology for tiring you. 
But the attitude of some people towards this question must be my excuse 


334 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


for entering into this subject at such great length. I realize that no Constitution 
1s a perfect constitution. Imperfections there are bound to be. But I think a 
distinction must be drawn between imperfections and inherent and congenital 
deficiencies. Imperfections can be removed. But congenital deficiencies cannot 
be supplied. The demands made in the resolutions of the Congress or of 
the Liberal Federation, even if granted, will remove the imperfections. But 
will they remove the deficiencies ? I would not mind the imperfections if I 
was assured that there are no deficiencies. The greatest deficiency in the 
Constitution is that it will not lead to Dominion Status. Neither the Congress 
nor the Liberal Federation seems to be aware that this deficiency exists. Their 
demands have no relation to the goal of India's political evolution. They do 
not even mention it. It is surprising that Congressmen should have become 
so enamoured of the prospect of seizing political power that their demands 
against the British Government should not even contain a declaration from 
the British Government in this behalf. But if Congress forget, the people 
of India cannot and should not. To do so would be fatal. It would be fatal 
as much for an individual as for a people to forget that a stage on the way 
is not the home and to follow the way without knowing whether it leads 
homewards or not is to misdirect one-self and fall into a ditch. 


You must not misunderstand me. I am not an impatient idealist. I am 
not condemning the gradualist, who is prepared to wait and take thing by 
instalments, although the gradualist, who has a valid claim for a rupee, 
demands an anna and proclaims a great victory when he gets a pie, must 
become an object of pity. All I want is that if circumstances force us to be 
gradualists we must not fail to be realists. Before accepting an instalment 
we should examine it carefully and satisfy ourselves that it contains an 
acknowledgement of the whole claim. Otherwise, as often happens what is 
good for the moment turns out to be the enemy of the better. 


Some of you will ask, how can India secure Dominion Status. My answer 
is India will get Dominion Status only if the Princes who join the Federation, 
consent to its being granted. If the Princes object to the grant of Dominion 
Status to India, then India cannot get Dominion Status. The Federation 
places the strings of India’s political evolution in the hands of the Princes. 
The destiny of India will be controlled by the Princes. 


This view of the future will strike as very strange to a great many of 
you. We are all saturated with Dicey’s dictum regarding the Sovereignty 
of Parliament. We all have learned from him that Parliament is supreme, 
that it is so supreme that it can do anything except make man a woman 
and woman a man. It would not be unnatural if some of you ask how can 
the Princes stand in the way when the British Parliament is supreme. It 
will take some effort on your part to accept the proposition that the British 
Parliament has no supremacy over the Indian Federation. Its authority to 
change the Federal Constitution now embodied in the government of India 
Act is strictly limited. 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 335 


Indian politicians have expressed their sense of sorrow and resentment 
over the fact that the Indian Legislatures have not been given by the Act 
any constituent powers. 


Under the Government of India Act neither the Federal Legislature, nor 
the Provincial Legislature have any powers of altering or amending the 
constitution. The only thing, which the Act by virtue of section 308 does. is to 
permit the Federal Legislature and Provincial Legislature to pass a resolution 
recommending any change in the constitution, and make it obligatory upon 
the Secretary of State to place it before both Houses of Parliament. This 
is contrary to the provisions contained in the Constitutions of the United 
States, Australia, the German Federation and Switzerland. There is no reason 
why constituent power should not have been given within certain defined 
limits to the Legislatures in India when they were fully representative of 
all sections and of all interests. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the 
Indian Legislatures cannot make any changes in constitution, not even in 
the franchise, much less in making the reserved subjects transferred. The 
only authority which can change the Constitution is of course the British 
Parliament. But very few seem to be aware of the fact that even Parliament 
has no powers to alter the Federal Constitution. This, however, is the truth 
and the sooner we all realize it the better. 


From this point of view the importance of Schedule II cannot be 
overestimated. I am sorry, it has not received the attention which it 
deserves. Schedule II is not only a charter but is also a chart along which 
the Constitution can move. The whole Schedule is worth careful study. 
What does Schedule II say ? Schedule II says that certain provisions of the 
Government of India Act may be amended by Parliament and that certain 
other provisions of the Act shall not be amended by Parliament. That is 
simply another way of saying that Parliament is not supreme and that its 
right to alter the Constitution is limited. 


What would happen if Parliament did amend those provisions of the Act 
which Schedule II says shall not be amended by Parliament ? The answer, 
which Schedule II gives, is that such an Act will have the effect of ‘affecting’ 
the accession of the States to the Federation, which means it will have the 
effect of destroying the binding character of the Instrument of Accession. In 
other words, if Parliament amended any of the provisions of the Act, which 
Schedule II says shall not be amended, the Princes would get the right to 
secede from the Federation. I am aware that some eminent lawyers have 
taken a different view. They hold that the Princes, once they come into the 
Federation, cannot go out of it. I have mentioned my view for what it is 
worth and I will say that my view is not altogether baseless. 


At any rate the Solicitor-General and Secretary of State gave the 
same interpretation, as I am giving, in the House of Commons, when the 
Government of India Bill was being discussed. 


336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Solicitor-General said: 


“The States will not agree to federate in a structure which within 
limits, is definite and certain and obviously we could not completely alter 
the structure afterwards. The purpose of this clause is to lay down those 
matters which can be altered without being regarded as fundamental or as 
impinging on the Instrument of Accession.” ...... “If the structure were to 
be altered in fundamental respects, of course the States would clearly have 
the right to say “This is not the Federation to which we have acceded.” 


The Secretary of State said : 


“If you amend the parts of the Bill which affect the States, obviously 
you would be altering the conditions on which they have acceded and 
that would certainly create a situation in which the Princes could rightly 
claim that their Instrument of Accession had been altered. It certainly 
means that we cannot amend any part of the Bill which affects what is 
virtually the treaties under which the Princes come in. If we make a 
change in the Bill as to strike at the basis of their Instrument of Accession 
then obviously, the agreement has been broken between the Princes and 
Parliament and the Princes are free.” 


“It will be accepted by every one that under the general scheme of the 
Bill the States, when they are asked to federate are entitled to know with 
certainty certain aspects at any rate, of the Federation to which they are 
to accede. It would be an absurd position if having said to a State this 
month, “Will you accede to a Federation,” it was possible next month for 
this House to alter in some fundamental respects the provisions of the 
Federation to which the State was held to have acceded. Therefore, some 
schedule of this kind is necessary. It is a sorting out of the various parts 
of the Bill which should be capable of amendment without in any sense 
altering from the point of view of the States the constitutional machinery 
to which they have acceded. The scheme of the Schedule is to set out the 
provisions of the Act, the amendment whereof is not to affect the validity 
of the Instrument of Accession of a State.” 


“One sees set out those parts of the Bill the amendment of which is not 
to affect the validity of the Instrument of Accession of a State, and on the 
opposite side there are set out those subjects the amendment of which, 
would affect the validity of accession. In drawing up a schedule of this 
kind one has to proceed with great care in defining what are the legitimate 
matters on which the Rulers of a State are entitled to ask that there shall 
be no amendment without their consent. Of course there will be border-line 
cases. There could be minor amendments, which would not really make any 
great difference to the existing position, and it would be very unreasonable 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 337 


if the States took objection to such amendments and said, “We are going to 
stand on our rights on this point as affecting the validity of our Instrument 
of Accession.” It is right that any matter which really affects what I may call 
the general balance of powers, the questions of the reservation of subjects of 
executive control and of matters which can be dealt with by the Governor- 
General in his discretion, matters which are vital to the architecture of the 
Federation to which the States are asked to accede, should not be amended 
without their assent. 


“The whole area of the special powers vested in the Governor-General is one 
of the essential features of the Federation. That is one part where the States are 
entitled to say ‘That is a change’ or ‘That is altered’. But this does not in any 
way check for all time the development of India. These are to be the subject- 
matter of negotiations with the States, because, in effect, they will produce a 
Federation of a different kind from that to which the State has acceded.” 


Therefore to the question what would happen if Parliament did make 
such changes which by virtue of Schedule II are treated as changes which 
will affect the Instrument of Accession the answer is that the Princes will 
get a right to walk out of the Federation. In other words, the consequence 
of any such change would be to break up the Federation. 


What are the changes which cannot be made without affecting the 
Instrument of Accession ? I will draw your attention to some of the provisions 
which Schedule II says cannot be amended by Parliament without affecting 
the Instrument of Accession. According to Schedule II no changes in the 
Constitution can be made which relate to (1) the exercise by the Governor- 
General of the executive authority of the Federation ; (2) the definition of 
the functions of the Governor-General ; (8) the executive authority of the 
Federation ; (4) the functions of the Council of Ministers and the choosing 
and summoning of ministers and their tenure of office ; (5) the power of the 
Governor-General to decide whether he is entitled to act in his discretion or 
exercise his individual judgment ; (6) the functions of the Governor-General 
with respect to external affairs and defence ; (7) the special responsibilities 
of the Governor-General relating to the peace and tranquility of India or any 
part thereof ; (8) the financial stability and credit of the Federal Government; 
(9) the rights of the Indian States and the rights and dignity of their Rulers; 
(10) the discharge of his functions by or under the Act in his discretion or 
in the exercise of his individual judgment ; (11) His Majesty’s Instrument 
of Instructions to the Governor-General ; and (12) the superintendence of 
the Secretary of State in the making of the rules for the Governor-General 
in his discretion for the transaction of and the securing of transmission to 
him of information with respect to, the business of the Federal Government. 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Schedule II is a very extensive collection of constitutional don’ts. I have 
given just a few of them. They will however be sufficient to show how limited 
is the authority of Parliament to make changes in the Constitution. 


Why is the authority of Parliament limited? To understand this it is 
necessary to note the exact limits of the authority of Parliament. According 
to law the authority of the Parliament to legislate extends only to countries 
which are the Dominions of the King. The States did not form part of the 
Dominions of the King and none of them not even the finest of them was 
subject to the legislative authority of Parliament. The Government of India 
Act makes no change in this status of the States. The States remain foreign 
territories inspite of the Federation, and as they were before Federation. 
This is the most extraordinary state about the Indian Federation, namely 
that the different units are as between themselves foreign states. As the 
Act does not make the States Dominions of the King, Parliament gets no 
right to legislate about them. Parliament derives its authority over the 
States from the Instrument of Accession. That being so, the authority of 
Parliament cannot but be limited to what is transferred to it by the States 
through their instruments. To use the language of the Privy Council itself, 
as the stream can rise no higher than its source, similarly, Parliament 
cannot have powers over the States greater than those given to them by 
the Instrument of Accession. This explains why the authority of Parliament 
to amend the Constitution is limited. 


The analysis made so far shows that the authority of Parliament 10 
change is limited by the Instrument of Accession and that for any excess 
of authority, there must be prior consent given by the Princes. As a legal 
effect of the provisions of the Act it may not be shocking. But consider the 
fact that the provisions in regard to which Parliament has no power to 
change include those that relate to the transposition of such subjects as 
Defence and External affairs from the category of Reserved to that of the 
Transferred and that it will not have that power unless the Princes consent 
expressly to confer that authority on Parliament and permit it to do so. You 
will be in a position to realize how grave are going to be the consequences 
of this Federation. The establishment of the Federation means that the 
mastery has gone from the hands of Parliament into the hands of Princes. 
This Federation makes the Princes the arbiters of destiny. Without their 
consent India cannot politically advance. 


Other consequences of this Federation might also be noted. I will just 
refer to one. It is that this federation, if accepted will weaken the position 
of British Indians in their struggle for change. Hitherto, in the struggle 
between the Indian people and the British Parliament the latter was 
always the weaker party. It had nothing to oppose the right of the people 
to change except its will. After the Federation the position is bound to be 
reversed. The Indian people would be in a weaker position and Parliament 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 339 


would be in a stronger position. After the Federation, Parliament would be in 
a position to say that it is willing to grant the demand for change but that 
its authority to change is limited and that before making any demand for 
change. Indians should obtain the consent of the Princes. There is nothing 
to prevent Parliament from taking this stand. 


What reply would Indians be able to give if they once accept the Federation 
and thereby admit the implications underlying it ? 


VIII 
THE FATALITY OF FEDERATION 


What shall we do with the Indian States? That is a question that is 
often asked. Some people with Republican faith in them desire their total 
abolition. Those who do not care for forms of Government will reject this 
view. But even they must abide by the consideration that what works best 
is best. Can the Indian States be said to work best? I do not know that 
there is anybody, who will be prepared to give an affirmative answer, at 
any rate an affirmative answer which will apply to all States. The internal 
administration of the States is a bye-word for mismanagement and mal- 
administration. Very few States will escape this charge. 


The people are always asking as to why there should be this mismanagement 
and maladministration in the States. The usual answer is that it is the 
consequence of Personal Rule. Everywhere the demand made is that Personal 
Rule should be replaced by Popular Government. I have grave doubts about 
the efficacy of this demand. I do not think that in a large majority of cases 
the substitution of Popular Government will be any cure for the ills of the 
State subjects. For, I am sure that the evils arise as much from the misrule 
of the Ruler as they arise from want of resources. Few have any idea as to 
how scanty are the resources of the Indian States. 


Let me give you a few facts. Out of the total of 627 States there are 
only ten with an annual revenue above 1 crore. Of these ten, five have just 
about a crore, three have between 2 and 2% crores. One has just about 3% 
crores and only one has a revenue just about 8 crores. There are nine with a 
revenue ranging between 1 crore and 50 lakhs. About twelve have a revenue 
ranging between 50 to 25 lakhs. Thirty have a revenue varying between 
25 lakhs and 10 lakhs. The rest of the 566 have an annual revenue which 
is less than 10 lakhs. This does not, however, give an idea of how small 
are some of the States which fall below 10 lakhs. A few illustrations may 
therefore be given. Among these 565 States there is one with a revenue of 
Rs. 500 and a population of 206 souls. Another with a revenue of Rs. 165 
and a population of 125 : another with a revenue of Rs. 136 and a population 
of 239, another with a revenue of 128 and a population of 147 and another 


340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


with a revenue of Rs. 80 and a population of 27. Each one of these is an 
Autonomous State, even the one with a revenue of Rs. 80 and a population 
of 27 ! 


The Autonomy of these States means that each one must take upon itself 
the responsibility to supply to its subjects all the services which relate to 
matters falling under law and order such as revenue, executive and Judicial 
and all the services which affect public welfare such as education, sanitation, 
roads etc. We in Bombay with our 12 crores of revenue are finding it difficult 
to maintain a civilized standard of administration. Other Provinces with 
equally large revenue are finding the same difficulty. How then can these 
small tiny states with a revenue of few hundreds and a population of few 
thousands cater to any of the wants which a civilized man must have his 
Government satisfy in full measure ? With the best of motives and given 
an ideal Prince the task is hopeless. 


The only way out is to reorganize the whole area occupied by the Indian 
States. The proper solution would be to fix an area of a certain size and of 
certain revenue and to constitute it into a New Province and to pension off 
the rulers now holding any territory in that area. Only such States should 
be retained in whose case by measure of area and revenue 1t can be said 
that they by reason of their resources are in a position to provide a decent 
standard of administration. Those which cannot satisfy the test must go. 
There is no other way. This is not merely what might be done. I say, to do 
this is our duty and a sacred duty. 


I know some will think of the hereditary right of the Prince to rule over 
his territory. But I ask, what is more important, the right of the Prince 
or the welfare of the people? I am sure that even the best friends of the 
States will not say that the rights of the Prince are more important than 
the welfare of the people. Which should give way, if the two are in conflict ? 
There again, I am sure that even the best friends of the States will not say 
that the welfare of the people should be sacrificed for the sake of maintaining 
the rights of the Prince. 


The question of the reorganization of the Indian States is not a political 
question. As I look at it, is a purely administrative question. It is also an 
inevitable question. Because, not to tackle it is to condemn the people of 
the States—and there are millions of them—perpetually to a life of misery 
and security. The way I suggest is not a revolutionary way. To pension off 
a Prince and to annex his territory is a legal way and can fall under the 
principles with which we are familiar under the Land Acquisition Act which 
allows private rights and properties to be acquired for public purposes. 


Unfortunately, the question of the Indian States has not been tackled 
from this point of view so far. The question that I want to place before 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 341 


you is, and it is a very important question, “Will it be open to you to tackle 
this question after the Federation is established ?” I say no. You will perhaps 
ask why. How does this conclusion follow ? 


I have already pointed out that with regard to the entry into the Federation, 
the Provinces and the States stand on a different footing. The Provinces have 
no choice. They must agree to be the units of the Federation. The States 
have a choice. They may join the Federation or they may refuse to join the 
Federation. That is so from the standpoint of the Provinces and from the 
standpoint of the States. What is the position from the standpoint of the 
Federation ? Has the Federation any choice in the matter of the admission of 
the States ? Can the Federation refuse to admit a State into the Federation ? 
The answer is no. The Federation has no right to refuse. The State has a 
right to enter the Federation. But the Federation has no right to refuse 
admission at any rate for the first 20 years. That is the position. Now what 
does the admission of a State into the Federation mean ? In my view the 
admission of a State into the Federation means recognition of the sovereign 
status of the State. Recognition of its sovereign status means the recognition 
of its indestructibility which means its right to the integrity of its territory 
and to guaranteeing of its powers of internal administration. This would 
apply even to the State with a population of 27 and revenue of Rs. 80. These 
being the implications of the admission of a State in the Federation, I am 
perfectly justified in suggesting that the territorial reorganisation of the 
Indian States will not be possible after the establishment of the Federation 
and the people of the Indian States will be forever doomed to misrule and 
mal-administration. 


Can British India do anything in the matter now ? I think British India 
is not in a position to do anything in the matter. If British India could have 
secured Responsible Government for itself, it might have been in a position 
to dictate which State should be admitted and on what terms. It would 
have been in a position to make the reorganization of the States territory 
into tolerably big units as a condition precedent for their entry into the 
Federation. Unfortunately British India has no Responsible Government. 
Indeed its right to Responsible Government at the Centre is denied and is 
made dependent upon the entry of the States. “No States, no responsibility” 
has now become the fate of British India. That being the position of British 
India, British India is not in a position to make terms with the States as 
she would have been able to do if she had Responsible Government. That 
is why I have said and that is why I have always maintained that British 
Indians should first ask for a Federation and Responsibility confined to 
British India. Once that is obtained, the path for an All India Federation 
on the basis of freedom and good government all round will become possible. 
That possibility will be gone if this Federation comes into being. 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I have already drawn your attention to some of the deformities of the 
Federal Scheme. What I have now drawn attention to is more than a 
deformity. It is a fatality of the Federation. So far as the States' people are 
concerned, it is a decree of fate. It is something which they will never be 
able to escape once it is executed. 


The State's problem is one which, I believe could be solved by the Paramount 
Power along the lines I have suggested or along any other line consistently 
with the welfare of the people, if it wishes to do so. Paramountcy is like 
the Trimurti of Hindu Theology. It is Brahma because it has created the 
States. It is Vishnu because it preserves them. It is Shiva because it can 
destroy them. Paramountcy has played all these parts in different times in 
relation to the States. At one time, it played the part of Shiva. It has now 
been playing the part of Vishnu. To play the part of Vishnu with regard to 
the States is from the point of view of the good of the people the crudest 
act. Should British India be a party to it? It is for you to consider. 


IX 
FEDERATION WITHOUT THE STATES 


There is another point of view from which the case for Federation is 
argued. I must now proceed to examine that argument. 


It is argued that the constitution creates Autonomous Provinces. The 
Autonomy of the Provinces means independence and therefore disruption of 
the Unity of British India. This must be counteracted. Some binding force 
must be provided so that the Provinces may be held together and unity 
and uniformity built up for the last hundred years as a result of British 
administration is preserved intact in fundamentals if not in details. 


The argument is quite sound, if it only means that the creation of 
Autonomous Provinces makes the creation of a Central Government a 
necessity. This proposition I am sure will command universal assent. In 
all the Round Table Conferences the late Sir Mahomad Iqbal was the only 
delegate who was against the establishment of a Central Government. 
Every other delegate irrespective of caste or creed differed from him. They 
asserted that with the creation of Autonomous Provinces the establishment 
of a Central Government was a categorial imperative and that without it 
autonomy would result in anarchy. 


But the argument goes beyond its legitimate scope. It seeks to justify the 
establishment of a Central Government for All India. The argument which 
can justify the establishment of a Central Government for British India 
is used to justify a Central Government for the whole of India. And the 
question that you have to consider is whether the creation of Autonomous 
Provinces in British India can justify a Central Government for the whole 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 343 


of India including the Indian States. My contention is that the creation of 
Autonomous Provinces does not require the creation of a Central Government 
for the whole of India. 


The establishment of Autonomous Provinces in British India will call for 
two things; (1) That there shall be a Central Government for British India and 
(2) that the form of that Central Government must be federal and not unitary. 
The essence of Federation lies in the division or allocation of Legislative and 
Executive Powers between the Central Government and the Units by law. 
The powers of the Units and the Centre are defined and demarcated and 
the one is not entitled to invade the domain of the other. Autonomy of the 
Provinces means that their powers are defined and vested in them. To make 
Provincial Autonomy real the Powers of the Central Government must also 
be limited, otherwise it would be in a position to invade the domain of the 
Provinces. To put it simply, autonomy means definition and delimitation of 
Powers by law and wherever there is definition and delimitation of powers 
between two Political Bodies there is and there must be Federation. You 
will now understand why I said that all that Provincial Autonomy demands 
is that the Central Government for British India shall be Federal in form. 
It does not justify all India Federation. Why is it necessary to bring in the 
States still remains to be answered and those who plead for this All-India 
Federation as distinct from British India Federation must answer this 
question. 


As I said all that is necessary is that Central Government for British 
India shall be Federal in form and this fact has been recognized by the 
Constitution. 


Many seemed to have failed to notice that the Government of India Act, 
1935 establishes two distinct Federations. One is a federation which is a 
federation of the Provinces of British India another which is a Federation 
of British Indian Provinces and the Indian States. It is surprising that so 
many should have missed so important a fact. That the Government of India 
Act establishes two federations is beyond dispute. To those who have any 
doubt they should read Parts III and XIII together and Part II and Part III 
together. Part II and Part III reveal that there is an All-India Federation 
and lay down the constitution of that Federation. Part III and Part XIII 
reveal that there is a Federation of British India Provinces apart from the 
States and lay down the Constitution of that Federation. That Part XIII 
relates to provisions which are called transitional does not make the British 
India Scheme any the less a Federation, because the law is law whether it 
is for a limited period or for all times. 


That the Act establishes a Federation for British India Provinces and 
also an All-India Federation cannot be denied. What is the difference 
between these two Federations ? Is there any difference in the Legislative 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Powers of the Federation ? The answer is no. The Federal Legislative List 
remains the same whether the Federation that is in operation is British India 
Federation or the All-India Federation. The Concurrent list also remains the 
same whether the Federation in operation is one or the other. 


Is there any difference in Financial Powers? The answer again is no. 


The Powers of taxation remain the same whether it is an All-India 
Federation or British India Federation. 


Is there any change in the Judicial organization of the Federation ? There 
is none. Federal Court is as much necessary for the All-India Federation as 
for British India Federation. 


How do these two Federations differ ? The two differ in one respect only. 
To find out this difference you should compare section 313 with section 8. 
The comparison will show that if the Federation is a British India Federation 
the Executive Authority of the Federation will be the Governor-General 
in Council and if the federation is an All-India Federation the Executive 
Authority in transferred matters to be the Governor-General acting on the 
advice of Ministers responsible to the Legislature. In other words while there 
is British India Federation only there is no responsibility at the Centre so 
long as there is no All-India Federation. 


This means that the entry of the States is a condition precedent for the 
grant of responsibility to British India. You will therefore ask, why is the 
entry of the States so essential ? 


All Federations have come into existence as a result of some danger from 
outside affecting the safety and integrity of the Units. The States of North 
America federated because of the fear of subjugation of the States by British 
Imperialism. The Provinces of Canada federated because of the danger 
of invasion or absorption by the United States. The Australian Colonies 
federated because of the danger of invasion by Japan. It is obvious that 
the Indian Federation is not the result of any such circumstance. There is 
no new invader on the border of India waiting to pounce upon both British 
India and the Indian States. Nor is this Federation necessary for bringing 
about peace between British India and the Indian States. It matters not 
that British India is under the sovereignty of the Crown and the Indian 
States are under the suzerainty of the Crown. So far as foreign relations 
are concerned, and they include peace and war, the two are subordinate 
to one and the same authority namely the crown. That is the reason why 
the two have been at peace. That is the reason why they will not be and 
cannot be at war. Prevention of external aggression or the maintenance of 
internal peace cannot be the motive for this All India Federation. What 
then can be the motive of this Federation? Why are the States invited to 
enter into this Federation ? Why is their entry made a condition precedent 
for responsibility at the Centre? To put it bluntly, 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 345 


the motive is to use the Princes to support imperial interests and to curb 
the rising tide of democracy in British India. I should like to have another 
explanation, if there is any. I see none. That the Princes are wanted in the 
Federation to serve ends of the British Imperialism is beyond question. The 
Secretary of State for India speaking in Parliament during the course of the 
debate on the Government of India Bill admitted that “we should all welcome 
the entry into the Central Government of India of a great force of stability 
and imperial feeling represented by the Princes”. While the suppression of 
democracy in British India may not be the motive I am sure that that will 
be the consequence of the entry of the Princes in the Federation. 


What a price has been paid for the entry of the Federation ! I do not wish 
to repeat what I have said. If you will re-call what I have said regarding the 
discrimination which has been made in favour of the Princes in the matter 
of representation, taxation, administration, legislation etc., you will know 
what benefits have been conferred, what rights have been surrendered and 
what immunities have been granted by British India to induce the Princes 
to come into the Federation. And what has British India got in return ? 


If the Federal Constitution had provided full responsible Government, 
there would have been some compensation to British India for the price it 
has paid to the Princes for their joining the Federation. But British India 
has not got any responsibility worth the name. What British India has got 
is a system of responsibility halved in part and mutilated in substance by 
conditions and restraints. Not only British India has not been able to secure 
responsibility at the Centre commensurate with the sacrifices it has made 
for making the Federation easy for the Princes, but it has lost its claim for 
Dominion Status in its own right and independently of the Princes. Many 
people do not know what British India has lost and stands to lose in this 
business of an All India Federation. The new Constitution is the result 
of the struggle of the people of British India. It is the agitation and the 
sufferings of the people of British India which was the compelling force 
behind this constitution. What was the right which the people of British 
India were claiming for themselves? As I have said, their first claim was 
good government in British India. Next they claimed self-government, that 
is responsible government for British India. Lastly, they claimed Dominion 
Status for British India. Each one of these claims have been accepted by 
the British Parliament. In 1917 the British Parliament accepted the goal of 
Responsible Government. In 1929 the English Nation accepted the goal of 
Dominion Status, Now it must be emphasised that each time the claim was 
made, it was made in the name of the people of British India. Each time it 
was accepted in relation to the people of British India. What is going to be 
the position of British India as a result of the Federation ? 


346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The position of British India is that they can never get any responsibility 
at the Centre unless the Princes come into the Scheme. That means that 
British India has lost its right to claim Responsible Government for itself 
in its own name and independently of the Princes. This right was a vested 
right because it was the result of a claim made and accepted. That right has 
been lost because British India is made dependent for the realization of its 
destiny upon the wishes of the States. Of the two parts of this Federation. 
British India is the progressive part and the States form the unprogressive 
part. That the progressive part should be tied up to the chariot of the 
unprogressive and its path and destiny should be made dependent upon 
the unprogressive part constitutes the most tragic side of this Federation. 


For this tragedy you have to blame your own national leaders. Fortunately 
for me I am not one of your national leaders. The utmost rank to which I 
have risen is that of a leader of the Untouchables. I find even that rank has 
been denied to me. Thakkar Bapa, the left hand man of Mahatma Gandhi. 
I call him left hand man only because Vallabhbhai Patel is the right hand 
man—very recently said that I was only the leader of the Mahars. He 
would not even allow me the leadership of the Untouchables of the Bombay 
Presidency. Whether what Thakkar Bapa said was said by him out of malice 
or out of love of truth does not worry me. For politics is not my first love nor 
is national leaderhip the goal of my life. On the other hand, when I see what 
disasters your national leaders have brought upon this country I feel relieved 
to know that I am not included in that august crowd. Believe me when I say 
that some of your national leaders were thoroughly unprepared for the job 
of constitution-making. They went to the Round Table Conference without 
any comparative study of constitutions and could propound no solutions to 
problems with which they were presented. Others who were undoubtedly 
competent to tackle the problem were like little children so charged with 
the ideal of Federation that they never cared to see whether what they 
were shaping was a real federation or a fraud in the name of Federation. 
This tragedy is entirely due to wrong leadership. I do not know if the steps 
taken can be retraced and whether the lost ground can be regained. But I 
think it is a right thing that the people of British India should know what 
they have lost. They have a federation of their own and they have right to 
demand responsibility for their federation. 


There is another reason why it would be desirable to have a Federation 
of British India only. A Federation of British India and of the Indian States 
cannot work harmoniously. There are two elements which I am sure will 
produce a conflict between British India and the Indian States. The first 
element arises out of the difference in the position of the representatives 
of British India and those of the Indian States. The representatives of 
British India will be free men. The representatives of the Indian States 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 347 


will be bondmen of the Political Department. The sources of mandate of those 
two sets of representatives in the Federal Legislature will be different. The 
British India representatives will be engaged in extending the authority of 
the Ministers. The States representatives are sure to act and will be made 
to act so as to lend support to the authority of the Governor-General as 
against the Ministers. This conflict is inevitable and it is sure to embitter 
the feelings of British India towards the Indian States. This was precisely 
what happened in the last regime in the Provinces. The feelings of the elected 
members towards the nominated members in the old Provincial Councils 
were certainly unfriendly. This experience I am sure will be repeated in the 
Federal Legislature. That it should be so is very natural when one section 
of the House feels that the other section has been brought in to thwart 
its wishes and is acting as the tool of some power outside the control of 
the Legislature. This is one element of disharmony. The other element of 
disharmony is the disparity in the position of British Indian States under 
the Federation. Equality before law is a precious thing. But not all people 
value it for the same reason. Most cherish it an ideal. Few realize why it is 
crucial. Equality before the law compels men to make common cause with 
all others similarly affected. Whereas if there is no equality, if some are 
favoured and others are burdened, those specially favoured not only refuse 
to join those who are burdened in the struggle for equality but actually 
take sides against them. A Dictator might, as the kings did in the olden 
times, pull out one by one the teeth of a few without necessarily exciting 
the resentment of the other people. On the contrary, the others will join in 
the raid. But suppose a law was made that all must contribute as much 
money as the dictators ask for under penalty of their teeth being drawn out 
all would rise in opposition. There is no equality between British India and 
the Indian States under the Federation. Indian States enjoy many benefits 
and many exemptions which are denied to British India. This is particularly 
so in the matter of taxation. There is bound to be great acrimony between 
the representatives of British India and those of the Indian States as to 
who should bear the load of taxation first. Patriotism vanishes when you 
touch a man's pocket and I am sure that the States representatives will 
prefer their own financial interest to the necessities of a common front to 
make the executive responsible to the Legislature. 


What is the use of housing British India and the Indian States under one 
edifice if the result is to make them quarrel with each other ? 


There is a complete dissimilarity between the forms of Government 
prevalent in British India and the Indian States and the principles underlying 
the two. These dissimilarities need not produce any antagonism between the 
Indian States and British India if the two continue to evolve in their separate 
spheres. So long as the form of Government in the Indian States does not 
become a factor in the decision of affairs which affects British India, British 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


India can tolerate those forms of Government however antiquated they 
may be. But the Federation makes them a factor and a powerful factor 
and British India cannot remain indifferent to them. Indeed the forging 
of the Federation will compel British India to launch a compaign in sheer 
self-interest for revolutionising the forms of Government prevalent in the 
Indian States. 


This will be the inevitable result of this Federation. Is this a consummation 
which the States devoutly wish for? This is a question they will have to 
consider. 


Does British India welcome this prospect ? Speaking for myself I will 
not. It would be impossible to wage war on so vast a front. The States are 
too numerous to allow concentrated attack. The States being a part of the 
structure, you cannot attack them and justify your attack as a Constitutional 
Act. Secondly, why put yourself in this difficulty ? Sometimes it turns out 
that a man thinks that he is buying property when as a matter of fact he is 
buying litigation. For British India to accept this Federation is like buying 
trouble. Thirdly, this Constitution is a settlement from which Dominion 
Status is most rigidly excluded not only for the present but also for the 
future as well. 


Looked at from any point of view, the wisest course seems to me that 
leaving the States where they are, British India should proceed on its own 
evolution and Federation for itself. 


x 
FEDERATION FROM DIFFERENT POINTS OF VIEW 


Different people are looking at this Federation from different points of 
view. There is the point of view of the Princes. There is the point of view 
of the Hindus and the Muslims and the Congress. There is also the point 
of view of the Merchant and the Trader. The point of view of each one of 
these is of course the result of their particular interests. 


What is the interest of the Princes in this Federation? To understand 
the motives of the Princes you must go back to the Butler Committee. The 
Princes had been complaining of the encroachment of the Political Department 
of the Government of India upon their treaty rights under the Doctrine of 
Paramountcy. The Princes were insisting that the Political Department had 
no greater right against the States except those that were given by the 
treaties subsisting between them and the British Government. The Political 
Department on the other hand claimed that in addition to the rights referable 
to the treaties, the Crown had also rights which were referable to political 
usages and customs. To adjudicate upon this dispute, the Secretary of State 
agreed to appoint the Butler Committee. The Princes had hoped that the 
Butler Committee would accept their contentions and limit the scope of 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 349 


Paramountcy to the rights referable to the treaties. Unfortunately for the 
Princes they were disappointed, because the Butler Committee reported that 
the Paramountcy was paramount and that there could be no definition or 
delimitation of it. This decision of the Butler Committee meant a complete 
subordination of the Princes to the Political Department of the Government 
of India and the Princes were in search of an escape from this unfortunate 
position in which they were placed and they found, and quite rightly, that 
the only solution which can enable them to esape the tyranny of the Political 
Department was the Federation; because to the extent to which the Federal 
authority prevailed, the authority of the Political Department would vanish 
and as the Federal authority could only be exercised by a Federal Legislature 
and a Federal Executive and as they would have sufficient volce in the 
Federal Legislature and the Federal Executive they thought of federation. 
The federal solution of their problem offered two advantages to the Princes. 
The first was that it would secure to the States internal autonomy which 
they were very anxious to have, for it is of the essence of federating units 
to remain in their own hands all powers save those which they themselves 
have willingly delegated to a common centre and over which they themselves 
possess a share in the control. The second advantage of the Federation was 
that Paramountcy would disappear to the extent of the Federal authority. The 
motive of the Princes, therefore, was selfish and their primary aim was to get 
rid as much as possible of the authority of the Political Department of the 
Government of India. This was one of the primary interests of the Princes. 
The Princes had another interests to safeguard. That was to preserve their 
powers of civil and military government as much as possible. They wanted 
to make the Federation as thin as possible so that it might not impinge 
upon them very hard. The interest of the Princes is two-fold. They wanted 
to escape Paramountcy. Secondly, they did not want to subject themselves 
too much to the authority of the Federation. In looking at the Federation, 
the Princes keep two questions before them. How far will this Federation 
enable them to escape the tyranny of Paramountcy ? Secondly, how far does 
this scheme of Federation take away their sovereignty and their powers of 
internal government ? They want to draw more under the former and sive 
less under the latter. 


The Muslims had an interest which not only coloured their whole vision 
but made it so limited that they did not care to look at anything else. 
That interest was their interest as a minority. They knew only one means 
of protecting themselves against the Hindu majority. That was to ask for 
reservation of seats with separate electorates and weightage in representation. 
In 1930 they discovered that there was another and a more efficacious 
method of protecting the Muslim minorities. That was to carve out new 
Provinces in which Muslims would be in a majority and Hindus in a minority 
as a counterblast to Provinces with Hindus as a majority and Muslims as 


350 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a minority. They hit upon this system because they felt such as a system 
of balance of Provinces would permit the Muslims in the Muslim majority 
Provinces to hold the Hindu minorities in their Provinces as hostage for 
the good behaviour of the Hindu Majorities in the Provinces in which the 
Muslims were in minority. The creation of Muslim majority Provinces and to 
make them strong and powerful was their dominant interest. To accomplish 
this they demanded the separation of Sindh and the grant of responsible 
government to the North West Frontier Provinces so that the Muslims could 
have a command of four Provinces. To make the Provinces strong they 
insisted on making the Centre weak. As a means to this end the Muslims 
demanded that residuary powers should be given to the Provinces and the 
Hindu representation in the Centre should be reduced by giving the Muslims 
not only 1/3 of seats from the total fixed for British India but also 1/3 from 
the total assigned to the Princes. 


The Hindus as represented by the Hindu Mahasabha were concerned 
with only one thing. How to meet what they called the menace of the 
Musalmans ? The Hindu Mahasabha felt that the accession of the Princes 
was an accretion to the Hindu strength. Everything else was to them of no 
consequence. Its point of view was Federation at any cost. 


The next class whose point of view is worthy of consideration is the Indian 
Commercial Community. The commercial community is no doubt a small 
community in a vast country like India, but there can be no doubt about it 
that the point of view of this community is really more decisive than the 
point of view of any other community. This community has been behind 
the Congress. It is this community which has supplied the Congress the 
sinews of war and it knows that having paid the piper it can call for the 
tune. The commercial community is primarily interested in what is called 
commercial discrimination and the lowering of the exchange Ratio. It was a 
very narrow and limited point of view. The Indian Commercial Community 
is out to displace Europeans from Trade and Commerce and take their place. 
This it claims to do in the name of nationalism. It wants the right to lower 
the exchange rate and make profit in its foreign trade. This also it claims 
to do in the name of nationalism. Beyond getting profits to themselves the 
Merchants and Traders have no other consideration. 


What shall I say about the Congress? What was its point of view? I 
am sure I am not exaggerating or misrepresenting facts when I say that 
the Congress point of view at the Round Table Conference was that the 
Congress was the only party in India and that no body else counted and 
that the British should settle with the Congress only. This was the burden 
of Mr. Gandhi's song at the Round Table Conference, He was so busy in 
establishing his own claim to recognition by the British as the dictator of 
India that he forgot altogether that the important question was not, with 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 351 


whom the settlement should be made but what were to be the terms of 
that settlement. As to the terms of the settlement, Mr. Gandhi was quite 
unequal to the task. When he went to London he had forgotten that he 
would have before him not those who go to him to obtain his advice and 
return with his blessings but persons who would treat him as a lawyer 
treats a witness in the box. Mr. Gandhi also forgot that he was going to a 
political conference. He went there as though he was going to a Vaishnava 
Shrine singing the Narsi Mehta's Songs. When I think of the whole affair I 
am wondering if any nation had ever sent a representative to negotiate the 
terms of a national settlement who was more unfit than Mr. Gandhi. How 
unfit Mr. Gandhi was to negotiate a settlement becomes evident when one 
realizes that this Ambassador of India was ready to return to India with 
only Provincial Autonomy when as a matter of fact he was sent to negotiate 
on the basis of Independence. No man has brought greater disasters to the, 
interests of India than did Mr. Gandhi at the Round Table Conference. Less 
one speaks of him the better. 


How far each of these interests feel satisfied with the Federal Scheme 
such as it is, it is not for me to say. The question one may however ask 
1s, are these the only points of view that must be taken into consideration 
in deciding as to what we shall do with this Federation? I protest that 
there are other points of view besides those mentioned above which-must 
receive attention. There is the point of view of the Free man. There is also 
the point of view of the Poor man. What have they to say of Federation ? 
The Federation does not seem to take any account of them. Yet they are 
the people who are most deeply concerned. Can the free man hope that the 
Federal Constitution will not be a menace to his freedom? Can the poor 
man feel that the constitution will enable him to have old values revalued, 
to have vested rights devested? I have no doubt that this Federation if it 
comes into being will be a standing menace to the free man and an obstacle 
in the way of the poor man. What freedom can there be when you are made 
subject to the autocracy of the Princes? What economic betterment can there 
be when you get Second Chambers with vested rights entrenched in MI and 
when legislation affecting property is subject to sanction by the Government 
both before introducing and after it has passed ? 


XI 
CONCLUSION 


I have perhaps detained you longer than I should have done. You will 
allow that it is not altogether my fault. The vastness of the subject is one 
reason for the length of this address. 


I must, however, confess that there is also another reason which has 
persuaded me not to cut too short. We are standing today at the point of 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


time where the old age ends and the new begins. The old age was the 
age of Ranade, Agarkar, Tilak, Gokhale, Wachha, Sic Pherozeshah Mehta, 
Surendranath Bannerjee. The new age is the age of Mr. Gandhi and this 
generation is said to be Gandhi generation. As one who knows something of 
the old age and also something of the new I see some very definite marks 
of difference between the two. The type of leadership has undergone a 
profound change. In the age of Ranade the leaders struggled to modernize 
India. In the age of Gandhi the leaders are making her a living specimen 
of antiquity. In the age of Ranade leaders depended upon experience as 
a corrective method of their thoughts and their deeds. The leaders of the 
present age depend upon their inner voice as their guide. Not only is there 
a difference in their mental make up there is a difference even in their view 
point regarding external appearance. The leaders of the old age took care 
to be well clad while the leaders of the present age take pride in being half 
clad. The leaders of the Gandhi age are of course aware of these differences. 
But far from blushing for their views and their appearance they claim 
that the India of Gandhi is superior to India of Ranade. They say that the 
age of Mr. Gandhi is an agitated and an expectant age, which the age of 
Mr. Ranade was not. 


Those who have lived both in the age of Ranade and the age of Gandhi 
will admit that there is this difference between the two. At the same time 
they will be able to insist that if the India of Ranade was less agitated it was 
more honest and that if it was less expectant it was more enlightened. The 
age of Ranade was an age in which men and women did engage themselves 
seriously in studying and examining the facts of their life, and what is 
more important is that in the face of the opposition of the orthodox mass 
they tried to mould their lives and their character in accordance with the 
light they found as a result of their research. In the age of Ranade there 
was not the same divorce between a politician and a student which one 
sees in the Gandhi age. In the age of Ranade a politician, who was not a 
student, was treated as an intolerable nuisance, if not a danger. In the age 
of Mr. Gandhi learning, if it is not despised, is certainly not deemed to be 
a necessary qualification of a politician. 


To my mind there is no doubt that this Gandhi age is the dark age of 
India. It is an age in which people instead of looking for their ideals in 
the future are returning to antiquity. It is an age in which people have 
ceased to think for themselves and as they have ceased to think they 
have ceased to read and examine the facts of their lives. The fate of an 
ignorant democracy which refuses to follow the way shown by learning 
and experience and chooses to grope in the dark paths of the mystics and 
the megalomaniacs is a sad thing to contemplate. Such an age I thought 
needed something more than a mere descriptive sketch of the Federal 
Scheme, It needed a treatment which was complete though not exhaustive 


FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM 353 


and pointed without being dogmatic in order to make it alive to the dangers 
arising from the inauguration of the Federal Scheme. This is the task I 
had set before myself in preparing this address. Whether I have failed 
or succeeded, it is for you to say. If this address has length which is not 
compensated by depth, all I can say is that I have tried to do my duty 
according to my lights. 


I am not opposed to a Federal Form of Government. I confess I have a 
partiality for a Unitary form of Government. I think India needs it. But I 
also realize that a Federal Form of Government is inevitable if there is to be 
Provincial Autonomy, But I am in dead horror the Federal Scheme contained 
in the Government of India Act. I think I have justified my antipathy by 
giving adequate reasons, I want all to examine them and come to their owe 
conclusions. Let us however realize that the case of Provincial Autonomy 
is very different from that of the Federal Scheme. To those who think that 
the Federation should become acceptable if the Governor-General gave an 
assurance along the same lines as was supposed to be done by the Governors 
that he will not exercise his powers under his special responsibilities I 
want to say two things. First I am sure the Governor-General cannot give 
such an assurance because he is exercising these powers not merely in 
the interest of the Crown but also in the interest of the States. Secondly, 
even if he did, that cannot alter the nature of the Federal Scheme. To 
those who think that a change in the system of State representation from 
nomination to election will make the Federation less objectionable, I want 
to say that they are treating a matter of detail as though it was a matter 
of fundamental. Let us note what is fundamental and what is not. Let there 
be no mistake, let there be no fooling as to this. We have had enough of 
both. The real question is the extension and the growth of responsibility. 
Is that possible? That is the crux. Let us also realize that there is no use 
hugging to Provincial Autonomy and leaving responsibility in the Centre 
hanging in the air. I am convinced that without real responsibility at the 
Centre, Provincial Autonomy is an empty shell. 


What we should do to force our point of view, this is no place to discuss. 
It is enough if I have succeeded in giving you an adequate idea of what are 
the dangers of this Federal Scheme. 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK 
AND 
A WAY TO SOLVE IT 


Address delivered at the Session 
of 
the All India Scheduled Castes Federation 
held in 
Bombay on May 6,1945 


Published: 1945 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND 
A WAY TO SOLVE IT 


Mr. President, 


I am indeed very grateful for your kind invitation to address the Annual 
Session of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation. I am happy to see this 
great gathering of the Scheduled Castes. Having regard to the very short 
time which has elapsed since its establishment, the growth of the Federation 
appears by all evidence to be phenomenal. That the Scheduled Castes all 
over India have rallied round the Federation and are determined to make 
the Federation their only representative organization is beyond question. The 
growth of the Federation within so short a time will not be fully appreciated 
unless the tremendous difficulties in the way of our organization have been 
fully appreciated. There are agents of other political organizations which 
decoy our people by false blandishments, by false promises and by false 
propaganda. There is the ignorance of our own people, who do not know the 
critical nature of the times we are living in and who do not know the value 
of organization for achieving our political objects. There is a lamentable lack 
of resources at our command. We have no money. We have no press. The 
cruelest of tyrannies and oppressions, to which our people are subjected, 
day in and day out all over India, are never reported by the Press. Even 
our views on social and political questions are systematically suppressed 
by an organized conspiracy on the part of the Press. We have no funds to 
maintain a machinery, to render help to our people and to educate, agitate 
and organize them. 


These are the odds we have to contend against. That the Federation, 
notwithstanding these difficulties, should have grown to this dimension is 
entirely due to our men who have been ceaselessly and unselfishly devoting 
themselves to the building up of this organization. I am sure you would 
like me to pay Mr. Ganpat Mahadev Jadhav, the President of the Bombay 
City Scheduled Castes Federation, our tribute for the work he has done. As 
everyone knows, he possesses remarkable degree of organizing capacity and 
I am sure the success of this Session is due to a great extent to his efforts 
and to those who have been his co-workers. 


358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Ordinarily, at a gathering such as this I would have spoken—and our 
people would expect me to speak—on any one of the social and political 
problems of the Scheduled Castes. But I do not propose to engage myself 
in a discourse on so sectarian a subject. Instead, I propose to speak on a 
topic, which is general and has a wider appeal, namely the shape and form 
of the future Constitution of India. 


It may be as well for me to explain the reasons for my decision. For 
the moment, the responsibility for leading the movement of the Scheduled 
Castes and facing its day-to-day problems does not lie on my shoulders. On 
account of my office I am out of it and I have no desire to take it up. That 
is one reason why Í do not propose to take up a sectarian subject which is 
related only to the Scheduled Castes. 


The Scheduled Castes are often charged as being selfish, interested only 
in themselves ; that they have no constructive suggestions to make for the 
solution of the country's political problem. The charge is entirely untrue ; and 
if it is true, the Untouchables will not be the only ones who will be found 
guilty of 1t. Most people in India do not make constructive suggestions. The 
reason is not that there are not people capable of constructive thought. The 
reason why all constructive thought remains bottled up is because a long 
and continuous propaganda has inculcated upon the minds of the generality 
of the people that nothing should be respected and nothing should be 
accepted unless it emanates from the Congress. It is this which has killed 
all constructive thought in this country. At the same time, I believe this 
charge against the Scheduled Castes should be repelled in a positive way by 
showing that the Scheduled Castes are capable of putting forth constructive 
proposals for the general political advancement of the country which the 
country, if it cares to, may consider. This is the second reason why I have 
on this occasion chosen this subject of general interest. 


II 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 


Before I set out in concrete terms the constitutional proposals I have in 
mind, I wish to raise two preliminary issues. First is: Who should frame a 
Constitution for India ? It is necessary to raise this question because there 
are quite a lot of people in India who are hoping, if not asking, the British 
Government to resolve the deadlock and to frame a Constitution for India. 
I think there is a gross fallacy in such a view which needs to be exposed. A 
Constitution, framed by the British Government and imposed upon Indians, 
sufficed in the past. But if the nature of the future Constitution Indians are 
clamouring for, is borne in mind it will be clear that an Imposed Constitution 
will not do. 


The difference between the past Constitutions and the future Constitution 
of India is fundamental, and those, who still rely on the British for framing 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 359 


a Constitution for India, do not seem to have realized this difference. The 
difference les in this that the past Constitutions contained a breakdown 
clause. But the future Constitution of India cannot contain such a breakdown 
clause. People in India decry the breakdown clause—by now the notorious 
section 93 of the Government of India Act, 1935. That is because they do 
not know the why and the how of its place in the Act. Its importance will 
become apparent if two important considerations governing the political life 
of a community are borne in mind. First of these considerations is that Law 
and Order is the medicine of the body politic, and when the body politic 
goes sick this medicine must be administered. Indeed, so important is this 
consideration that failure to administer it must be deemed to be a crime 
against society and civilization. The second consideration is that though it 
is true that no government has a vested right to govern, it is equally true 
that there must always be a government to govern—which I mean maintain 
Law and Order— until it is displaced by a better government. The breakdown 
clause serves these two purposes. As such, it is of the highest value for the 
peace and tranquillity of the people. It is the one and only means which can 
save the country from anarchy. For, when Constitutional Government fails, 
the breakdown clause has at least the merit of maintaining Government. 


In the past this distinction between Constitutional Government 
and Government with the provision for Government stepping in when 
Constitutional Government failed, was a feasible proposition. It was 
feasible because while the British Government gave Indians the right to 
a Constitutional Government, it kept to itself the right to govern, should 
Constitutional Government fail. In the future Constitution of India, it 
would not be possible to maintain this distinction. It would not be possible 
for the British Government to give the Indians the right to Constitutional 
Government and also to keep to itself the right to govern in case there was 
a breakdown in the Constitutional Government. The reason is quite obvious. 
The past Constitutions of India did not treat India as a Dominion. The future 
Constitution will proceed on the assumption that India will be a Dominion. 
The breakdown clause or the possibility of Government stepping in, when 
Constitutional Government has failed, can be reconciled im the case of a 
country, which has no Dominion Status. But the two are irreconcilable in 
the case of a Dominion. In the case of a Dominion or for the matter of that 
in the case of any free country, there is either a Constitutional Government 
or a Rebellion. 


What does this mean ? It means that it is impossible to frame a Constitution 
for an Indian Dominion with a possibility of a breakdown. To put the same 
thing in a different language the Constitution must be so made that it will 
not only command the obedience but also the respect of all; and all or if 
not all, at any rate, all important elements in the national life of India shall 
be prepared to uphold it and to give it their support. This can happen only 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


if the Constitution is framed by Indians for Indians and with the voluntary 
consent of Indians. If the Constitution is imposed by the British Government 
and is not accepted by one section and is opposed by another, there will 
arise in the country an element, hostile to the Constitution, and which will 
devote its energies not to working the Constitution but to breaking it. The 
anti-Constitution party may look upon destroying the Constitution as its 
only duty and may engage itself in “pronouncing” against a party working 
the Constitution in the real Latin American fashion. 


It is useless for the British to frame a Constitution for India which they 
will not remain to enforce. The same result will ensue if the Constitution is 
imposed by one powerful section or a combination of such sections on other 
sections. I am, therefore, firmly of opinion that if Indians want Dominion 
Status, they cannot escape the responsibility of framing their own Constitution. 
The position is thus inescapable. 


HI 
CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY 


The second question that I wish to raise is : Should there be a Constituent 
Assembly, charged with the function of making a Constitution ? Constituent 
Assembly is on the lips of everybody. The Congress parties in their 
resolutions, passed before the Congress ministries resigned, demanded 
that the Constitution for India should be made by a Constituent Assembly 
composed of Indians. A Constituent Assembly was included in the Cripps 
proposals. The Sapru Committee has followed suit. 


I must state that I am wholly opposed to the proposals of a Constituent 
Assembly. It is absolutely superfluous. I regard it as a most dangerous 
project, which may involve this country in a Civil War. In the first place, 
I do not see why a Constituent Assembly is at all necessary. Indians are 
not in the same position as the Fathers of the American Constitution 
were, when they framed the Constitution of the United States. They had 
to evolve ideas, suitable for the constitution for a free people. They had 
no constitutional patterns before them to draw upon. This cannot however 
be the case for Indians. Constitutional ideas and constitutional forms are 
ready at hand. Again, room for variety is very small. There are not more 
than two or three constitutional patterns to choose from. Thirdly, there are 
hardly any big and purely constitutional questions about which there can be 
said to be much dispute among Indians. It is agreed that the future Indian 
Constitution should be Federal. It is also more or less settled what subjects 
should go to the Centre and what to the Provinces. There is no quarrel 
over the division of Revenues between the Centre and the Provinces, none 
on Franchise and none on the relation of the Judiciary to the Legislature 
and the Executive. The only point of dispute, which is outstanding, centres 
round the question of the residuary powers—whether they should be 
with the Centre or with the Provinces. But that is hardly a matter worth 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 361 


bothering about Indeed, the provision contained in the present Government 
of India Act could be adopted as the best compromise. 


Having regard to this I cannot see why a Constituent Assembly is necessary 
to incubate a constitution. So much of the Constitution of India has already 
been written out in the Government of India Act, 1935, that 1t seems to be 
an act of supererogation to appoint a Constituent Assembly to do the thing 
ever again. All that is necessary is to delete those sections of the Government 
of India Act, 1935, which are inconsistent with Dominion Status. 


The only function which could be left to a Constituent Assembly is to find 
a solution of the Communal Problem. I am quite positive that whatever be 
the terms of reference of the Constituent Assembly, the Communal Question 
should not form a part of them. Consider the composition of the Constituent 
Assembly as suggested by the Sapru Committee. The total membership is 
fixed at 160. The election is by Joint electorates by members of the Provincial 
Legislative Assemblies under a system of proportional representation and the 
decision is to be by three-fourths of the members present and voting. Can a 
minority accept this Constituent Assembly as a safe body, in the impartiality 
of which it can place implicit confidence ? The answer to this question must 
depend upon what answers one can give to two other questions: Does it 
guarantee that the representatives of a minority elected to the Assembly will 
be its true representatives ? Secondly, does 1t guarantee that the decision of 
the Assembly with regard to the claims of any particular minority will not 
in fact be an imposition on the minority ? On neither of these two questions 
can I confidently say that a minority need have no cause for fear. 


Before taking up these questions, let me point out what differences there 
are between the Cripps Constituent Assembly and the Sapru Constituent 
Assembly. They may be stated as follows: 


G) The total number for the Constituent Assembly fixed by the Sapru 
Committee is 160. Sir Stafford Cripps had not fixed any number. But 
the provision contained in his proposal that the Constituent Assembly 
shall consist of ten per cent of the total number of members of the 
Provincial Legislatures virtually fixed the number to about 158—a 
difference of only 2. 


Gi) The method of election to the Constituent Assembly by the Sapru 
Committee is by joint electorate under the system of proportional 
representation. In this there is no difference between the Cripps plan 
and the Sapru plan for the composition of the Constituent Assembly. 


(ii) Under the Cripps plan, there was no communal reservation. The 
Sapru plan departs from the Cripps plan in this respect, in as 
much as it reserves seats for particular communities in prescribed 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


proportions. This difference is only normal. For, though the Cripps 
plan did not in terms fix the number, the scheme of proportional 
representation would have in fact resulted in such reservation. The 
difference in the quota of representation under the two schemes 
will be seen from the following table: 


Communities and Interests Quota of seats in the Constituent 
Assembly 
Under Cripps’ Under Sapru’s 

Hindus a de Së TT 51 
Muslims Š soo a 50 51 
Scheduled Castes se Sate 15 20 
Sikhs 3 8 
Indian Christians A 2 7 
Anglo-Indians Me 1 2 
Europeans 6 1 
Aboriginal Tribes 2 3 
Special Interests | Ae see 16 
Others is see 2 1 

158 160 


The Sapru Committee has not only fixed the numbers for each 
Community in the composition of the Constituent Assembly but it 
has offered the Muslims equality with the Hindus. For this departure 
the Committee’s plea is that in consideration for this offer it has 
demanded joint electorate as a basis for election to the Constituent 
Assembly. In this, the Committee must be said to have entirely 
misunderstood the Cripps proposals. Joint-Electorates were already 
provided for in the Cripps proposals one clause of which reads—“The 
members of the Lower Houses of the Provincial Legislatures are 
to form a single Electoral College”. This is simply another way of 
saying that the election shall be by joint-electorate. It has given 
something for nothing to one element and thereby put the other 
Communities in a hazard. 


(iv) Under the Cripps proposal the decision of the Assembly was to be 
by majority of those present and voting, Under the Sapru proposal 
the decision is to be by a majority of 3/4th of those present and 
voting. 


Now to revert to the two questions. How does the position stands with 
regard to the first question ? To give one’s opinion on it, it is first necessary 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 363 


to know the communal distribution of the membership of the Provincial 
Legislative Assemblies. The following table sums up the position : 


Distribution of Seats by Communities in the Provincial 
Legislative Assemblies* 


Communities General Women University Trade Com- Land 
Unions merce lords Total 
1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 
1. Hindus . 651 26 7 88 31 22 770 
2. Muslims . 482 10 al 5 6 13 517 
3. Scheduled Castes. 151 H i P P es 151 
4. Indian Christians. 20 1 ú x” se D 21 
5. Anglo-Indians z: 11 1 m z is à: 12 
6. Sikhs sz 34 1 m z i 1 36 
7. Europeans . 26 me x” 19 1 46 
8. Aboriginals . 24 s: a z as ú 24 
Total . 1,899 39 8 38 56 37 1,577 


Has the communal reservation made by the Sapru proposal, and which 
is not to be found in the Cripps proposal, any value? That depends upon 
how far one community will be able to influence the election of the members 
of the other communities ? What are the prospects in this regard ? Let me 
give another table: 


Voting strength in relation to seats 


Communities Voters for Quota of Number of (+)Excess of 
Constituent seats in the votes required voters over 
Assembly Constituent for electing (—)Deficiency 


Assembly the quota of voters 
below 
requirement 

1. Hindus u 778 51 561 +217 
2. Muslims 561 51 517 + 44 
3. Scheduled Castes .. 151 20 220 — 69 
4. Indian Christians .. 21 7 TI — 56 
5. Sikhs = 36 8 88 — 52 
6. Europeans x 46 1 11 + 35 


From this table the following conclusions emerge : 


G) Taking the total votes to be 1577 and the total number to be elected 
160, the quota under the proportional system of representation would 
roughly come to 10 + 1 = 11. 


*The distribution of seats for (1) Universities; (2) Trade Unions, (3) Commerce and (4) 
Landlords among the communities does not stand for an exact figure. It is based on guess as 
to how they may be divided among the communities having regard to the relative position. 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Gi) Taking 11 as the quota, the Hindus will have 217, the Muslims 44 
and the Europeans 35 votes to spare, while the Scheduled Castes 
will be short by 69, the Indian Christians by 56 and the Sikhs by 
52 votes. 


To put the same thing in a different way: 


G) The Hindus with their excess of 217 votes can elect 20 non-Hindus, 
who would be dependent upon them ; the Muslims with their excess 
of 44 votes can elect 4 non-Muslims, who would be dependent upon 
them and the Europeans with their excess of 35 votes would be able 
to elect 3 non-Europeans, who would be dependent upon them. 


Gi) The Scheduled Castes with a shortage of 69 votes will be able 
to elect only 13 members on the stock of their own votes and for 
7 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim or European 
voters. The Indian Christians with a shortage of 56 votes will be 
able to elect only 2 seats on the stock of their own voters. For the 
rest of the 5 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim or 
European voters. Similarly the Sikhs with a shortage of 52 will be 
able to elect only 3 seats on the stock of their own voters. For the 
rest of the 5 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim 
or European voters 


Such is the position. It is evident that the excess representation granted 
to the smaller minorities is only an eye-wash. Their representation is made 
so dependent that in no sense can it be called a real representation. 


Let me now take the second question. Is the rule of decision adopted 
by the Sapru Committee for the Constituent Assembly a safe rule? The 
Cripps proposal had adopted the rule of bare majority. This was an absurd 
proposition which no sensible man could have proposed. I know of no case 
where questions relating to the constitution were left to be decided by a 
simple majority. 


The Cripps proposals sought to excuse the adoption of the majority rule 
on the ground that there was to be a further provision for safeguarding 
the interest of the minorities. The provision was to take the form of a 
Treaty between the British Crown and the Indian Constituent Assembly, 
before Parliament was to relinquish its sovereignty and make India free. 
The proposal of a Treaty would have had some sense, if the Treaty was 
to override the constitution. But the proposal was impossible as under the 
Cripps scheme India was free to become a Dominion or an Independent 
country as she pleased. For once India became a Dominion it would ipso 
facto acquire all the legal power necessary to pass an enactment declaring 
that the Treaty shall not override the constitution. In that case the 
Treaty would have been no better than a calendar which members of the 
minorities might, if they wished, hang on the walls of their houses. This 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 365 


was exactly what happened to the Irish Treaty. The Irish Treaty continued 
to override the Irish Constitution so long as Ireland was not a Dominion. 
But the moment Ireland became a Dominion the over riding power of the 
Treaty was taken away by a short and simple enactment of the Parliament 
of the Irish Free State and the British Parliament did nothing, for it knew 
that Ireland was a Dominion and therefore it could do nothing. How so 
absurd a provision came to be put forth by so eminent a person to assure 
the minorities, I am unable to understand. 


The provisions contained in the Sapru proposals appear to be an 
improvement. But are they really an improvement? I am sure they are not. 
A three-fourths majority of 160 means that a view to prevail must have the 
support of 120 members. Before accepting this as an improvement, one has 
to have some idea as to how this group of 120 is likely to be formed. If the 
Hindus and the Muslims combine they will together make up 102 and will 
need only 18 more to make up 120. Most of the special seats and a few more 
from others may easily fall into the hands of this combine. If this happens the 
decision of the Assembly will obviously be an imposition upon the Scheduled 
Castes, the Sikhs, the Indian Christians etc. Similarly, if the Muslims are 
isolated the decision will not be a joint decision but an imposition upon the 
Muslims by non-Muslims. These possibilities of permutation and combination 
for the purpose of check-mating or out-manouvering of some communities 
by others, I am sorry to say, have not been taken into consideration by 
the Sapru Committee. There would have been some safety, if the Sapru 
Committee had provided that the three-fourths majority shall at least include 
50 per cent of each element. 


Following upon the procedure adopted in the making of the constitution of 
the United States, the Sapru Committee could have added a further provision 
for the ratification at any rate of the communal part of the decision of the 
Assembly by the representatives of the minorities outside the Assembly. None 
of these provisions finds a place in the plan of the Constituent Assembly as 
designed by the Sapru Committee. Consequently the Constituent Assembly 
has become a snare. 


There are many other arguments against the plan of a Constituent 
Assembly. I may mention one, which I confess has influenced me greatly. 
When I read the history of the Union between Scotland and England, I was 
shocked at the corruption and bribery that was practised to win the consent 
of the Scottish Parliament. The whole of the Scottish Parliament was bought. 
The chances of corruption and bribery being used in the Indian Constituent 
Assembly to buy over members to support decisions desired by interested 
groups are very real. Their effects, I am sure, cannot be overlooked. If this 
happens, it will not only make mockery of the Constituent Assembly but I 
feel quite certain that any attempt made to enforce its decisions will result 
in a civil war. It is my considered opinion that the proposal of Constituent 
Assembly is more dangerous than profitable and should not be entertained. 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
IV 
NECESSITY OF A NEW APPROACH 


I shall be asked that if the Constituent Assembly is not the correct 
approach, what is the alternative ? I know I shall be confronted with such 
a question. But I am confident in my view that if the Communal Question 
has become difficult of solution it is not because it is insoluble, nor because 
we had not yet employed the machinery of Constituent Assembly. It has 
become insoluble because the approach to it is fundamentally wrong. The 
defect in the present approach is that it proceeds by methods instead of 
by principles. The principle is that there is no principle. There is only a 
series of methods. If one method fails another is tried. It is this swing from 
one method to another which has made the Communal Problem a jig-saw 
puzzle. There being no principle there is no guide to tell why a particular 
method has failed. There being no principle there is no assurance that the 
new method will succeed. 


The attempts at the solution of the Communal Problem are either in the 
nature of a coward's plan to cow tow to the bully or of bully's plan to dictate 
to the weak. Whenever a community grows powerful and demands certain 
political advantages, concessions are made to it to win its goodwill. There is 
no Judicial examination of its claim ; no judgement on merits. The result is 
that there are no limits to demands and there are no limits to concessions. 
A start is made with a demand for separate electorate for a minority. It is 
granted. It is followed by a demand for a separate electorate for a community 
irrespective of the fact whether it is a minority or majority. That is granted. 
A demand is made for separate representation on a population basis. That 
is conceded. Next, a claim is made for weightage in representation. That 
is granted. It is followed by a demand for statutory majority over other 
minorities with the right for the majority to retain separate electorates. This 
is granted. This is followed by a demand that the majority rule of another 
community is intolerable, and therefore without prejudice to its rights to 
maintain majority rule over other minorities, the majority of the offending 
community should be reduced to equality. Nothing can be more absurd than 
this policy of eternal appeasement, it is a policy of limitless demand followed 
by endless appeasement. 


Frankly, I don't blame the community that indulges in this strategy. 
It indulges in it because it has found that it pays, it pursues it because 
there are no principles to fix the limits and it believes that more could be 
legitimately asked and would be easily given. On the other hand, there is a 
community economically poor, socially degraded, educationally backward and 
which is exploited, oppressed and tyrannized without shame and without 
remorse, disowned by society, unowned by Government and which has no 
security for protection and no guarantee for justice, fair play and equal 
opportunity. Such a community is told that it can have no safeguards, not 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT 367 


because it has no case for safeguards but only because the bully on whom the 
bill of rights is presented thinks that because the community is not politically 
organized to have sanctions behind its demand he can successfully bluff. 


All this differential treatment is due to the fact, that there are no principles, 
which are accepted as authoritative and binding on those who are parties to the 
Communal Question. The absence of principles has another deleterious effect. It 
has made impossible for public opinion to play its part. The public only knows 
methods and notes that one method has failed another is being suggested. It 
does not know why one method has failed and why another is said to be likely 
to succeed. The result is that the public, instead of being mobilized to force 
obstinate and recalcitrant parties to see sense and reason, are only witnessing 
the discussions of Communal Questions whenever they take place is mere shows. 


The approach I am making for the solution of the Communal Problem is 
therefore based upon two considerations : 


(1) That in proceeding to solve the Communal Problem it is essential to 
define the governing principles which should be invoked for determining 
the final solution, and 


(2) That whatever the governing principles they must be applied to all 
parties equally without fear or favour. 


V 
PROPOSALS FOR SOLUTION OF THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM 


Having made my position clear on certain preliminary points, I will now 
proceed to deal with the subject. 


The Communal Problem raises three questions : 
(A) The question of representation in the Legislature ; 
(B) The question of representation in the Executive; and 
(C) The question of representation in the Services. 
A. REPRESENTATION IN PUBLIC SERVICES 


To take the last question first. This can hardly be said to be a subject of 
controversy. The principle that all communities should be represented in the 
Public Services in a prescribed proportion and no single community should be 
allowed to have a monopoly has been accepted by the Government of India. This 
principle has been embodied in the Government of India Resolutions of 1934 
and 1943 and rules to carry it out have been laid down. It has even prescribed 
that any appointment made contrary to the rules shall be deemed to be null and 
void. All that is necessary is to convert administrative practice into statutory 
obligation. This can be done by adding a Schedule to the Government of India 
Act, which will include the provisions contained in these Resolutions and similar 
provisions for the different provinces and make the Schedule a part of the Law 
of the Constitution. 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


B. REPRESENTATION IN THE EXECUTIVE 
This question raises three points: 
(i) The quantum of representation in the Executive; 
Gi) The nature of the Executive ; 
(iii) The method of filling the places in the Executive. 
(i) Quantum of Representation 


For the solution of this question, the principle which should be adopted is that 
the representation of the Hindus, the Muslims and the Scheduled Castes should 
be equal to the quantum of their representation in the Legislature. 


With regard to the other minorities such as the Sikhs, Indian Christians and 
Anglo-Indians, it is difficult to give them representation in the Executive in 
strict proportion to their representation in the Legislature. This difficulty arises 
largely from the smallness of their numbers. If they are to get representation in 
the Executive in exact proportion to their numbers, the Executive would have to 
be enlarged to a fantastic degree. All that can be done, therefore, is to reserve 
a seat or two for them in the Cabinet for their representation and to establish 
a convention that they will get a fail portion of representation in the corps of 
Parliamentary Secretaries that will have to be raised, when the new Constitution 
comes into existence. 


(ii) Nature of the Executive 


In the Constitution of the Executive, I would propose the adoption of following 
principles : 


(1) It must be recognised that in a country like India where there is a 
perpetual antipathy between the majority and the minorities and on 
which account the danger of communal discrimination by majority against 
minorities forms an ever-present menace to the minorities, the executive 
power assumes far greater importance than the legislative power. 


(2) In view of (1) above, the system under which a party which has secured 
a majority at the poll is deemed entitled to form a Government on the 
presumption that it has the confidence of the majority is untenable in 
Indian conditions. The majority in India is a communal majority and not 
a political majority. That being the difference, the presumption that arises 
in England cannot be regarded as a valid presumption in the conditions 
of India. 


(3) The Executive should cease to be a Committee of the majority party in 
the Legislature. It should be so constituted that it will have its mandate 
not only from the majority but also from the minorities in the Legislature. 


(4) The Executive should be non-Parliamentary in the sense that it shall 
not be removeable before the term of the Legislature. 


(5) The Executive should be Parliamentary in the sense that the 
members of the Executive shall be chosen from the members of the 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 369 


Legislature and shall have the right to sit in the House, speak, vote 
and answer questions. 
Gii) Method of Filling Places 
In this connection, I would propose the adoption of the following principles : 


(a) The Prime Minister as the executive head of the Government should 
have the confidence of the whole House. 


(b) The person representating a particular minority in the Cabinet 
should have the confidence of the members of his community in the 
Legislature. 


(c) A member of the Cabinet shall not be liable to be removed except on ; 
impeachment by the House on the ground of corruption or treason. 


Following those principles, my proposal is that the Prime Minister and the 
members of the Cabinet from the majority community should be elected by the 
whole House by a single transferable vote and that the representatives of the 
different Minorities in the Cabinet should be elected by a single transferable 
vote of the members of each minority community in the Legislature. 


C. REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURE 


This is the most difficult question. All other questions depend upon the 
solution of this question. It raises two points : 


G) The quantum of representation; and 
Gi) The nature of the electorate. 
(i) Quantum of Representation 


I would first put forth my proposals and then explain the principles on 
which they are based. The proposals are worked out in the following tables, 
which show the scale of representation for the different communities in British 
India in the Central Legislature as well as in the Provincial Legislature : 


Proposed Ratio of Representation in the Legislatures 


N.B.—The percentages of population in the following Tables differ from 
the census figures as they have been taken after deducting the population 
of Aboriginal Tribes : 


1. CENTRAL ASSEMBLY 


Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to total Representation 
Hindus ee vi fe 54.68 40 
Muslims n 52 2 28.50 32 
Scheduled Castes s: s x 14.30 20 
Indian Christians s m s 1.16 3 
Sikhs X sš z 1.49 4 


Anglo-Indians 5 > x” 0.05 1 


370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


2. BOMBAY 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 76.42 40 
Muslims 9.98 28 
Scheduled Castes 9.64 28 
Indian Christians 1.75 2 
Anglo-Indians 0.07 1 
Parsees 0.44 1 
3. MADRAS 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to total Representation 
Hindus w. 71.20 40 
Scheduled Castes 16.53 30 
Muslims 7.98 24 
Indian Christians 4.10 5 
Anglo-Indians 0.06 1 
4. BENGAL 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Muslims 56.50 40 
Hindus 30.03 33 
Scheduled Castes 12.63 25 
Indian Christians 0.19 1 
Anglo-Indians 0.05 1 


5. UNITED PROVINCES 


Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 62.29 40 
Scheduled Castes 21.40 29 
Muslims 15.30 29 
Indian Christians 0.24 1 
Anglo-Indians 0.03 1 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT 371 


6. PUNJAB 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Muslims 57.06 40 
Hindus 22.17 28 
Sikhs 13.22 21 
Scheduled Castes 4.39 9 
Indian Christians 1.71 2 


7. C.P. & BERAR 


Indian Christians 


Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 72.20 40 
Scheduled Castes 20.23 34 
Muslims 5.70 25 
Indian Christians 0.36 1 
8. BIHAR 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 70.76 40 
Muslims 15.05 30 
Scheduled Castes Wn sea. e 13.80 28 
Indian Christians TI 
9. ASSAM 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 45.60 40 
Muslims 44.59 39 
Scheduled Castes 8.76 19 
Indian Christians 0.48 2 
10. ORISSA 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus 70.80 40 
Scheduled Castes 17.66 36 
Muslims 2.07 22 


0.37 2 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


11. SIND 
Community Percentage of Percentage of 
population to Representation 
total 
Hindus WN. ny lš 23.08 40 
Muslims he. tes as 71.30 40 
Scheduled Castes i. S er 4.26 19 
Indian Christians ER s 0.29 1 
VI 


EFFECT ON MINORITIES 


It may be desirable to set out in a tabular form the changes in the 
representation of the different minorities as prescribed in the Government 
of India Act, 1935, and as laid down in the proposals— 


EFFECT ON MUSLIMS 


Ratio of Representation 


Legislature Population Under the Under the 
Ratio Government of proposed 
India Act, 1935 scheme 

Central sh =ë 28.50 32.00 32 
Madras ms š 8.00 13.49 24 
Bombay z vi 10.00 17.40 28 
U.P. ai i 15.30 28.95 29 
C.P. m m 5.70 12.50 25 
Bihar a Fe 15.00 26.32 28 
Assam 2s 7 44.60 31.48 38 
Orissa 2.00 6.66 22 


EFFECT ON SCHEDULED CASTES 


Ratio of Representation 


Legislature Population Under the Under the 
Ratio Government of proposed 
India Act, 1935 scheme 

Central J ai 14.30 7.60 20 
Madras $ e 16.50 13.90 30 
Bombay sç ss 9.60 8.50 28 
Bengal és 2 12.60 12.00 25 
U.P. ia 3 21.40 8.70 29 
Punjab 2 48 4.40 4.50 9 
C.P. as sç 20.20 17.80 34 
Bihar i w. 13.80 9.80 28 
Assam i tas 8.70 6.50 20 
Orissa i = 17.60 10.00 36 


Sind don, he 4.20 Nil. 19 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 373 


EFFECT ON INDIAN CHRISTIANS 


Ratio of Representation 


Legislature Population Under the Under the 
Ratio Government of proposed 
India Act, 1935 scheme 

Central š is 1.16 3.00 3 
Madras ss sŠ 4.10 4.20 5 
Bombay = ” 1.70 1.70 2 
Bengal P z 0.19 0.80 1 
U.P. se š 0.24 0.90 1 
Punjab m” s. 1.70 1.14 2 
C.P. a i 0.35 Nil 1 
Bihar a ” 1.70 0.66 2 
Assam 7 s: 0.48 0.90 2 
Orissa i 5 0.37 0.16 2 
Sind s = 0.29 Nil 1 


EFFECT ON SIKHS 


Ratio of Representation 


Legislature Population Under the Under the 
Ratio Government of proposed 
India Act, 1935 scheme 
Centre me = 1.50 2.40 4 
Punjab oe 2: 13.20 18.29 21 


EFFECT ON HINDUS 


Population Ratio of Representation 
Legislature Ratio Under the Under the 
Government of proposed 
India Act, 1935 scheme 
Bengal 30.00 20.00 33 
Punjab 22.10 20.00 28 
Sind 23.80 31.60 40 
VII 


PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE PROPOSALS 


I may now proceed to state the principles on which this distribution has 
been made. They are: 


(1) Majority Rule is untenable in theory and unjustifiable in practice. 
A majority community may be conceded a relative majority of 
representation but it can never claim an absolute majority.* 


*I have not framed any scheme of representation for the North-West Frontier province as the 
minority is so small that even the Principle of relative majority cannot help it. 


374 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


If I 


The relative majority of representation given to a majority community 
in the legislature should not be so large as to enable the majority 
to establish its rule with the help of the smallest minorities. 


The distribution of seats should be so made that a combination of 
the majority and one of the major minorities should not give the 
combine such a majority as to make them impervious to the interest 
of the minorities. 


The distribution should be so made that if all the minorities combine 
they could, without depending on the majority, form a government 
of their own. 


The weightage taken from the majority should be distributed among 
the minorities in inverse proportion to their social standing, economic 
position and educational condition so that a minority which is large 
and which has a better social, educational and economic standing gets 
a lesser amount of weightage than a minority whose numbers are 
less and whose educational, economic and social position is inferior 
to that of the others. 


may say so, the representation is a balanced representation. No 


one community is placed in a position to dominate others by reason of its 
numbers. The Muslim objection to the Hindu majority and the Hindu and 
Sikh objections to the Muslim majority are completely eliminated, both in 
the Central as well as in the Provinces. 


VIII 
NATURE OF THE ELECTORATE 


With regard to the question of electorates the following propositions 
should be accepted : 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Joint electorate or separate electorate is a matter of machinery for 
achieving a given purpose. It is not a matter of principle. 


The purpose is to enable a minority to select candidates to the 
Legislature who will be real and not nominal representatives of the 
minority. 


While separate electorate gives an absolute guarantee to the minority, 
that its representatives will be no others except those who enjoy 
its confidence, a system of joint electorates which will give equal 
protection to the minorities should not be overlooked. 


A Four-member constituency, with a right to the minorities to have 
a double vote and requiring a minimum percentage of minority votes, 
may be considered as a possible substitute. 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 375 
IX 
MATTERS NOT COVERED 


(i) QUESTION OF SPECIAL SAFEGUARDS 
There are other demands made on behalf of particular minorities such as: 
(1) Provision of a Statutory Officer to report on the condition of minorities. 
(2) Statutory provision of State aid for education, and 


(8) Statutory provision for land settlement. But they are not of a communal 
character, I do not therefore wish to enlarge upon them here. 


Gi) ABORIGINAL TRIBES 


It will be obvious that my proposals do not cover the Aboriginal Tribes 
although they are larger in number than the Sikhs, Anglo Indians, Indian 
Christians and Parsees. I may state the reasons why I have omitted them 
from my scheme. The Aboriginal Tribes have not as yet developed any political 
sense to make the best use of their political opportunities and they may easily 
become mere instruments in the hands either of a majority or a minority and 
thereby disturb the balance without doing any good to themselves. In the 
present stage of their development it seems to me that the proper thing to 
do for these backward communities is to establish a Statutory Commission to 
administer what are now called the ‘excluded areas’ on the same basis as was 
done in the case of the South African Constitution. Every Province in which 
these excluded areas are situated should be compelled to make an annual 
contribution of a prescribed amount for the administration of these areas. 


(iii) INDIAN STATES 


It will also be noticed that my proposals do not include the Indian States. 
I am not opposed to the inclusion of the Indian States, provided the terms 
and conditions of inclusion are such— 


(1) that the dichotomy of divided sovereignty between British India and 
Indian States is completely done away with, 


(2) that the judicial and political boundaries which separate British India 
from Indian States will disappear, that there will be no such entities 
as British India or Indian States and in their place there will be only 
one entity namely India, and 


(8) that the terms and conditions of inclusion do not prevent India from 
having full and plenary powers of a Dominion. I have worked out a 
scheme for the fusion of the Indian States and British India, which 
will permit the realization of these objects. I do not wish to overburden 
this address with the details of the plan. For the moment, it is better 
if British India marches to her goal without complicating its progress 
by an entanglement with the Indian States. 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
X 
PAKISTAN IN THE LIGHT OF PROPOSALS 


My proposals are for an United India. They are made in the hope that the 
Muslims will accept them in preference to Pakistan as providing better security 
than Pakistan does. I am not against Pakistan, I believe it is founded on principle 
of self-determination, which it is now too late to question. I am prepared to 
give them the benefit of the principle, on condition that the Muslims do not 
deny the benefit of the principles to the Non-Muslim residents of the Area. 
But I believe, I am entitled to draw the attention of the Muslims to another 
and a better plan of security. I claim that my plan is better than the plan of 
Pakistan. Let me state the points which tell in favour of my plan. They are: 


G) Under my proposal the danger of a communal majority, which is the 
basis of Pakistan is removed, 


Gi) Under my proposal the weightage at present enjoyed by the Muslims 
is not disturbed. 


(Gi) The position of Muslims in the Non-Pakistan Provinces is greatly 
strengthened by an increase in their representation, which they may 
not get if Pakistan comes and which will leave them in a more helpless 
condition than they are in at present. 


XI 
A WORD TO HINDUS 


Much of the difficulty over the Communal Question is due to the insistance 
of the Hindus that the rule of majority is sacrosanct and that it must be 
maintained at all costs. The Hindu does not seem to be aware of the fact that 
there is another rule, which is also operative in fields where important disputes 
between individual and nations arise and that rule is a rule of unanimity. If he 
will take the trouble to examine the position he will realise that such a rule is 
not a fiction, but it does exist. Let him take the Jury System. In the jury trial 
the principle is unanimity. The decision is binding upon the judge only if the 
verdict of the jury is unanimous. Let him take another illustration that of the 
League of Nations. What was the rule for decisions in the League of Nations ? 
The rule was a rule of unanimity. It is obvious that if the principle of unanimity 
was accepted by the Hindus as a rule of decision in the Legislature and in 
the Executive there would be no such thing as a Communal Problem in India. 


One may well ask the Hindu that if he is not prepared to concede constitutional 
safeguards to the minorities, is he prepared to agree to the rule of unanimity ? 
Unfortunately he is not prepared to accept either. 


About the rule of majority the Hindu is not prepared to admit any 
limitations. The majority he wants is an absolute majority. He will not be 
satisfied with relative majority. He should consider whether his insistance 
on absolute majority is fair proposition, which political philosophers can 
accept. He is not aware that even the constitution of the United States does 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 377 


not lend support to the absolutistic rule of majority rule on which the Hindu 
has been insisting upon. 


Let me illustrate the point from the constitution of the United States. 
Take the clause embodying Fundamental Rights. What does that clause 
mean ? It means that, matters included in Fundamental Rights are of such 
supreme concern that a mere majority rule is not enough to interfere with 
them. Take another illustration also from the Constitution of the United 
States. The Constitution says that no part of the Constitution shall be altered 
unless the proposition is carried by three-fourths majority and ratified by the 
States. What does this show ? It shows that the United States Constitution 
recognizes for certain purposes mere majority rule is not competent. 


All these cases are of course familiar to many a Hindu. The pity of it is, 
he does not read from them the correct lesson. If he did, he would realize 
that the rule of the majority rule is not as sacrosanct a principle as he thinks 
it is. The majority rule is not accepted as a principle but is tolerated as a 
rule. I might also state why it is tolerated. It is tolerated for two reasons; 
(1) because the majority is always a political majority and (2) because the 
decision of a political majority accepts and absorbs so much of the point of 
view of the minority that the minority does not care to rebel against the 
decision. 


In India, the majority is not a political majority. In India the majority is 
born ; it is not made. That is the difference between a communal majority 
and a political majority. A political majority is not a fixed or a permanent 
majority. It is a majority which is always made, unmade and remade. A 
communal majority is a permanent majority fixed in its attitude. One can 
destroy it, but one cannot transform it. If there is so much objection to 
a political majority, how very fatal must be the objection to a communal 
majority ? 


It may be open to the Hindus to ask Mr. Jinnah, why in 1930 when he 
formulated his fourteen points he insisted upon the principle of majority 
rule to such an extent that one of the fourteen points stipulated that in 
granting weightage, limits should be placed whereby a majority shall not 
be reduced to a minority or equality. It may be open to the Hindus to ask 
Mr. Jinnah, if he is in favour of a Muslim majority in Muslim Provinces, 
why he is opposed to a Hindu Majority in the Centre? The Hindu 
must however realize that these posers may lead to the conclusion, that 
Mr. Jinnah’s position is inconsistent. They cannot lead to the affirmation of 
the principle of majority rule. 


The abandonment of the principle of majority rule in politics cannot affect 
the Hindus very much in other walks of life. As an element in social life they 
will remain a majority. They will have the monopoly of trade and business 
which they enjoy. They will have the monopoly of the property which they 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


have. My proposals do not ask the Hindus to accept the principle of unanimity. 
My proposals do not ask the Hindus to abandon the principle of majority 
rule. All I am asking them is to be satisfied with a relative majority. Is it 
too much for them to concede this ? 


Without marking any such sacrifice the Hindu majority is not justified in 
representing to the outside world that the minorities are holding up India's 
Freedom. This false propaganda will not pay. For the minorities are doing 
nothing of the kind. They are prepared to accept freedom and the dangers 
in which they likely to be involved; provided they granted satisfactory 
safeguards. This gesture of the minorities is not to be treated as a matter 
for which Hindus need not be grateful. It may well be contrasted with what 
happened in Ireland. Mr. Redmond, the leader of the Irish Nationalists once 
told Carson, the leader of Ulster; “Consent to United Ireland, Ask for any 
safeguard and they shall be granted to you”. He is reported to have turned 
round and said: “Damn your safeguards ; we don’t want to be ruled by you”. 
The minorities in India have not said that. They are ready to be satisfied 
with safeguards. I ask the Hindus Is this not worth a mass ? I am sure it is. 


XII 
CONCLUSION 


These are some of the proposals I have had in mind for the solution of 
the Communal Problem. They do not commit the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation. They do not even commit me. In putting them forth, I am 
doing nothing more than exploring a new way. My emphasis is more on the 
principle, I have enunciated, than on the actual proposals. If the principles 
are accepted then I am sure the solution of the Communal Question will 
not be as baffling as it has been in the past. 


The problem of solving the Indian deadlock is not easy. I remember reading 
a historian describing the condition of Germany before the Confederation 
of 1867 as one of “ Divinely Ordained Confusion’. Whether that was true of 
Germany or not, it seems to me that they form a very accurate description 
of the present conditions of India. Germany did get out of this confusion, 
if not at one stroke at least by successive stages until Just before the war 
she became a unified people, unified in mind, unified in outlook and unified 
by belief in a common destiny. India has not so far succeeded in evolving 
order out of her confusion. It is not that she had no opportunities to do 
so. In fact, there have been quite a number. The first opportunity came in 
1927, when Lord Birkenhead gave a challenge to Indians asking them to 
produce a constitution for India. That challenge was taken up. A committee 
was formed to frame a constitution. A constitution was produced and was 
known as ‘The Nehru Constitution’. It was, however, not accepted by Indians 
and was buried without remorse. A second opportunity presented itself to 
Indians in 1930, when they assembled at the Round Table Conference. 
There again, Indians failed to play their part and write out their own 


COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE TT 379 


Constitution. A third attempt is the one recently made by the Sapru 
Committee. The proposals of this committee too have fallen flat. 


There is neither enthusiasm nor optimism left to indulge in another 
attempt. One is persued by a sense of fatality, which suggests that as 
every attempt is doomed to failure, none need be made. At the same time 
I feel that no Indian ought to be so down hearted or so callous as to let the 
deadlock stink, as though it was a dead dog, and say that he is prepared 
to do nothing more than be a mere witness to the political dog-fight that is 
going on in this country. The failures of the past need not daunt any body. 
They do not daunt me. For, I have a feeling that though it is true that all 
attempts to reach an agreement on the communal question have failed, the 
failure have been due not so much to any inherent fault of the Indians as 
they have been due to a wrong approach. I feel confident that my proposals, 
if considered dispassionately, should be found acceptable. They constitute a 
new approach and as such I commend them to my countrymen. 


Before I conclude, I must, however, warn my critics that they may be 
able to amend my proposals in some respects ; but it will not be easy to 
reject them. If they do reject them, the first thing they shall have to do is 
to controvert the principles on which they are based. 


10 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


What are Their Rights and How to 
Secure Them in the Constitution of 
Free India 


Memorandum on the Safeguards for the Scheduled Castes 
submitted to the Constituent Assembly on behalf of 
the All India Scheduled Castes Federation 


Published: 1947 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


PREFACE 


Soon after it became definite that the framing of the future 
Constitution of India was to be entrusted to a Constituent Assembly, 
the Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation 
asked me to prepare a Memorandum on the Safeguards for the 
Scheduled Castes for being submitted to the Constituent Assembly, 
on behalf of the Federation. I very gladly undertook the task. The 
results of my labour are contained in this brochure. 


The Memorandum defines Fundamental Rights, Minority Rights 
and Safeguards for the Scheduled Castes. Those who hold the view 
that the Scheduled Castes are not a minority might say that in this 
matter I have gone beyond prescribed bounds. The view that the 
Scheduled Castes are not a minority is a new dispensation issued on 
behalf of the High and Mighty Hindu Majority which the Scheduled 
Castes are asked to submit to. The spokesmen of the Majority have 
not cared to define its scope and its meaning. Anyone with a fresh 
and free mind, reading it as a general proposition, would be justified 
in saying that it is capable of double interpretation. I interpret 
it to mean that the Scheduled Castes are more than a minority 
and that any protection given to the citizens and to the minorities 
will not be adequate for the Scheduled Castes. In other words it 
means that their social, economic and educational condition is so 
much worse than that of the citizens and other minorities that in 
addition to protection they would get as citizens and as minorities 
the Scheduled Castes would require special safeguards against 


384 PREFACE 


the tyranny and discrimination of the majority. The other 
Interpretation is that the Scheduled Castes differ from a minority 
and therefore they are not entitled to the protection which can 
be claimed by a minority. This interpretation appears to be such 
unmitigated nonsense that no sane man need pay any attention to 
it. The Scheduled Castes must be excused if they ignore it. Those 
who accept my interpretation of the view that the Scheduled Castes 
are not a minority will, I am sure, agree with me that I am justified 
in demanding for the Scheduled Castes, all the benefit of the 
Fundamental Rights of citizens, all the benefit of the Provisions for 
the Protection of the minorities and in addition special Safeguards. 


The memorandum was intended to be submitted to the Constituent 
Assembly. There was no intention to issue it to the public. But 
my caste Hindu friends who have had the opportunity to read the 
typescript have pressed me to give it a wider circulation. Although 
it is meant for members of the Constituent Assembly, I do not see 
any breach of decorum in making it available to the general public. 
I have therefore agreed to fall in line with their wishes. 


Instead of setting out my ideas in general terms, I have drafted 
the Memorandum in the form of Articles of the Constitution. I am 
sure that for the sake of giving point and precision this method 
will be found to be more helpful. For the benefit of the Working 
Committee of the Scheduled Castes Federation, I had prepared certain 
explanatory notes and other statistical material. As the notes and 
the statistical material are likely to be useful to the general reader, 
I have thought it better to print them along with the Memorandum 
rather than keep them back. 


Among the many problems the Constituent Assembly has to 
face, there are two which are admittedly most difficult. One is 
the problem of the Minorities and the other is the problem of 
the Indian States. I have been a student of the problem of the 
Indian States and I hold some very definite and distinct views 
on the subject. It was my hope that the Constituent Assembly 
would elect me to the States Committee Evidently, it has found 
men of superior calibre for the work. It may also be because I 
am one of those who are outside the tabernacle and therefore 
undesirable. I am not sorry to find myself left out. My only regret 
is that I have lost an opportunity to which I was looking forward 


PREFACE 385 


for placing my views for the consideration of the Committee. I have 
therefore chosen to do the next best thing—namely, to incorporate 
them in this brochure along with the Rights of Citizens, of Minorities 
and of the Scheduled Castes so that a wider public may know what 
they are, may value them for what they are worth and may make 
such use of them as it may deem fit. 


“Raja Graha” B. R. AMBEDKAR 
Dadar, Bombay-14 
15-3-47 


CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES OF INDIA 
PROPOSED PREAMBLE 


We the people of the territories of British India distributed into 
(For explanation, administrative units called Provinces and Centrally 
see page 405) Administered Areas and of the territories of the Indian 
States with a view to form a more perfect union of these territories do— 


ordain that the Provinces and the Centrally Administered Areas (to be 
hereafter designated as States) and the Indian States shall be joined 
together into a Body Politic for Legislative, Executive and Administrative 
purposes under the style The United States of India and that the union 
so formed shall be indissoluble 


and that with a view : 


(i) to secure the blessings both of self-government and good government 
throughout the united States of India to ourselves and to our 
posterity, 


Gi) to maintain the right of every subject to life, hberty and pursuit 
of happiness and to free speech and free exercise of religion, 


(iii) to remove social, political and economic inequality by providing 
better opportunities to the submerged classes, 


(iv) to make it possible for every subject to enjoy freedom from want 
and freedom from fear, and 


(v) to provide against internal disorder and external aggression, 


establish this Constitution for the United States of India. 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


PROPOSED ARTICLE I 
DETAILED ANALYSIS 
Article I, Section I—Admission of Indian States into the Union : 
Clause 1. Qualified Indian States and their admission into the Union. 


Clause 2. Relation of Qualified Indian States which have not entered 
the Union and of the Disqualified Indian States to the 
United States of India. 


Clause 3. Power of the United States of India to reorganise the 
territory of the Disqualified Indian States into suitable 
Administrative Units with a view to qualify them for 
admission into the Union as States of the Union. 


Clause 4. Formation of new States within the Union. 
Article I, Section II— United States of India and New Territory : 
Clause 1. Incorporation of Foreign States into the Union. 


Clause 2. Acquisition of new territory by the United States of India 
and its retention as unincorporated territory of the Union. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 389 


ARTICLE I—Section I 
ADMISSION OF INDIAN STATES INTO THE UNION 
Clause I 


The United States of India may, on application and on fulfilment of 
the terms prescribed by an Enabling Act of the Union 
Legislature laying down the form of the Constitution 
admit an Indian State into the Union provided the Indian 
State seeking admission is a Qualified State. 


For explanation, 
see page 405 


For the purposes of this clause a list of Qualified Indian States shall be 
drawn up. A State shall not be deemed to be a Qualified State unless it is 
proved that it is of a standard size prescribed by the Union Legislature and 
is endowed with natural resources capable of supporting a descent standard 
of living for its people and can, by reason of its revenues and population 
function as an autonomous State, protect itself against external aggression, 
maintain Law and Order against internal disturbance and guarantee to 
its subjects minimum standards of administration and welfare which are 
expected from a modern State. 


Clause 2 


The territory of an Indian State which is a Qualified State but which 
has not entered the Union and the territory of the Indian States which 
are disqualified shall be treated as incorporated territories of the United 
States of India and shall at all times form integral parts thereof and shall 
be subject to such parts of the Constitution of the United States of India 
as may be prescribed by the Union Legislature. 


Clause 3 


The United States of India shall have power to reform, rearrange, 
redistribute and amalgamate the territories of Disqualified Indian States 
into suitable Administrative Units for admission into the Union as States 
of the Union. 


Clause 4 


After a State has been admitted into the Union as a State no new State 
shall be formed or created within its jurisdiction nor any new State shall 
be formed by the junction of two or more States or parts of States without 
the consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the 
Union Legislature. 


ARTICLE I—Section II 
Clause 1 


The United States of India may admit into the Union any territory which 
forms a natural part of India or which is on the border of India on terms 


390 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and conditions mutually agreed upon. Provided that the terms shall not 
: be inconsistent with the Constitution of the United 
(For explanation, p a . 
see page 406) States of India and the admission is recommended by 
the Legislatures of one half of the States comprising the 
United States of India in the form of a resolution. 


Clause 2 


The United States of India may acquire territory and may treat it as 
unincorporated territory. The provisions of the Constitution of the United 
States of India shall not apply to the unincorporated territory unless a 
provision to the contrary is made by the Legislature of the United States 
of India. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 391 
PROPOSED ARTICLE II 
DETAILED ANALYSIS 


Article II, Section I—Fundamental Rights of Citizens. 
Article II, Section II—Remedies against Invasion of Fundamental Rights: 
Clause 1. Judicial Protection. 
Clause 2. Protection against Unequal Treatment. 
Clause 3 Protection against Discrimination. 
Clause 4. Protection against Economic Exploitation. 
Article II, Section IH— Provisions for the Protection of Minorities: 
Clause 1. Protection against Communal Executive. 
Clause 2. Protection against Social and Official Tyranny. 
Clause 3. Protection against Social Boycott. 


Clause 4. Authority and obligation of the Union and State 
Governments to spend money for public purposes including 
purposes beneficial to Minorities. 


Article II, Section I[V—Safeguards for the Scheduled Castes. 
Part I—Guarantees: 


Clause 1. Right to Representation in the Legislature and in the Local 
Bodies, 


Clause 2. Right to Representation in the Executive. 
Clause 3. Right to Representation in Services. 
Part II—Special Responsibilities, 
Clause 1. For Higher Education. 
Clause 2. For Separate Settlements. 

Part IIl—Sanction for Safeguards and Amendment of Safeguards : 
Clause 1. Safeguards to be embodied in the Constitution. 
Clause 2. Amendment of Safeguards. 

Part IV— Protection of Scheduled Castes in Indian States. 


Part V—Interpretation. 


392 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


ARTICLE II—Section I 
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF CITIZENS 


The Constitution of the United States of India shall recognize the 
following as Fundamental Rights of citizenship : 


1. All persons born or naturalized within its territories are citizens of 
Fundamental Rights. the United States of India and of the State wherein 
(For explanation, see they reside. Any privilege or disability arising out 
page 406) of rank, birth, person, family, religion or religious 


usage and custom is abolished. 


2. No State shall make or enforce any law or custom which shall abridge 
the privileges or immunities of citizens ; nor shall any State deprive any 
person of life, liberty and property without due process of law; nor deny 
to any person within its jurisdiction equal protection of law. 


3. All citizens are equal before the law and possess equal civic rights. 
Any existing enactment, regulation, order, custom or interpretation of law 
by which any penalty, disadvantage or disability is imposed upon or any 
discrimination is made against any citizen shall, as from the day on which 
this Constitution comes into operation, cease to have any effect. 


4. Whoever denies to any person, except for reasons by law applicable 
to persons of all classes and regardless of their social status, the full 
enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges 
of inns, educational institutions, roads, paths, streets, tanks, wells and 
other watering places, public conveyances on land, air or water, theatres 
or other places of public amusement, resort or convenience, whether they 
are dedicated to or maintained or licensed for the use of the public, shall 
be guilty of an offence. 


5. All citizens shall have equal access to all institutions, conveniences 
and amenities maintained by or for the public. 


6. No citizen shall be disqualified to hold any public office or exercise 
any trade or calling by reason of his or her religion, caste, creed, sex or 
social status. 


7. G) Every citizen has the right to reside in any part of India. No 
law shall be made abridging the right of a citizen to reside except for 
consideration of public order and morality. 


Gi) Every citizen has the right to settle in any part of India, subject to 
the production of a certificate of citizenship from the State of his origin. 
The permission to settle shall not be refused or withdrawn except on 
grounds specified in sub-clause (iv) of this clause. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 393 


Gii) The State in which a citizen wishes to settle may not impose any 
special charge upon him in respect of such settlement other than the charge 
imposed upon its own inhabitants. The maximum fees chargeable in respect 
of permits for settlement shall be determined by laws made by the Union 
Legislature. 


Gv) The permission to settle may be refused or withdrawn by a State 
from persons— 


(a) who have been habitual criminals ; 


(b) whose intention to settle is to alter the communal balance of the 
State ; 


(c) who cannot prove to the satisfaction of the State in which they wish 
to settle that they have an assured means of subsistence and who 
are likely to become or have become a permanent burden upon public 
charity; 


(d) whose State of origin refuses to provide adequate assistance for them 
when requested to do so, 


(v) Permission to settle may be made conditional upon the applicant being 
capable of work and not having been a permanent charge upon public charity 
in the place of his origin, and able to give security against unemployment. 


(vi) Every expulsion must be confirmed by the Union Government. 


(vii) Union Legislature shall define the difference between settlement and 
residence and at the same time, prescribe regulations governing the political 
and civil rights of persons during their residence. 


8. The Union Government shall guarantee protection against persecution 
of a community as well as against internal disorder or violence arising in 
any part of India. 


9. Subjecting a person to forced labour or to involuntary servitude shall 
be an offence. 


10. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers 
and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, 
and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or 
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the 
persons or things to be seized. 


11. The right of a citizen to vote shall not be denied or abridged on any 
account other than immaturity, imprisonment and insanity. 


12. No law shall be made abridging the freedom of Speech, of the Press, 
of Association and of Assembly except for consideration of public order and 
morality. 


394 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


13. No Bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed. 


14. The State shall guarantee to every Indian citizen liberty of conscience 
and the free exercise of his religion including the right to profess, to preach 
and to convert within limits compatible with public order and morality. 


15. No person shall be compelled to become a member of any religious 
association, submit to any religious instruction or perform any act of religion. 
Subject to the foregoing provision, parents and guardians shall be entitled 
to determine the religious education of children up to the age of 16 years. 


16. No person shall incur any penalties of any kind whatsoever by reason 
of his caste, creed or religion nor shall any person be permitted to refuse to 
fulfil any obligation of citizenship on the ground of caste, creed or religion. 


17. The State shall not recognise any religion as State religion. 


18. Persons following a religion shall be guaranteed freedom of association 
and shall have, if they so desire, the right to call upon the State to pass 
legislation in terms approved by them making them into a body corporate. 


19. Every religious association shall be free to regulate and administer 
its affairs, within the limits of the laws applicable to all. 


20. Religious associations shall be entitled to levy contributions on their 
members who are willing to pay them if their law of incorporation permits 
them to do so. No person may be compelled to pay taxes the proceeds of 
which are specifically appropriated for the use of any religious community 
of which he is not a member. 


21. All offences under this section shall be deemed to be cognizable offences. 
The Union Legislature shall make laws to give effect to such provisions as 
require legislation for that purpose and to prescribe punishment for those 
acts which are declared to be offences. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 395 


ARTICLE II—Section II 
REMEDIES AGAINST INVASION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 
The United States of India shall provide : 
Clause 1 


(1) That the Judicial Power of India shall be vested in a Supreme Court. 
Judicial Protection 


against Executive (2) The Supreme Court shall have the power of 


Tyranny. superintendence over all other Courts or officers 
(For explanation, see exercising the powers of a Court, whether or not 
page 406) such Courts or officers are subject to its appellate or 


revisional jurisdiction. 


(8) The Supreme Court shall have the power on the application of an 
aggrieved party to 1ssue what are called prerogative writs such as Hebeas 
Corpus, Quo Warranto Prohibition, Certiorari and Mandamus, etc. For 
purposes of such writs the Supreme Court shall be a Court of general 
jurisdiction throughout India. 


(4) The right to apply for a writ shall not be abridged or suspended unless 
when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it. 


Clause 2 


That the Authority of the Legislature and the Executive of the Union 
Protection against as well as of every State throughout India shall be 


ea s A subject to the following limitations : 


pages 406-8) 

It shall not be competent for any Legislature or Executive in India to 
pass a law or issue an order, rule or regulation so as to violate the following 
rights of the subjects of the State : 


(1) to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and give evidence, 
to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold and convey real and personal property. 


(2) to be eligible for entry into the civil and military employ and to all 
educational institutions except for such conditions and limitations as may be 
necessary to provide for the due and adequate representation of all classes 
of the subjects of the State. 


(3) to be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, 
advantages, facilities, educational institutions, privileges of inns, rivers, 
streams, wells, tanks, roads, paths, streets, public conveyances on land, air 
and water, theatres and other places of public resort or amusement except 
for such conditions and limitations applicable alike to all subjects of every 
race, class, caste, colour or creed. 


(4) to be deemed fit for and capable of sharing without distinction the 
benefits of any religious or charitable trust dedicated to or created, maintained 
or licensed for the general public or for persons of the same faith and religion. 


396 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(5) to claim full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security 
of persons and property as is enjoyed by other subjects regardless of any usage or 
custom or usage or custom based on religion and be subject to like punishment, 
pains and penalties and to none other. 


Clause 3 


(1) Discrimination against citizens by Government officers in Public 
Protection against administration or by private employers in factories and 
Discrimination. commercial concerns on the ground of race or creed or social 
(For explanation, status shall be treated as an offence. The jurisdiction to try 
see page 408) such cases shall be vested in a tribunal to be created for 
the purpose. 


(2) The Union Legislature shall have the right as well as the obligation to 
give effect to this provision by appropriate legislation. 


Clause 4 
The United States of India shall declare as a part of the law of its constitution— 


(1) That industries which are key industries or which may be declared to be 


Protection key industries shall be owned and run by the State ; 
against Economic ; i : f ; 
Exploitation. (2) That industries which are not key industries but 
(For explanation, which are basic industries shall be owned by the State and 


see pages 408-12) shall be run by the State or by Corporations established 
by the State ; 


(8) That Insurance shall be a monopoly of the State and that the State shall 
compel every adult citizen to take out a life insurance policy commensurate with 
his wages as may be prescribed by the Legislature ; 


(4) That agriculture shall be State Industry; 


(5) That State shall acquire the subsisting rights in such industries, insurance 
and agricultural land held by private individuals, whether as owners, tenants or 
mortgagees and pay them compensation in the form of debenture equal to the 
value of his or her right in the land. Provided that in reckoning the value of land, 
plant or security no account shall be taken of any rise therein due to emergency, 
of any potential or unearned value or any value for compulsory acquisition; 


(6) The State shall determine how and when the debenture holder shall be 
entitled to claim cash payment; 


(7) The debenture shall be transferable and inheritable property but neither 
the debenture holder nor the transferee from the original holder nor his heir shall 
be entitled to claim the return of the land or interest in any industrial concern 
acquired by the State or be entitled to deal with it in any way ; 


(8) The debenture-holder shall be entitled to interest on his debenture at such 
rate as may be defined by law, to be paid by the State in cash or in kind as the 
State may deem fit; 


STATES AND MINORITIES 397 


(9) Agricultural industry shall be organized on the following basis : 


G) The State shall divide the land acquired into farms of standard size 
and let out the farms for cultivation to residents of the village as 
tenants (made up of group of families) to cultivate on the following 
conditions : 


(a) The farm shall be cultivated as a collective farm ; 


(b) The farm shall be cultivated in accordance with rules and 
directions issued by Government; 


(c) The tenants shall share among themselves in the manner 
prescribed the produce of the farm left after the payment of 
charges properly leviable on the farm ; 


Gi) The land shall be let out to villagers without distinction of caste or 
creed and in such manner that there will be no landlord, no tenant 
and no landless labourer ; 


Gii) It shall be the obligation of the State to finance the cultivation of the 
collective farms by the supply of water, draft animals, implements, 
manure, seeds, etc.; 


Gv) The State shall be entitled to— 
(a) to levy the following charges on the produce of the farm : 
G) a portion for land revenue ; 
Gi) a portion to pay the debenture-holders ; and 
(iii) a portion to pay for the use of capital goods supplied ; and 


(b) to prescribe penalties against tenants who break the conditions 
of tenancy or wilfully neglect to make the best use of the means 
of cultivation offered by the State or otherwise act prejudicially 
to the scheme of collective farming ; 


(10) The scheme shall be brought into operation as early as possible but 
in no case shall the period extend beyond the tenth year from the date of 
the Constitution coming into operation. 


398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


ARTICLE II—Section III 
PROVISIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF MINORITIES 
The Constitution of the United States of India shall provide : 
Clause 1 


(1) That the Executive—Union or State—shall be non-Parliamentary in 
Protection against the sense that it shall not be removable before the 


Communal Beca ve. term of the Legislature. 
(For explanation, see 


pages 412-15) 
(2) Members of the Executive if they are not members of the Legislature 
shall have the right to sit in the Legislature, speak, vote and answer questions. 


(3) The Prime Minister shall be elected by the whole House by single 
transferable vote. 


(4) The representatives of the different minorities in the Cabinet shall 
be elected by members of each minority community in the Legislature by 
single transferable vote. 


(5) The representatives of the majority community in the Executive shall 
be elected by the whole House by single transferable vote. 


(6) A member of the Cabinet may resign his post on a censure motion or 
otherwise but shall not be liable to be removed except on impeachment by 
the House on the ground of corruption or treason. 


Clause 2 
(1) That there shall be appointed an Officer to be called the Superintendent 
Protection against of Minority Affairs. 
social and official : 
tyranny. (2) His status shall be similar to that of the 
(For explanation, see Auditor-General appointed under section 166 of the 
page 416) Government of India Act of 1935 and removable in 


like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court, 


(3) It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to prepare an annual report 
on the treatment of minorities by the public, as well as by the Governments, 
Union and State and of any transgressions of safeguards or any miscarriage 
of justice due to communal bias by Governments or their Officers. 


(4) The Annual Report of the Superintendent shall be placed on the 
Table of the Legislatures—Union and State, and the Governments—Union 
and State, shall be bound to provide time for the discussion of the Report. 


Clause 3 


That Social Boycott, Promoting or Instigating a Social Boycott or 
Protection against Threatening a Social Boycott as defined below shall be 


social boycott. declared to be an offence : 
(For explanation, 


see pages 416-18) 


STATES AND MINORITIES 399 


G) Boycott Defined.—A person shall be deemed to boycott another who— 


(a) refuses to let or use or occupy any house or land, or to deal with, 
work for hire, or do business with another person, or to render to 
him or receive from him any service, or refuses to do any of the said 
things on the terms on which such things should commonly be done 
in the ordinary course of business, or 


(b) abstains from such social, professional or business relations as he 
would, having regard to such existing customs in the community 
which are not inconsistent with any fundamental right or other rights 
of citizenship declared in the Constitution, ordinarily maintain with 
such person, or 


(c) in any way injures, annoys or interferes with such other person in 
the exercise of his lawful rights. 


Gi) Offence of Boycotting.—Whoever, in consequence of any person having 
done any act which he was legally entitled to do or of his having omitted to 
do any act which he was legally entitled to omit to do, or with intent to cause 
any person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do or to omit to 
do any act which be is legally entitled to do, or with intent to cause harm 
to such person in body, mind, reputation or property, or in his business or 
means of living, boycotts such person or any person in whom such person is 
interested, shall be guilty of offence of boycotting. 


Provided that no offence shall be deemed to have been committed under 
this Section, if the Court is satisfied that the accused person has not acted 
at the instigation of or in collusion with any other person or in pursuance of 
any conspiracy or of any agreement or combination to boycott. 


Gii) Offence of Instigating or Promoting a Boycott— 
Whoever— 
(a) publicly makes or publishes or circulates a proposal for, or 


(b) makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or report with 
intent to, or which he has reason to believe to be likely to cause, or 


(c) in any other way instigates or promotes the boycotting of any person 
or class of persons, shall be guilty of the offence of instigating or 
promoting a boycott. 


Explanation—An offence under this clause shall be deemed to have been 
committed although the person affected or likely to be affected by any action 
of the nature referred to herein is not designated by name or class but only 
by his acting or abstaining from acting in some specified manner. 


(iv) Offence of Threatening a Boycott.—Whoever, in consequence of any 
person having done any act which he was legally entitled to do or of his 
having omitted to do any act which he was legally entitled to omit to do, 
or with intent to cause any person to do any act which he is not legally 
bound to do, or to omit to do any act which he is legally entitled to do, 


400 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


threatens to cause such person or any person in whom such person is 
interested, to be boycotted shall be guilty of the offence threatening a boycott. 


Exception.—It is not boycott— 
(i) to do any act in furtherance of a bona fide labour dispute ; 
Gi) to do any act in the ordinary course of business competition. 


(2) All these offences shall be deemed to be cognizable offences. The Union 
Legislature shall make laws prescribing punishment for these offences. 


Clause 4 


That the Power of the Central and Provincial Governments to make grants 
Power of Governments for any purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose 
to spend money for any js not one for which the Union or State Legislature 
purposes connected as the case may be may make laws, shall not be 


with the Government š 
of India including abridged or taken away. 


purposes beneficial to 
the Minorities. 

(For explanation, 

see page 418) 


STATES AND MINORITIES 401 


ARTICLE II—Section IV 
SAFEGUARDS FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES 
PART I—GUARANTEES 


The Constitution of the United States of India shall guarantee to the Scheduled 


Right to Castes the following Rights: 
Representation in 

the Legislature. 

(For explanation, 

see pages 419-24) 


Clause 1 
Right to Representation in the Legislature 
(1) Quantum of Representation.—(a) (i) The Scheduled Castes shall have 
minimum representation in the Legislature—Union and State—and if there be 
a group Constitution then in the group Legislature equal to the ratio of their 


population to the total population. Provided that no other minority is allowed to 
claim more representation than what is due to it on the basis of its population. 


(ii) The Scheduled Castes of Sind and N.W.F. Provinces shall be given their 
due share of representation. 


(iii) Weightage where it becomes necessary to reduce a huge communal 
majority to reasonable dimensions shall come out of the share of the majority. 
In no case shall it be at the cost of another minority community. 


(iv) Weightage carved out from the share of majority shall not be assigned 
to one community only. But the same shall be divided among all minority 
communities equally or in inverse proportion to their— 

(1) economic position, 
(2) social status, and 
(3) educational advance. 
(6) There should be no representation to special interests. But if the same 


is allowed it must be taken out of the share of representation given to that 
community to which the special interest belongs. 


(2) Method of Election— 
(A) For Legislative Bodies 
(a) The system of election introduced by the Poona Pact shall be abolished. 
(6) In its place, the system of Separate Electorates shall be substituted. 
(c) Franchise shall be adult franchise. 
(d) The system of voting shall be cumulative. 
(B) For Local Bodies 


The principles for determining the quantum of representation and the Method 
of election for Municipalities and Local Boards shall be the same as that adopted 
for the Union and State Legislatures. 


402 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Clause 2 
(1) The Scheduled Castes shall have minimum representation in the 
Right to Executive—Union and State—and if there be a group 
Representation in the Constitution then in the group Executive equal to the 
Executive. ratio of their population to the total population. Provided 
(For explanation, see that no minority community is allowed to claim more 
pages 424-25) than its population ratio. 


(2) Weightage where it becomes necessary to reduce a huge majority to 
reasonable dimensions shall come out of the share of the majority community. 
In no case shall it be at the cost of another minority community, 


(3) Weightage carved out from the share of the majority shall not be 
assigned to one community only But the same shall be divided among all 
minorities equally or in inverse proportion to : 

(i) their economic position. 
(ii) social status, and 
(iii) educational advance. 


Clause 3 
Right to Representation in the Services 


(a) The quantum of representation of the Scheduled Castes in the Services 
Right to Representation shall be as follows : 
in services. 
(For explanation, see 
page 425) 
(i) In the Union Services.—In proportion to the ratio of their population 
to the total population in India or British India as the case may be. 
Gi) In the State and Group Services.—In proportion to their population 
in the State or Union. 
Gii) In the Municipal and Local Board Services.—In proportion to their 
population in the Municipal and Local Boards areas : 


Provided that no minority community is allowed to claim more than 
its population ratio of representation in the Services. 


(b) Their right to representation in the Services shall not be curtailed 
except by conditions relating to minimum qualifications, education, age, etc. 


(c) The conditions prescribed for entry in Services shall not abrogate any 
of the concessions given to the Scheduled Castes by the Government of India 
in their Resolutions of 1942 and 1945. 


(d) The method of filling up the vacancies shall conform to the rules 
prescribed in the Government of India Resolutions of 1942 and 1946. 


(e) On every Public Services Commission or a Committee constituted for 
filling vacancies, the Scheduled Castes shall have at least one representative. 


PART II—SPEcIAL RESPONSIBILITIES 


That the United States of India shall undertake the following special 
Provisions for responsibilities for the betterment of the Scheduled Castes : 
Higher Education 
(For explanation, 
see page 425) 


STATES AND MINORITIES 403 


Clause 1 


(1) Governments—Union and State—shall be required to assume financial 
responsibility for the higher education of the Scheduled Castes and shall 
be required to make adequate provisions in their budgets. Such Provisions 
shall form the first charge on the Education Budget of the Union and State 
Government. 


(2) The responsibility for finding money for secondary and college education 
of the Scheduled Castes in India shall be upon the State Governments and 
the different States shall make a provision in their annual budgets for the 
said purpose in proportion to the population of the Scheduled Castes to the 
total budget of the States. 


(3) The responsibility for finding money for foreign education of the 
Scheduled Castes shall be the responsibility of the Union Government and 
the Union Government shall make a provision of rupees 10 lakhs per year 
in its annual budget in that behalf. 


(4) These special grants shall be without prejudice to the right of 
the Scheduled Castes to share in the expenditure incurred by the State 
Government for the advancement of primary education for the people of 
the State. 


Clause 2 
1. The following provision shall be made in the Constitution of the Union 
Provision for New Government : 
Settlements. 


(For explanation. 
see pages 425-26) 
G) There shall be a Settlement Commission under the new Constitution to 
hold uncultivated lands belonging to the State in trust for Settlement 
of the Scheduled Castes in separate villages. 


Gi) The Union Government shall set apart annually a fund of Rs. 5 
crores for the purpose of promoting the scheme of settlement. 


(ii) That the Commission shall have the power to purchase any land 
offered for sale and use it for the said purpose. 


2. The Union Government shall from time to time pass such legislation 
as may be necessary for the Commission to carry out its functions. 


PART III—SANCTION FOR SAFEGUARDS AND AMENDMENT OF SAFEGUARDS 
Clause 1 
The Constitution of the United States shall provide that— 


The United States of India undertakes to give the safeguards contained 
Sanction for in Article II Section IV a place in the Constitution and 


safeguards. — make them a part of the Constitutional Law of India. 
(For explanation, 


see pages 426-28) 


404 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Clause 2 


The provisions for the Scheduled Castes shall not be altered, amended or 


Mode of Amendment abrogated except in the following manner : 
of safeguards. 


(For explanation, see 
page 428). 

Any amendment or abrogation of Section IV of Article II or any part thereof 
relating to the Scheduled Castes shall only be made bya Resolution passed in the 
manner prescribed below by the more Popular Chamber of the Union Legislature : 


G) Any proposal for amendment or abrogation shall be initiated in the form 
of a Resolution in the more Popular Chamber of the Union Legislature. 


Gi) No such Resolution shall be moved— 


(a) unless 25 years have elapsed after the Constitution has come 
into operation and has been worked ; and 


(b) unless six months' notice has been given to the House by the 
mover of his intention to move such a Resolution. 


Gii) On the passing of such a Resolution, the Legislature shall be dissolved and 
a new election held. 


Gv) The original Resolution in the form in which it was passed by the previous 
Legislature shall be moved afresh in the same House of the newly elected 
Union Legislature. 


(v) The Resolution shall not be deemed to have been carried unless it is 
passed by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the House and also 
two-thirds of members of the Scheduled Castes who have been returned 
through separate electorates. 


PART IV—PROTECTION OF SCHEDULED CASTES IN THE INDIAN STATES 


The Constitution of the United States shall provide that 
Safeguards for er ; : í 
Scheduled Castes in the admission of the Indian States into the Union shall be 


Indian States. subject to the following condition : 
(For explanation, 


see page 428) 

“All provisions relating to the Scheduled Castes contained in Section IV of Article II 
of the Constitution of the United States of India shall be extended to the Scheduled 
Castes in the Indian States. Such a provision in the Constitution of an Indian States 
shall be a condition precedent for its admission into the Union.” 


PART V—INTERPRETATION 


I. For the purposes of Article II the Scheduled Castes, as defined in the Government 


ae En Castes ofIndia Scheduled Caste Order, 1936, issued under the Government 
(For explanation, of India Act, 1935, shall be deemed to be a minority. 


see page 428) 

II. For the purposes of Article II a Caste which is a Scheduled Caste in one 
Scheduled Castes and State shall be treated as Scheduled Caste in all States of 
change of Domicile. he Uni 
(For explanation, see the Union. 
page 428) 


STATES AND MINORITIES 405 


Appendix I 
EXPLANATORY NOTES 
Preamble 


The Preamble gives constitutional shape and form to the Resolution on 
objectives passed by the Constituent Assembly on Wednesday the 22nd 
January 1947. 


ARTICLE I—Section I 
Clauses 1 to 4 


The admission of the six hundred and odd Indian States into the Union 
raises many difficult questions. The most difficult of them is the one which 
relates to their admission into the Union. Every Indian State is claiming 
to be a Sovereign State and is demanding to be admitted into the Union 
in its own right. The Indian States fall into different classes from the view 
of size, population, revenue and resources. It is obvious that every State 
admitted into the Union as a State must have the capacity to bear the 
burden of modern administration to maintain peace within its own borders 
and to possess the resources necessary for the economic advancement of its 
people. Otherwise, the United States of India is lkely to be encumbered 
with a large number of weak States which, instead of being a help to the 
Central Government, will be a burden upon it. The Union Government with 
such small and weak States as its units will never be able to pull its full 
weight in an emergency. It is therefore obvious that it would be a grave 
danger to the future safety of India if every Indian State were admitted into 
the Union without any scrutiny of its capacity to bear the burden of modern 
administration and maintaining internal peace. To avoid this danger, the 
Article proceeds to divide the Indian States into two classes: (1) Qualified 
Indian States and (2) Unqualified Indian States. It proposes that a list of 
Qualified Indian States should be drawn up as a first step in the procedure 
to be followed for the admission of the Indian States into the Union. A 
Qualified Indian State will be admitted into the Union on an application 
for admission and the fulfilment of the provisions of the Enabling Act which 
the Union Legislature is authorized to pass for the purpose of requiring 
an appropriate form of internal Government set up within the State which 
will be in consonance to the principles underlying the Constitution of the 
United States of India. The territory in the occupation of the Unqualified 
Indian States will be treated as the territory of the United States of India 
and will be reorganized into States of suitable sizes by the United States of 
India. In the meantime those who are rulers of the territory shall continue to 
administer the territory under the supervision of the United States of India. 
The Act also declares that the Indian territory whether in the occupation 
of British Indian Provinces or of the Indian States is one and integral and 
will be so even though an Indian State has not entered into the Union. 


406 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Clause 4 provides that once a State is admitted into the Union, its 
integrity shall be maintained and it shall not be liable to sub-division except 
in accordance with the provisions contained in the clause. 


ARTICLE I—Section II 
Clauses 1 and 2 


Clause 1 permits the United States of India to incorporate States which are 
independent but which are on the border and which desire to join the Union. 


Clause 2 enables the United States of India to acquire territory and to 
incorporate it or to treat it as separate territory. 


ARTICLE II—Section I 


The inclusion of Fundamental Rights in the Constitution requires no 
justification. The necessity of Fundamental Rights is recognized in all 
Constitutions old and new. The Fundamental Rights included in the Article are 
borrowed from the Constitutions of various countries particularly from those 
wherein the conditions are more or less analogous to those existing in India. 


ARTICLE II—Section II 
Clause 1 


Rights are real only if they are accompanied by remedies. It is no use 
giving rights if the aggrieved person has no legal remedy to which he can 
resort when his rights are invaded. Consequently when the Constitution 
guarantees rights it also becomes necessary to make provision to prevent the 
Legislature and the Executive from overriding them. This function has been 
usually assigned to the judiciary and the Courts have been made the special 
guardians of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The clause does no 
more than this. The clause proposes to give protection to the citizen against 
Executive tyranny by investing the Judiciary with certain powers of inquisition 
against the abuse of authority by the Executive. This power takes the form 
of issue of writs. The High Courts in India possess these powers under the 
Government of India and under their letters patent. These powers are however 
subject to two limitations. In the first place the powers given by the Letters 
Patent are available only to the High Courts in the Presidency Towns and 
not to all. Secondly these powers are subject to laws made by the Indian 
Legislature. Thirdly the powers given by the Government of India Act, 1935 
are restricted and may prove insufficient for the protection of the aggrieved 
person. The clause achieves two objectives : (1) to give the fullest power to 
the Judiciary to issue what under the English Law are called Prerogative 
Writs and (2) to prevent the Legislature from curtailing these powers in any 
manner whatsoever. 


Clause 2 


It is difficult to expect that in a country like India where most persons 
are communally minded those in authority will give equal treatment to those 


STATES AND MINORITIES 407 


who do not belong to their community. Unequal treatment has been the 
inescapable fate of the Untouchables in India. The following extract from the 
Proceedings of the Board of Revenue of the Government of Madras No. 723 
dated 5th November, 1892. illustrates the sort of unequal treatment which 
1s meted out to the Scheduled Castes by Hindu Officers. Says the report : 


“134. There are forms of oppression only hitherto hinted at which must be at 
least cursorily mentioned. To punish disobedience of Pariahs, their masters— 


(a) bring false cases in the village Court or in the criminal Courts; 


(b) obtain, on application, from Government, waste lands lying all round 
the paracheri, so as to impound the Pariahs’ cattle or obstruct the 
way to their temple; 


(c) have mirasi names fraudulently entered in the Government account 
against the paracheri; 


(d) pull down the huts and destroy the growth in the backyards; 
(e) deny occupancy right in immemorial sub-tenancies; 


(f) forcibly cut the Pariahs’ crops, and on being resisted charge them with 
theft and rioting; 


(g) under misrepresentations, get them to execute documents by which 
they are afterwards ruined; 


(h) cut off the flow of water from their fields; 


(ü without legal notice, have the property of sub-tenants attached for the 
landlords’ arrears of revenue.” 


“135. It will be said there are civil and criminal Courts for the redress of 
any of these injuries. There are the Courts indeed; but India does not breed 
village Hampdens. One must have courage to go to the Courts; money to 
employ legal knowledge, and meet legal expenses; and means to live during 
the case and the appeals. Further most cases depend upon the decision of the 
first Court; and these Courts are presided over by officials who are sometimes 
corrupt and who generally for other reasons, sympathize with the wealthy 
and landed classes to which they belong.”. 


“136. The influence of these classes with the official world can hardly be 
exaggerated. It is extreme with natives and great even with Europeans. Every 
office, from the highest to the lowest, is stocked with their representatives, 
and there is no proposal affecting their interests but they can bring a score 
of influence to bear upon it in its course from inception to execution.” 


The Punjab Land Alienation Act is another illustration of unequal treatment 
of the Untouchables by the Legislature. 


Many other minority communities may be suffering from similar treatment 
at the hands of the majority community. It is therefore necessary to have 


408 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


such a provision to ensure that all citizens shall have equal benefit of Laws, 
Rules and Regulations. 


The provisions of Clause 2 are borrowed from Civil Rights Protection Act, 
1866, and of March 1st, 1875 passed by the Congress of the United States 
of America to protect the Negroes against unequal treatment. 


Clause 3 


Discrimination is another menace which must be guarded against if the 
Fundamental Rights are to be real rights. In a country like India where 
it is possible for discrimination to be practised on a vast scale and in a 
relentless manner Fundamental Rights can have no meaning. The Remedy 
follows the lines adopted in the Bill which was recently introduced in the 
Congress of the U.S.A. the aim of which is to prevent discrimination being 
practised against the Negroes. 


Clause 4 


The main purpose behind the clause is to put an obligation on the State 
to plan the economic life of the people on lines which would lead to highest 
point of productivity without closing every avenue to private enterprise, 
and also provide for the equitable distribution of wealth. The plan set out 
in the clause proposes State ownership in agriculture with a collectivised 
method of cultivation and a modified form of State Socialism in the field 
of industry. It places squarely on the shoulders of the State the obligation 
to supply capital necessary for agriculture as well as for industry. Without 
the supply of capital by the State neither land nor industry can be made to 
yield better results. It also proposes to nationalize insurance with a double 
objective. Nationalized Insurance gives the individual greater security than 
a private Insurance Firm does inasmuch as it pledges the resources of the 
State as a security for the ultimate payment of his insurance money. It also 
gives the State the resources necessary for financing its economic planning 
in the absence of which it would have to resort to borrowing from the money 
market at a high rate of interest. State Socialism is essential for the rapid 
industrialization of India. Private enterprize cannot do it and if it did it 
would produce those inequalities of wealth which private capitalism has 
produced in Europe and which should be a warning to Indians. Consolidation 
of Holdings and Tenancy Legislation are worse than useless. They cannot 
bring about prosperity in agriculture. Neither Consolidation nor Tenancy 
Legislation can be of any help to the 60 millions of Untouchables who 
are just landless labourers. Neither Consolidation nor Tenancy Legislation 
can solve their problem. Only collective farms on the lines set out in the 
proposal can help them. There is no expropriation of the interests concerned. 
Consequently there ought to be no objection to the proposal on that account. 


The plan has two special features. One is that it proposes State Socialism 
in important fields of economic life. The second special feature of the 


STATES AND MINORITIES 409 


plan is that it does not leave the establishment of State Socialism to the 
will of the Legislature. It establishes State Socialism by the Law of the 
Constitution and thus makes it unalterable by any act of the Legislature 
and the Executive. 


Students of Constitutional Law will at once raise a protest. They are 
sure to ask : Does not the proposal go beyond the scope of the usual type 
of Fundamental Rights ? My answer is that it does not. If it appears to go 
beyond it is only because the conception of Fundamental Rights on which 
such criticism is based is a narrow conception. One may go further and say 
that even from the narrow conception of the scope of the Constitutional 
Law as comprising no more than Fundamental Rights the proposal can find 
ample justification. For what is the purpose of prescribing by law the shape 
and form of the economic structure of society ? The purpose is to protect 
the liberty of the individual from invasion by other individuals which is the 
object of enacting Fundamental Rights. The connection between individual 
liberty and the shape and form of the economic structure of society may not 
be apparent to everyone. None the less the connection between the two is 
real. It will be apparent if the following considerations are borne in mind. 


Political Democracy rests on four premises which may be set out in the 
following terms : 


G) The individual is an end in himself. 


Gi) That the individual has certain inalienable rights which must be 
guaranteed to him by the Constitution. 


Gii) That the individual shall not be required to relinquish any of his 
constitutional rights as a condition precedent to the receipt of a 
privilege. 


Gv) That the State shall not delegate powers to private persons to govern 
others. 


Anyone who studies the working of the system of social economy based 
on private enterprise and pursuit of personal gain will realize how it 
undermines, if it does not actually violate, the last two premises on which 
Democracy rests. How many have to relinquish their constitutional rights 
in order to gain their living ? How many have to subject themselves to be 
governed by private employers? 


Ask those who are unemployed whether what are called Fundamental 
Rights are of any value to them. If a person who is unemployed is offered 
a choice between a job of some sort, with some sort of wages, with no fixed 
hours of labour and with an interdict on joining a union and the exercise 
of his right to freedom of speech, association, religion, etc., can there be 
any doubt as to what his choice will be. How can it be otherwise ? The 
fear of starvation, the fear of losing a house, the fear of losing savings if 
any, the fear of being compelled to take children away from school, the fear 


410 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of having to be a burden on public charity, the fear of having to be burned 
or buried at public cost are factors too strong to permit a man to stand 
out for his Fundamental Rights. The unemployed are thus compelled to 
relinquish their Fundamental Rights for the sake of securing the privilege 
to work and to subsist. 


What about those who are employed? Constitutional Lawyers assume that 
the enactment of Fundamental Rights is enough to safeguard their liberty and 
that nothing more is called for. They argue that where the State refrains from 
intervention in private affairs—economic and social —the residue is liberty. 
What is necessary is to make the residue as large as possible and State 
intervention as small as possible. It is true that where the State refrains 
from intervention what remains is liberty. But this does not dispose of the 
matter. One more question remains to be answered. To whom and for whom 
is this liberty ? Obviously this liberty is liberty to the landlords to increase 
rents, for capitalists to increase hours of work and reduce rate of wages. This 
must be so. It cannot be otherwise. For in an economic system employing 
armies of workers, producing goods en masse at regular intervals some one 
must make rules so that workers will work and the wheels of industry run 
on. If the State does not do it the private employer will. Life otherwise will 
become impossible. In other words what is called liberty from the control 
of the State is another name for the dictatorship of the private employer. 


How to prevent such a thing happening ? How to protect the unemployed 
as well as the employed from being cheated out of their Fundamental 
Rights to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness ? The useful remedy 
adopted by Democratic countries is to limit the power of Government to 
impose arbitrary restraints in political domain and to invoke the ordinary 
power of the Legislature to restrain the more powerful individual from 
imposing arbitrary restraints on the less powerful in the economic field. 
The inadequacy may the futility of the plan has been well-established. The 
successful invocation by the less powerful of the authority of the Legislature 
is a doubtful proposition. Having regard to the fact that even under adult 
suffrage all Legislatures and Governments are controlled by the more 
powerful an appeal to the Legislature to intervene is a very precarious 
safeguard against the invasion of the liberty of the less powerful. The plan 
follows quite a different method. It seeks to limit not only the power of 
Government to impose arbitrary restraints but also of the more powerful 
individuals or to be more precise to eliminate the possibility of the more 
powerful having the power to impose arbitrary restraints on the less powerful 
by withdrawing from the control he has over the economic life of people. 
There cannot be slightest doubt that of the two remedies against the invasion 
by the more powerful of the rights and liberties of the less powerful the 
one contained in the proposal is undoubtedly the more effective. Considered 


STATES AND MINORITIES 411 


in the light of these observations the proposal is essentially a proposal for 
safeguarding the liberty of the individual. No Constitutional Lawyer can 
therefore object to it on the ground that it goes beyond the usual scope of 
Constitutional Law. 


So far as the plan has been considered purely as a means of safeguarding 
individual liberty. But there is also another aspect of the plan which is worthy 
of note. It is an attempt to establish State Socialism without abrogating 
Parliamentary Democracy and without leaving its establishment to the will 
of a Parliamentary Democracy. Critics of State Socialism even its friends 
are bound to ask why make it a part of the Constitutional Law of the land? 
Why not leave it to the Legislature to bring it into being by the ordinary 
process of Law. The reason why it cannot be left to the ordinary Law is not 
difficult to understand. One essential condition for the success of a planned 
economy is that it must not be liable to suspension or abadonment. It must be 
permanent. The question is how this permanence can be secured. Obviously 
it cannot be secured under the form of Government called Parliamentary 
Democracy under the system of Parliamentary Democracy, the policy of the 
Legislature and of the Executive is the policy of the majority for the time 
being. Under the system of Parliamentary Democracy the majority in one 
election may be in favour of State Socialism in Industry and in Agriculture. 
At the next election the majority may be against it. The anti-State Socialism 
majority will use its Law-making power to undoing the work of the pro-State 
Socialism majority and the pro-State Socialism majority will use its Law- 
making power to doing over again what has been undone by their opponents. 
Those who want the economic structure of society to be modelled on State 
Socialism must realize that they cannot leave the fulfilment of so fundamental 
a purpose to the exigencies of ordinary Law which simple majorities—whose 
political fortunes are never determined by rational causes—have a right 
to make and unmake. For these reasons Political Democracy seems to be 
unsuited for the purpose. 


What is the alternative ? The alternative is Dictatorship. There is no 
doubt that Dictatorship can give the permanence which State Socialism 
requires as an essential condition for its fructification. There is however 
one fact against Dictatorship which must be faced. Those who believe 
in individual freedom strongly object to Dictatorship and insists upon 
Parliamentary Democracy as a proper form of Government for a Free 
Society. For they feel that freedom of the individual is possible only under 
Parliamentary Democracy and not under Dictatorship. Consequently those 
who want freedom are not prepared to give up Parliamentary Democracy as 
a form of Government. However, much they may be anxious to have State 
Socialism they will not be ready to exchange Parliamentary Democracy for 
Dictatorship eventhough the gain by such an exchange is the achievement 
of State Socialism. The problem therefore is to have State Socialism 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


without Dictatorship, to have State Socialism with Parliamentary 
Democracy. The way out seems to be to retain Parliamentary Democracy 
and to prescribe State Socialism by the Law of the Constitution so that it 
will be beyond the reach of a Parliamentary majority to suspend, amend 
or abrogate it. It is only by this that one can achieve the triple object, 
namely, to establish socialism, retain Parliamentary Democracy and avoid 
Dictatorship. 


The proposal marks a departure from the existing Constitutions whose 
aim is merely to prescribe the form of the political structure of society 
leaving the economic structure untouched. The result is that the political 
structure is completely set at naught by the forces which emerge from 
the economic structure which is at variance with the political structure. 
Those who want socialism with Parliamentary Democracy and without 
Dictatorship should welcome the proposal. 


The soul of Democracy is the doctrine of one man, one value. Unfortunately, 
Democracy has attempted to give effect to this doctrine only so far as the 
political structure is concerned by adopting the rule of one man, one vote 
which is supposed to translate into fact the doctrine of one man, one 
value. It has left the economic structure to take the shape given to it 
by those who are in a position to mould it. This has happened because 
Constitutional Laywers have been dominated by the antiquated conception 
that all that is necessary for a perfect Constitution for Democracy was to 
frame a Constitutional Law which would make Government responsible 
to the people and to prevent tyranny of the people by the Government. 
Consequently, almost all Laws of Constitution which relate to countries 
which are called Democratic stop with Adult Suffrage and Fundamental 
Right. They have never advanced to the conception that the Constitutional 
Law of Democracy must go beyond Adult Suffrage and Fundamental Rights. 
In other words, old time Constitutional Lawyers believed that the scope 
and function of Constitutional Law was to prescribe the shape and form of 
the political structure of society. They never realized that it was equally 
essential to prescribe the shape and form of the economic structure of 
society, if Democracy is to live up to its principle of one man, one value. 
Time has come to take a bold step and define both the economic structure 
as well as the political structure of society by the Law of the Constitution. 
All countries like India which are late-comers in the field of Constitution- 
making should not copy the faults of other countries. They should profit 
by the experience of their predecessors. 


ARTICLE II—Section III 
Clause 1 


In the Government of India Acts of 1919 and 1935 the model that was 
adopted for framing the structure of the Executive in the Provinces and 


STATES AND MINORITIES 413 


in the Centre was of the British type or what is called by Constitutional 
Lawyers Parliamentary Executive as opposed to the American type of 
Executive which in contradistinction of the British type is called Non- 
Parliamentary Executive. The question is whether the pattern for the 
Executive adopted in the two Acts should be retained or whether it should 
be abandoned and if so what model should be adopted in its place. Before 
giving final opinion on this issue it would be desirable to set out the special 
features of the British type of the Executive and the consequences that are 
likely to follow if it was applied to India. 


The following may be taken to be the special features of British or the 
Parliamentary Executive : 


(1) It gives a party which has secured a majority in the Legislature the 
right to form a Government. 


(2) It gives the majority party the right to exclude from Government 
persons who do not belong to the Party. 


(3) The Government so formed continues in office only so long as it can 
command a majority in the Legislature. If it ceases to command a 
majority it is bound to resign either in favour of another Government 
formed out of the existing Legislature or in favour of a new 
Government formed out of a newly elected Legislature. 


As to the consequences that would follow if the British System was applied 
to India the situation can be summed up in the following proposition : 


(1) The British System of Government by a Cabinet of the majority 
party rests on the premise that the majority is a political majority. 
In India the majority is a communal majority. No matter what social 
and political programme it may have the majority will retain its 
character of being a communal majority. Nothing can alter this fact. 
Given this fact it is clear that if the British System was copied it 
would result in permanently vesting Executive power in a Communal 
majority. 


(2) The British System of Government imposes no obligation upon the 
Majority Party to include in its cabinet the representatives of Minority 
Party. If applied to India the consequence will be obvious. It would 
make the majority community a governing class and the minority 
community a subject race. It would mean that a communal majority 
will be free to run the administration according to its own ideas of 
what is good for the minorities. Such a state of affairs could not be 
called democracy. It will have to be called imperialism. 


In the light of these consequences it is obvious that the introduction of British 
type of the Executive will be full of menace to the life, liberty and pursuit of 
happiness of the minorities in general and of the Untouchables in particular. 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The problem of the Untouchables is a formidable one for the Untouchables 
to face. The Untouchables are surrounded by a vast mass of Hindu population 
which is hostile to them and which is not ashamed of committing any 
inequity or atrocity against them. For a redress of these wrongs which 
are matters of daily occurrence, the Untouchables have to call im the 
aid of the administration. What is the character and composition of this 
administration ? To be brief, the administration in India is completely 
in the bauds of the Hindus. It is their monopoly. From top to bottom it 
is controlled by them. There is no Department which is not dominated 
by them. They dominate the Police, the Magistracy and the Revenue 
Services, indeed any and every branch of the administration. The next 
point to remember is that the Hindus in the administration have the same 
positive anti-social and inimical attitude to the Untouchables which the 
Hindus outside the administration have. Their one aim is to discriminate 
against the Untouchables and to deny and deprive them not only of the 
benefits of Law, but also of the protection of the Law against tyranny and 
oppression. The result is that the Untouchables are placed between the 
Hindu population and the Hindu-ridden administration, the one committing 
wrong against them and the other protecting the wrong-doer, instead of 
helping the victims. 


Against this background, what can Swaraj mean to the Untouchables ? It 
can only mean one thing, namely, that while today it is only the administration 
that is in the hands of the Hindus, under Swaraj the Legislature and 
Executive will also be in the hands of the Hindus. It goes without, saying 
that such a Swaraj would aggravate the sufferings of the Untouchables. 
For, in addition to an hostile administration, there will be an indifferent 
Legislature and a callous Executive. The result will be that the administration 
unbridled in venom and in harshness, uncontrolled by the Legislature and 
the Executive, may pursue its policy of inequity towards the Untouchables 
without any curb. To put it differently, under Swaraj the Untouchables 
will have no way of escape from the destiny of degradation which Hindus 
and Hinduism have fixed for them. 


These are special considerations against the introduction of the British 
System of Executive which have their origin in the interests of the minorities 
and the Scheduled Castes. But there is one general consideration which 
can be urged against the introduction of the British Cabinet System in 
India. The British Cabinet System has undoubtedly given the British 
people a very stable system of Government. Question is will it produce 
a stable Government in India ? The chances are very slender. In view of 
the clashes of castes and creeds there is bound to be a plethora of parties 
and groups in the Legislature in India. If this happens it is possible, nay 
certain, that under the system of Parliamentary Executive like the one that 
prevails in England under which the Executive is bound to resign upon an 


STATES AND MINORITIES 415 


adverse vote in the Legislature, India may suffer from instability of the 
Executive. For 1t is the easiest thing for groups to align and realign themselves 
at frequent intervals and for petty purposes and bring about the downfall 
of Government. The present solidarity of what are called the Major Parties 
cannot be expected to continue. Indeed as soon as the Problem of the British 
in India is solved the cement that holds these parties together will fall away. 
Constant overthrow of Government is nothing short of anarchy. The present 
Constitution has in it Section 93 which provides a remedy against it. But 
Section 93 would be out of place in the Constitution of a free India, Some 
substitute must therefore be found for Section 93. 


Taking all these considerations together there is no doubt that the British 
type of the Executive is entirely unsuited to India. 


The form of the Executive proposed in the clause is intended to serve 
the following purposes : 


G) To prevent the majority from forming a Government without giving 
any opportunity to the minorities to have a say in the matter. 


Gi) To prevent the majority from having exclusive control over 
administration and thereby make the tyranny of the minority by 
the majority possible. 


Gii) To prevent the inclusion by the Majority Party in the Executive 
representatives of the minorities who have no confidence of the 
minorities. 


(iv) To provide a stable Executive necessary for good and efficient 
administration. 


The clause takes the American form of Executive as a model and adapts it 
to Indian conditions especially to the requirements of minorities. The form of 
the Executive suggested in the proposal cannot be objected to on the ground 
that it is against the principle of responsible government. Indians who are 
used to the English form of Executive forget that this is not the only form of 
democratic and responsible Government. The American form of Executive is an 
equally good type of democratic and responsible form of Government. There is 
also nothing objectionable in the proposal that a person should not be qualified 
to become a Minister merely because he is elected to the Legislature. The 
principle that a member of the Legislature before he is made a Minister should 
be chosen by his constituents was fully recognized by the British Constitution 
for over hundred years. A member of Parliament who was appointed a 
Minister had to submit himself for election before taking up his appointment. 
It was only lately given up. There ought therefore to be no objection to 
it on the ground that the proposals are not compatible with responsible 
Governments. The actual proposal is an improved edition of the American 
form of Government, for the reason that under it members of the Executive 
can sit in the Legislature and have a right to speak and answer questions. 


416 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Clause 2 


The proposal cannot be controversial. The best remedy against tyranny 
and oppression by a majority against the minority is inquiry, publicity and 
discussion. This is what the safeguard provides for. A similar proposal 
was also recommended by the Sapru Committee. 


Clause 3 


Social boycott is always held over the heads of the Untouchables by 
the Caste Hindus as a sword of Democles. Only the Untouchables know 
what a terrible weapon it is in the hands of the Hindus. Its effects and 
forms are well described in the Report made by a Committee appointed 
by the Government of Bombay in 1928 to investigate the grievances of 
the Depressed Classes and from which the following extracts are made. 
It illuminates the situation in a manner so simple that everybody can 
understand what tyranny the Hindus are able to practise upon the 
Untouchables. The Committee said: 


“Although we have recommended various remedies to secure to the 
Depressed Classes their rights to all public utilities we fear that there will 
be difficulties in the way of their exercising them for a long time to come. 
The first difficulty is the fear of open violence against them by the orthodox 
classes. It must be noted that the Depressed Classes form a small minority 
in every village, oppose to which is a great majority of the orthodox who are 
bent on protecting their interests and dignity from any supposed invasion by 
the Depressed Classes at any cost. The danger of prosecution by the Police 
has put a limitation upon the use of violence by the orthodox classes and 
consequently such cases are rare. 


The second difficulty arises from the economic position in which the 
Depressed Classes are found today. The Depressed Classes have no economic 
independence in most parts of the Presidency. Some cultivate the lands of 
the orthodox classes as their tenants at will. Others live on their earnings as 
farm labourers employed by the orthodox classes and the rest subsist on the 
food or grain given to them by the orthodox classes in lieu of service rendered 
to them as village servants. We have heard of numerous instances where the 
orthodox classes have used their economic power as a weapon against those 
Depressed Classes in their villages, when the latter have dared to exercise their 
rights, and have evicted them from their land, and stopped their employment 
and discontinued their remuneration as village servants. This boycott is 
often planned on such an extensive scale as to include the prevention of the 
Depressed Classes from using the commonly used paths and the stoppage of 
sale of the necessaries of life by the village Bania. According to the evidence, 


STATES AND MINORITIES 417 


sometimes small causes suffice for the proclamation of a social boycott against 
the Depressed Classes. Frequently it follows on the exercise by the Depressed 
Classes of their right to use the common well, but cases have been by no 
mean rare where a stringent boycott has been proclaimed simply because 
a Depressed Class man has put on the sacred thread, has bought a piece 
of land, has put on good clothes or ornaments, or has carried a marriage 
procession with a bridegroom on the horse through the public street”. 


This was said in 1928. Lest it should be regarded as a phase which has 
now ended I reproduce below a copy of a petition by the Untouchables 
of the village Kheri Jessore in the Punjab addressed to the Deputy 
Commissioner of the Rohtak District in February 1947 and a copy of 
which was sent to me. It reads as follows : 


“From 

The Scheduled Caste People (Chamars), 

Village Kheri Jessore, Tehsil and District Rohtak. 
To 

The Deputy Commissioner, 

Rohtak District, Rohtak. 

Sir, 


We, the following Scheduled Caste (Chamars) of the Village Kheri Jessore, 
beg to invite your kind attention to the hard plight, we are put to, due to 
the undue pressure and merciless treatment by the Caste Hindu Jats of 
this village. 


It was about four months back that the Jats of the village assembled 
in the Chopal and told us to work in the fields on a wage in kind of one 
bundle of crops, containing only about one seer of grains per day per man 
instead of food at both times and a load of crops, and annas 8 in addition 
which we used to get before above announcement was made. As it was 
too little and insufficient to meet both ends, we refused to go to work. At 
this they were enraged and declared a Social Boycott on us. They made a 
rule that our cattle would not be allowed to graze in the jungle unless we 
would agree to pay a tax not leviable under Government for the animals, 
which they call as “Poochhi” They even do not allow our cattle to drink 
water in the village pool and have prevented the sweepers from cleaning 
the streets where we live so that heaps of dust and dirt are lying there 
which may cause some disease if left unattended to. We are forced to lead 
a shameful life and they are always ready to beat us and to tear down our 
honour by behaving indecently towards our wives, sisters and daughters. 
We are experiencing a lot of trouble of the worst type. While going to the 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


school, the children were even beaten severely and in a merciless 
manner. 


We submitted an application detailing the above facts to yourself but we are 
sorry that no action has been taken as yet. 


It is also for your kind consideration that the Inspector of Police and Tehsildar 
of Rohtak, whom we approached in this connection, made a careless investigation 
and in our opinion, no attention was paid to redress the difficulties of the poor 
and innocent persons. 


We, therefore, request your good self to consider over the matter and make 
some arrangement to stop the merciless treatment and threats which the Jats 
give us in different ways. We have no other approach except to knock at your 
kind door and hope your honour will take immediate steps to enable us to lead 
an honourable and peaceful life which is humanity’s birth-right. 


We beg to remain, 
Sir, 
Your most obedient servants, 


Scheduled Caste People 
(Chamars), 


of Village Kheri Jessore, 
Tehsil and District Rohtak. 
Thumb Impressions. 


* * * * * 


Copy forwarded to the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 


Western Court, New Delhi. 
Received on 1st February 1947.” 


This shows that what was true in 1928 is true even today. What is true 
of Bombay is true of the whole of India. For evidence of the general use of 
boycott by the Hindus against the Untouchables one has only to refer to 
the events that occurred all over India in the last elections to the Provincial 
Legislatures. Only when boycott is made criminal will the Untouchables be 
free from being the slaves of the Hindus. 


The weapon of boycott is nowadays used against other communities 
besides the Scheduled Castes. It is therefore in the interests of all minor 
communities to have this protection. 


The provisions relating to boycott are taken bodily from the Burma Anti- 
Boycott Act, 1922. 


Clause 4 


Such a provision already exists in Section 150 of the Government of India 
Act, 1935. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 419 


ARTICLE II—Section IV 
PART I—CLAUSE I 


There is nothing new in this clause. The right to representation in the 
Legislature is conceded by the Poona Pact. The only points that require to 
be reconsidered relate to (1) Quantum of Representation, (2) Weightage and 
(3) The System of Electorates. 


(1) Quantum 


The quantum of representation allowed to the Scheduled Castes by the 
Poona Pact is set out in Clause I of the Pact. The proportion set out in 
the Pact was fixed out of the balance of seats which remained after (i) the 
share of the other communities had been taken out; (ii) after weightage to 
other communities had been allotted, and (iii) after seats had been allocated 
to special interests. This allotment of seats to the Scheduled Castes has 
resulted in great injustice. The loss due to seats taken out as weightage 
and seats given to special interests ought not to have been thrown upon 
the Scheduled Castes. The allotment of those seats had already been made 
by the Communal Award long before the Poona Pact. It was therefore not 
possible then to rectify this injustice. 


(2) Weightage 


There is another injustice from which the Scheduled Castes have been 
suffering. It relates to their right to a share in weightage. 


As one can see the right to weightage has become a matter of double 
controversy. One controversy is between the majority and the minorities, 
the other is a matter of controversy between the different minorities. 


The first controversy relates to the principle of weightage. The majority 
insists that the minority has no right to representation in excess of the ratio 
of its population to the total population. Why this rule is insisted upon by 
the majority it is difficult to understand. Is it because the majority wants 
to establish its own claim to population ratio so that it may always remain 
as a majority and act as a majority ? Or is it because of the fact that a 
minority no matter how much weightage was given to it must remain a 
minority and cannot alter the fact that the majority will always be able 
to impose its will upon it. The first ground leads to a complete negation 
of the basic conception of majority rule which if rightly understood means 
nothing more than a decision of the majority to which the minority has 
reconciled itself. This cannot be the intention of the majority. One must 
put a more charitable construction and assume that the argument on which 
the contention of the majority rests is the second and not the first. That 
a minority even with weightage will remain a minority has to be accepted 
in view of the insistence of a Communal Majority to remain a majority 


420 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and to claim the privileges of a political majority which it is not. But 
surely there is a difference between a defeat which is a complete rout and 
a defeat which is almost victory though not a victory. Cricketers know what 
difference there is between the defeat of a team by a few runs, a defeat by 
a few wickets and a defeat by one whole innings. The defeat by one whole 
innings is a complete frustration which a defeat by a few runs is not. Such 
a frustration when it comes about in the political Hfe of a minority depresses 
and demoralizes and crushes the spirit of the minority. This must be avoided 
at any price. Looked at from this point of view there is no doubt that the 
rule of population—ratio—representation insisted upon by the majority 
is wrong. What a minority needs is not more representation but effective 
representation. 


And what is effective representation? Obviously the effectiveness of 
representation depends upon its being large enough to give the minority 
the sense of not being entirely overwhelmed by the majority. Representation 
according to population to a minority or to the minorities combined may be 
effective by reason of the fact that the population of a minority where there 
is only one or of the combined minorities where there are many is large 
enough to secure effective minority representation. But there may be cases 
where the population of a minority or of the minorities combined is too small 
to secure such effective representation if the population ratio of a minority is 
taken as an inflexible standard to determine its quantum of representation. 
To insist upon such a standard is to make mockery of the protection to the 
minority which is the purpose behind the right to representation which is 
accepted as the legitimate claim of a minority. In such cases weightage 
which is another name for deduction from the quantum of representation 
which is due to the majority on the basis of its population becomes essential 
and the majority 1f it wishes to be fair and honest must concede it. There 
can therefore be no quarrel over the principle of weightage. On this footing 
the controversy becomes restricted to the question, how is the masnitude 
of weightage to be determined ? This obviously is a question of adjustment 
and not of principle. 


There can therefore be no manner of objection to the principle of weightage. 
The demand for weightage is however a general demand of all the minorities 
and the Scheduled Castes must join them in it where the majority is too big. 
What is however wrong with the existing weightage is unequal distribution 
among the various minoritles. At present, some minorities have secured a 
lion's share and some like the Untouchables have none. This wrong must be 
rectified by a distribution of the weightage on some intelligible principles. 


(8) Electorates 


1. The method of election to the seals allotted to the Scheduled Castes 
is set out in clauses (2) to (4) of the Poona Pact. It provides for two 


STATES AND MINORITIES 421 


elections : (1) Primary election and (2) Final election. The Primary election 
is by a separate electorate of the Scheduled Castes. It is only a qualifying 
election and determines who is entitled to stand in the Final election on 
behalf of the Scheduled Castes for the seats reserved to them. The Final 
election is by a joint electorate in which both caste Hindus and the Scheduled 
Castes can vote and the final result is determined by their joint vote. 


2. Clause 5 of the Poona Pact has limited the system of Primary election 
to ten years which means that any election taking place after 1947 will 
be by a system of joint electorates and reserved seats pure and simple. 


3. Even if the Hindus agreed to extend the system of double election 
for a further period it will not satisfy the Scheduled Castes. There are 
two objections to the retention of the Primary election. Firstly, it does 
not help the Scheduled Castes to elect a man who is their best choice. As 
will be seen from Appendix III, the Scheduled Caste candidate who tops 
the poll in the Primary election fails to succeed in the Final election and 
the Scheduled Caste candidate who fails in the Primary election tops the 
poll in the Final election. Secondly, the Primary election is for the most 
part a fiction and not a fact. In the last election, out of 151 seats reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes there were Primary elections only in 43. This is 
because it is impossible for the Scheduled Castes to bear the expenses of 
two elections—Primary and Final. To retain such a system is worse than 
useless. 


4. Things will be much worse under the system of joint electorates and 
reserved seats which will hereafter become operative under the terms of the 
Poona Pact. This is no mere speculation. The last election has conclusively 
proved that the Scheduled Castes can be completely disfranchised in a 
joint electorate. As will be seen from the figures given in Appendix III, 
the Scheduled Caste candidates have not only been elected by Hindu votes 
when the intention was that they should be elected by Scheduled Caste 
votes but what is more the Hindus have elected those Scheduled Caste 
candidates who had failed in the Primary election. This is a complete 
disfranchisement of the Scheduled Castes. The main reason is to be found 
in the enormous disparity between the voting strength of the Scheduled 
Castes and the caste Hindus in most of the constituencies as may be seen 
from figures given in Appendix III. As the Simon Commission has observed, 
the device of the reserved seats ceases to be workable where the protected 
community constitutes an exceedingly small fraction of any manageable 
constituency. This is exactly the case of the Scheduled Castes. This disparity 
cannot be ignored. It will remain even under adult suffrage. That being 
the case, a fool-proof and a knave-proof method must be found to ensure 
real representation to the Scheduled Castes. Such a method must involve 
the abolition of— 


(i) the Primary election as a needless and heavy encumbrance; and 


422 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


GD 


the substitution of separate electorates. 


5. One of the issues which has embittered the relations between the Hindus 
and the Scheduled Castes in the political field is the issue of electorate. The 
Scheduled Castes are Insisting upon separate electorates. The Hindus are 
equally insistent on opposing the demand. To arrive at a settlement on this 
issue—without which there can be no peace and amity between the Hindus 
and the Scheduled Castes—it is necessary to determine who is right and who 
is wrong and whether the opposition is based on rational grounds or is based 
on mere prejudice. 


6. The grounds which are generally urged against the demand of the Scheduled 
Castes for separate electorates are : 


(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 


that the Scheduled Castes are not a minority; 


that the Scheduled Castes are Hindus and therefore they cannot have 
separate electorates; 


that separate electorates will perpetuate untouchability; 
that separate electorates are anti-national; and 


that separate electorates enables British Imperialism to influence the 
communities having separate electorates to act against the interests of 
the country. 


7. Are these arguments valid ? 


@ 


(ii) 


To say that the Scheduled Castes are not a minority is to misunderstand 
the meaning of the word ‘minority’. Separation in religion is not the only 
test of a minority. Nor is it a good and efficient test. Social discrimination 
constitutes the real test for determining whether a social group is or 
is not a minority. Even Mr. Gandhi thought it logical and practical to 
adopt this test in preference to that of religious separation. Following 
this test, Mr. Gandhi in an editorial under the heading. “The Fiction of 
Majority in the Harijan dated 21st October 1939 has given his opinion 
that the Scheduled Castes are the only real minority in India. 


To argue that the Scheduled Castes are Hindus and therefore 
cannot demand separate electorates is to put the same argument 
in a different form. To make religious affiliation the determining 
factor for constitutional safeguards is to overlook the fact that the 
religious affiliation may be accompanied by an intense degree of social 
separation and discrimination. The belief that separate electorates go 
with separation in religion arises from the fact that those minorities 
who have been given separate electorates happen to be religious 
minorities. This, however, is not correct. Muslims are given separate 
electorates not because they are different from Hindus in point of 
religion. They are given separate electorates because—and this is the 
fundamental fact—the social relations between the Hindus and the 


STATES AND MINORITIES 423 


Gii) 


(iv) 


(v) 


Musalmans are marked by social discrimination. To put the point 
in a somewhat different manner, the nature of the electorates is 
determined not by reference to religion but by reference to social 
considerations. That it is social considerations and not religious 
affiliation or disaffiliation which is accepted as the basis of 
determining the nature of the electorates is best illustrated by the 
arrangements made under the Government of India Act (1935) for 
the Christian community in India. The Christian community is 
divided into three sections—Europeans, Anglo-Indians and Indian 
Christians. In spite of the fact that they all belong to the same 
religion, each section has a separate electorate. This shows that 
what is decisive is not religious affiliation but social separation. 


To urge that separate electorates prevent solidarity between the 
Untouchables and the Caste Hindus is the result of confused 
thinking. Elections take place once in five years. Assuming there were 
joint electorates, it is difficult to understand how social solidarity 
between the Hindus and the Untouchables can be promoted by 
their devoting one day for voting together when out of the rest of 
the five years they are leading severally separate lives ? Similarly, 
assuming that there were separate electorates it is difficult to 
understand how one day devoted to separate voting in the course 
of five years can make for greater separation than what already 
exist ? Or contrarywise, how can one day in five years devoted to 
separate voting prevent those who wish to work for their union 
from carrying out heir purposes. To make it concrete, how can 
separate electorate for the Untouchables prevent inter-marriage or 
inter-dining being introduced between them and the Hindus ? It is 
therefore futile to say that separate electorates for the Untouchables 
will perpetuate separation between them and the Hindus. 


To insist that separate electorates create anti-national spirit is 
contrary to experience. The Sikh have separate electorates. But no 
one can say that the Sikhs are anti-national. The Muslims have 
had separate electorates right from 1909. Mr. Jinnah had been 
elected by separate electorates. Yet, Mr. Jinnah was the apostle 
of Indian Nationalism up to 1935. The Indian Christians have 
separate electorates. Nonetheless a good lot of them have shown 
their partiality to the Congress if they have not been actually 
returned on the Congress ticket. Obviously, nationalism and anti- 
nationalism have nothing to do with the electoral system. They are 
the result of extra electoral forces. 


This argument has no force. It is nothing but escapism. Be that as it 
may, with free India any objection to separate electorates on such 
a ground must vanish. 


424 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


8. The reason why the arguments advanced by the opponents of separate 
electorates do not stand the scrutiny of logic and experience is due entirely 
to the fact that their approach to the subject is fundamentally wrong. It is 
wrong in two respects : 


© 


GD 


9, A 


They fail to realize that the system of electorates has nothing to 
do with the religious nexus or communal nexus. It is nothing but a 
mechanism to enable a minority to return its true representative to 
the Legislature. Being a mechanism for the protection of a minority 
it follows that whether the electorate should be joint or separate 
must be left to be determined by the minority. 


They fail to make any distinction between the demand for separate 
electorates by a majority community and a similar demand made 
by a minority community. A majority community has no right to 
demand separate electorates. The reason is simple. A right by a 
majority community to demand separate electorates is tantamount 
to a right to establish the Government of the majority community 
over the minority community without the consent of the minority. 
This is contrary to the well-established doctrine of democracy that 
government must be with the consent of the governed. No such 
evil consequence follows from the opposite principle namely that 
a minority community is entitled to determine the nature of the 
electorates suited to its interests, because there is no possibility of 
the minority being placed in a position to govern the majority. 


correct attitude towards the whole question rests on the following 


axioms : 


© 


GD 


This 


The system of electorates being a devise for the protection of the 
minority, the issue whether the electoral system should be the joint 
electorate or separate electorate must be left to the wishes of the 
minority. If it is large enough to influence the majority 1t will choose 
joint electorates. If it is too small for the purpose, it will prefer 
separate electorates for fear of being submerged. 


The majority, being in a position to rule can have no voice in the 
determination of the system of electorates. If the minority wants joint 
electorates, the majority must submit itself to joint electorates. If the 
minority decides to have separate electorates for itself the majority 
cannot refuse to grant them. In other words, the majority must look 
to the decision of the minority and abide by it. 


PART I—CLAUSE 2 


demand may appear to be outside the Poona Pact in as much as 


the Poona Pact made no provision for it. This would not be correct. As 
a matter of fact, if no provision was made, it was because there was no 
need to make such a provision. This was due to two reasons : Firstly, it 


STATES AND MINORITIES 425 


was due to the fact that at the time when the Poona Pact was made no 
community was guaranteed by Law a specific quantum of representation in 
Executive, Secondly, the representation of the communities in the Executive 
was left to a convention which the Governor by his instrument of instructions 
was required to see observed. Experience has shown that the quantum of 
representation of the Scheduled Castes in the Executive should now be fixed. 


PART I—CLAUSE 3 


This is not a new demand. Clause 8 of the Poona Pact guarantees to the 
Scheduled Castes fair representation in Public Services. It does not, however, 
define the quantum of representation. The demand has been admitted by the 
Government of India as legitimate and even the quantum of representation 
has been defined. All that remains is to give 1t a statutory basis. 


PART II—CLAUSE 1 


This is not a new demand. Clause 9 of Poona Pact guarantees that an 
adequate sum shall be earmarked for the education of the Scheduled Castes. 
It does not define the quantum. All that the demand does is to define the 
quantum of liability the State should take. In this connection reference may 
be made to Section 83 of the Government of India Act, 1935, which relates 
to the education of the Anglo-Indians and Europeans and to the grants made 
to the Aligarh and Benaras Hindu Universities by the Central Government. 


PART II—CuLuLausgz 2 


This a new demand but is justified by circumstances. At present, the 
Hindus live in the village and the Untouchables live in the Ghettoes. The 
object is to free the Untouchables from the thraldom of the Hindus. So long 
as the present arrangement continues it is impossible for the Untouchables 
either to free themselves from the yoke of the Hindus or to get rid of their 
Untouchability. It is the close knit association of the Untouchables with the 
Hindus living in the same villages which marks them out as Untouchables 
and which enables the Hindus to identify them as being Untouchables. 
India is admittedly a land of villages and so long as the village system 
provides an easy method of marking out and identifying the Untouchables, 
the Untouchable has no escape from Untouchability. It is the system of 
the Village plus the Ghetto which perpetuates Untouchability and the 
Untouchables therefore demand that the nexus should be broken and the 
Untouchables who are as a matter of fact socially separate should be made 
separate geographically and territorially also, and be settled into separate 
villages exclusively of Untouchables in which the distinction of the high and 
the low and of Touchable and Untouchable will find no place. 


The second reason for demanding separate settlements arises out of the 
economic position of the Untouchables in the villages. That their condition 
is most pitiable no one will deny. They are a body of landless labourers 


426 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


who are entirely dependent upon such employment as the Hindus may 
choose to give them and on such wages as the Hindus may find it profitable 
to pay. In the villages in which they five they cannot engage in any trade 
or occupation, for owing to Untouchability no Hindu will deal with them. It 
is therefore obvious that there is no way of earning a living which is open 
to the Untouchables so long as they live in a Ghetto as a dependent part of 
the Hindu village. 


This economic dependence has also other consequences besides the condition 
of poverty and degradation which proceeds from it. The Hindu has a Code of 
life, which is part of his religion. This Code of life gives him many privileges 
and heaps upon the Untouchable many indignities which are incompatible with 
the dignity and sanctity of human life. The Untouchables all over India are 
fighting against the indignities and injustices which the Hindus in the name 
of their religion have heaped upon them. A perpetual war is going on every 
day in every village between the Hindus and the Untouchables. It does not 
see the light of the day. The Hindu Press is not prepared to give it publicity 
lest it should injure the cause of their freedom in the eyes of the world. The 
existence of a grim struggle between the Touchables and the Untouchables 
is however a fact. Under the village system the Untouchables has found 
himself greatly handicapped in his struggle for free and honourable life. It is 
a contest between the Hindus who are economically and socially strong and 
the Untouchables who are economically poor and numerically small. That the 
Hindus most often succeed in suppressing the Untouchables is due to many 
causes. The Hindus have the Police and the Magistracy on their side. In a 
quarrel between the Untouchables and the Hindus the Untouchables will never 
get protection from the Police and justice from the Magistrate. The Police and 
the Magistracy naturally love their class more than their duty. But the chief 
weapon in the armoury of the Hindus is economic power which they possess 
over the poor Untouchables living in the village. The proposal may be dubbed 
escapism. But the only alternative is perpetual slavery. 


PART II— Cause 1 


No country which has the problem of Communal majority and Communal 
minority is without some kind of an arrangement whereby they agree to share 
political power. South Africa has such an understanding. So has Canada. The 
arrangement for sharing political power between the English and the French 
in Canada is carried to the minutes office. In referring to this fact Mr. Porritt 
in his book on the Evolution of the Dominion of Canada says : 


“Conditions at Ottawa, partly due to race and language, and partly to 
long-prevailing ideas as to the distribution of all government patronage, 
have militated against the Westminster precedent of continuing a member 
in the chair for two or three parliaments, regardless of the fortunes of 
political parties at general elections. There is a new speaker at Ottawa 


STATES AND MINORITIES 427 


for each new House of Commons; and it has long been a custom that when 
one political party continues in power for two or three parliaments, if the 
speaker in one parliament is of British extraction the next one shall be a 
French-Canadian. 


“It is a rule also that the offices of speaker and of deputy speaker can 
at no time be held by men of the same race. If the speaker is a French- 
Canadian, the deputy speaker, who is also Chairman of committees, must 
be an English-speaking Canadian ; for the rule of the House is that the 
member elected to serve as deputy speaker shall be required to possess 
the full and practical knowledge of the language which is not that of the 
speaker for the time being. 


The clerkship and the assistant clerkship of the House, and the offices of 
sergeant-at-arms and deputy sergeant-at-arms—all appointive as distinct from 
elective offices—are, by usage, also similarly divided between the two races. 


Nearly all the offices, important and unimportant, connected with 
parliament, with the Senate as well as with the House, are distributed in 
accordance with these rules or usages. A roll call of the staffs of the two 
Houses, including even the boys in knicker-bockers who act as pages, would 
contain the names of almost as many French-Canadians as Canadians of 
British ancestry. 


The rules and usages by virtue of which this distribution of offices is 
made are older than Confederation. They date back to the early years of 
the United Provinces, when Quebec and Ontario elected exactly the same 
number of members to the Legislature, and when these were the only 
provinces in the union. 


Quebec today elects only 65 of the 234 members of the House of Commons. 
Its population is not one-fourth of the population of the Dominion. Its 
contribution to Dominion revenues does not exceed one-sixth. But an equal 
division of the offices of the House of Commons is regarded by Quebec as 
necessary to the preservation of its rights and privileges ; and so long as each 
political party, when it is in power, is dependent on support from French- 
Canada, it will be nearly as difficult to ignore the claim of Quebec to these 
parliamentary honours and offices as it would be to repeal the clause in the 
British North America Act that safeguards the separate schools system.”. 


Unfortunately for the minorities in India, Indian Nationalism has 
developed a new doctrine which may be called the Divine Right of the 
Majority to rule the minorities according to the wishes of the majority. Any 
claim for the sharing of power by the minority is called communalism while 
the monopolizing of the whole power by the majority is called Nationalism. 
Guided by such a political philosophy the majority is not prepared to 


428 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


allow the minorities to share political power nor is it willing to respect any 
convention made in that behalf as is evident from their repudiation of the 
obligation (to include representatives of the minorities in the cabinet) contained 
in the Instrument of Instructions issued to the Governors in the Government 
of India Act of 1935. Under these circumstances there is no way left but to 
have the rights of the Scheduled Castes embodied in the Constitution. 


PART II— CLAUSE 2 


This is not a new demand. It replaces Clause 6 of the Poona Pact which 
provides that the system of representation for the Scheduled Castes by 
reserved seats shall continue until determined by mutual consent between 
the communities concerned in the settlement. Since there is no safe method 
of ascertaining the will of the Scheduled Castes as to how to amend and alter 
the safeguards provided for them it is necessary to formulate a plan which will 
take the place of Clause 6 of the Pact. Provisions having similar objectives to 
those contained in the proposal exist in the Constitution of Australia, America 
and South Africa. 


In dealing with a matter of this sort two considerations have to be borne 
in mind. One is that it is not desirable to rule out the possibility of a change 
in the safeguards being made in the future by the parties concerned. On 
the other hand it is by no means desirable to incessant struggle over their 
revision. If the new Union and State Legislatures are to address themselves 
successfully to their responsibilities set out in the preamble it is desirable 
that they should not be distracted by the acute contentions between religions 
and classes which questions of change in the safeguards are bound to raise. 
Hence a period of twenty-five years has been laid down before any change 
could be considered. 


PART IV 


The object of this prevision is to see that whatever safeguards are provided 
for the Scheduled Castes in British India are also provided for the Scheduled 
Castes in the Indian States. The provision lays down that an Indian State 
seeking admission to the Union shall have to satisfy that its Constitution 
contains these safeguards. 


PART V—INTERPRETATION 


Whether the Scheduled Castes are a minority or not has become a matter of 
controversy. The purpose of First Provision to set this controversy at rest. The 
Scheduled Castes are in a worst position as compared to any other minority 
in India. As such they required and deserve much more protection than any 
other minority does. The least one can do is to treat them as a minority. 


The purpose of Second Provision is to remove the provincial bar. There is 
no reason why a person who belongs to Scheduled Castes in one Province 
should lose the benefit of political privileges given by the Constitution merely 
because he happens to change his domicile. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 429 


Appendix II 
TEXT OF THE POONA PACT 


(1) There shall be seats reserved for the Depressed Classes out of the 
general electorates seats in the Provincial Legislatures as follows : 


Madras z Re sŠ 30 
Bombay with Sind 7 n és 15 
Punjab z a a 8 
Bihar and Orissa .. a z: 18 
Central Provinces n T ie 20 
Assam .. 1: z 7 
Bengal z z i 30 
United Provinces ú u AN 20 

Total 148 


These figures are based on total strength of the Provincial councils 
announced in the Prime Minister's decision. 


(2) Election to these seats shall be by joint electorates, subject however, 
to the following procedure : 


All the members of the Depressed Classes registered in the general 
electoral roll in a constituency will form an electoral college, which will 
elect a panel of four candidates belonging to the Depressed Classes for 
each of such reserved seats, by the method of the single vote ; the four 
getting the highest number of votes in such Primary election, shall be 
candidates for election by the general electorate. 


(3) Representation of the Depressed Classes in the Central Legislature 
shall likewise be on the principle of joint electorates and reserved seats 
by the method of Primary election in the manner provided for in clause 
(2) above, for their representation in the Provincial Legislatures. 


(4) In the Central Legislature, eighteen per cent of seats allotted to the 
general electorate for British India in the said Legislature shall be reserved 
for the Depressed Classes. 


(5) The system of Primary election to a pannel of Candidates for election 
to the Central and Provincial Legislature, as hereinbefore mentioned, shall 
come to an end after the first ten years, unless terminated sooner by mutual 
agreement under the provision of clause (6) below. 


(6) The system of representation of the Depressed Classes by reserved 
seats in the Provincial and Central Legislatures as provided for in clauses 
(1) and (4) shall continue until determined by mutual agreement between 
the communities concerned in the settlement. 


(7) Franchise for the Central and Provincial Legislatures, for the Depressed 
Classes shall be as indicated in the Lothian Committee Report. 


430 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(8) There shall be no disabilities attaching to anyone on the ground of 
his being a member of the Depressed Class in regard to any elections to 
local bodies or appointment to the Public Services. Every endeavour shall 
be made to secure fair representation of the Depressed Classes in these 
respects, subject to such educational qualifications as may be laid down for 
appointment to the Public Service. 


(9) In every Province out of the educational grant an adequate sum shall 
be earmarked for providing educational facilities to the Members of the 
Depressed Classes. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 431 


Appendix III 
DISADVANTAGES OF THE POONA PACT 


1. The Poona Pact was intended to devise a method whereby the Scheduled 
Castes would be able to return to the Legislature representatives of their 


choice. 


This intention has been completely nullified as will be seen from 


the following series of statistics. The series have been constructed from the 
results of the last elections which took place in February 1946. 


2. The statistical data is arranged in four series of tables : 


First series show the votes secured by the successful Caste Hindu 


candidate and the successful Scheduled Caste candidate in the Final 
election. 


Second series show in how many cases did reliance on reservation clause 


become necessary for the success of the Scheduled Caste candidate 
im the Final election and in how many he succeeded without the 
benefit of reservation. 


Third series show the relative voting strength of the Caste Hindus and 


the Scheduled Castes in constituencies in which seats are reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes. 


Fourth series show the position in the Primary election of the Scheduled 


Caste Candidates who became successful in the Final elections. 


3. The conclusions that follow from these figures will not escape those 
who care to examine them. The figures prove the following propositions : 


Gü) 


GD 


That every of the Scheduled Caste candidate who became successful 
in the Final election owed his success to the votes of the caste Hindus 
and not of the Scheduled Castes. A great many of them came to the 
top of the poll and secured votes equal to and in some cases larger 
than those obtained by Caste Hindu candidates (See Tables in the 
First Series). Secondly, in very few constituencies was the successful 
Scheduled Caste candidate required to rely on reservation (See Tables 
in the Second Series). This is a most unexpected phenomenon. Anyone 
who compares the voting strength of the Scheduled Castes with the 
voting strength of the Caste Hindus in the different constituencies 
(See Tables in the Third Series) would realize that the voting strength 
of the Scheduled Castes is so small that such a phenomenon could 
never have occurred if only the Scheduled Castes voters had voted 
for the Scheduled Caste candidates. That they have occurred is proof 
positive that the success of the Scheduled Caste candidate in the 
Final election is conditioned by the Caste Hindu votes. 


That comparing the results of the Primary election with those of 
the Final election (See Tables in the Fourth series) the Scheduled 
Caste candidate who was elected in the Final election was one 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


who had failed in the Primary election Gf the Primary election be 
treated as a Final election and the constituency be treated as a 
single-member constituency). 


Gii) Owing to the extreme disparity between the voting strength of the 
Hindus and the Scheduled Castes—disparity which will not disappear 
even under adult suffrage—a system of joint electorates will not 
succeed in giving the Scheduled Castes the chance of returning their 
true representatives. 


(iv) The Poona Pact has completely disfranchised the Scheduled Castes 
inasmuch as candidates whom they rejected in the Primary elections— 
which is a true index of their will—have been returned in the Final 
election by the votes of the Caste Hindus. 


The Poona Pact is thus fraught with mischief. It was accepted because 
of the coercive fast of Mr. Gandhi and because of the assurance given at 
the time that the Hindus will not interfere in the election of the Scheduled 
Castes. 


FIRST SERIES 


Votes obtained by the successful Scheduled Caste candidates as compared 
with the votes secured by the successful Caste Hindu candidates. 


Page Nos. 
Part I—Madras s: P. af 433 
Part II—Bengal g 4 ka 7 433-34 
Part HI Bombay ae aE “ee 434 
Part IV—U.P. a .. ae 435 
Part V—C.P. s 7 a 435 
Part VI—Assam Da s z 436 


Part VII—Orissa eos a a 436 


STATES AND MINORITIES 433 


First Series 


I. MADRAS 
Name of the Constituency Seats Votes polled by Votes polled by 
successful Hindu successful Scheduled 
candidates Caste candidates 
1 2 3 4 
1. Coconada 2 32,607 28,544 
2. Ellore 2 87,618 38,195 
3. Bandar 2 69,319 70,931 
4. Oneole 2 50,906 49,992 
5. Penukonda 2 17,406 18,125 
6. Kurnool 2 32,756 32,294 
7. Chingleput 2 13,865 15,129 
8. Thiruvalur 2 17,225 17,818 
9. Ranipet 2 21,249 21,059 
10. Tiruvannamalai 2 31,476 32,132 
11. Tindivanam 2 25,626 25,442 
12. Chidambaram 2 15,272 14,874 
13. Tanjore 2 26,904 16,133 
14. Mannargudi 2 29,932 30,116 
15. Ariyalur 2 22,656 20,520 
16. Sattur 2 30,988 29,530 
17. Malapuram 2 28,229 28,085 
18. Namakkal 2 15,438 15,085 
IL. BENGAL 
Name of the Constituency Seats Votes polled Votes polled 
by successful by successful 
Hindu Scheduled Caste 
candidates candidates 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Burdwan Central 2 42,858 33,903 
2. Burdwan, North-West 2 32,270 25,728 
3. Birbhum 2 24,629 20,252 
4. Bankura, West 2 30,388 21,266 
5. Thurgram-cum-Ghatal 2 40,900 19,060 
6. Hooghly, North-East 2 26,1382 18,768 
7. Howrah 2 40,608 386,099 
8. 24 Parganas, South-East 2 50,345 38,459 
9. 24 Parganas, North-West 2 45,3389 48,272 
10. Nadia 2 30,489 28,054 
11. Murshidabad 2 32,3886 26,958 
12. Jessore 2 38,665 41,434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


II. BENGAL 
Name of the Constituency Seats Votes polled Votes polled 
by successful by successful 
Hindu Scheduled Caste 
candidates candidates 
1 2 3 4 5 
18. Khulna 3 79,218 57,724 44,043 
14. Malda 2 32,728 12,796 papa 
15. Dinajpur 3 46,146 35,127 30,839 
16. Jalpaiguri-cum-Siliguri 3 30,950 26,109 13,829 
17. Rangpur 3 46,869 29,657 23,237 
18. Bogra-cum-Pabna 2 43,249 31,515 
19. Dacca, East 2 51,808 31,392 
20. Mymensingh, West 2 37,983 32,782 
21. Mymensingh, East 2 43,678 32,207 .... 
22. Faridpur 2 70,115 51,450 29,503 
23. Bakargunj 2 48,560 28,560 
24. Tippera 2 60,146 59,051 
HI. BOMBAY 
Votes 
secured by 
Name of the Constituency Seats Votes secured by sa m: 
successful Caste 
Hindu candidates candidates 
1 2 8 4 5 6 
1. Bombay City (Suburban) 8 57,182 47,835 .... 59,646 
2. Bombay City (Byculla) .. 8 42,143 41,795 .... 43,251 
3. Kaira District 4 68,044 63,422 57,394 69,807 
4. Surat District 4 40,232 389,985 39,610 39,849 
5. Thana, South 3 30,581 27,587 .... 11,630 
6. Ahmednagar, South 3 25,747 20,948 .... 20,908 
7. East Khandesh, East 4 38,721 34,349 33,960 36,136 
8. Nasik, West 4 37,218 36,794 36,555 42,604 
9. Poona, West 8 23,758 23,454 .... 24,709 
10. Satara, North 4 44,815 42,727 41,474 43,961 
11. Sholapur, North-East 3 19,380 16,705 .... 18,264 
12. Belgaum, North 4 55,787 50,759 49,867 27,682 
13. Bijapur, North 3 23,083 20,8388 .... 16,059 
14. Kolaba District 4 41,012 38,864 35,633 17,676 
15. Ratnagiri, North 4 13,640 10,985 10,372 11,734 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


435 


IV. UNTTED PROVINCES 


Name of the Constituency Seats Votes polled by Votes polled by 
successful Hindu successful Scheduled 
candidates Caste candidates 
1 2 3 4 
1. Lucknow City 2 24,614 14,110 
2. Cawnpore City 2 34,550 34,782 
3. Agra City 2 17,446 16,343 
4. Allahabad City 2 19,870 10,308 
5. Badaun District 2 6,716 14,037 
6. Jalaun District 2 21,692 15,363 
7. Basti District 2 14,450 15,447 
8. Almora District 2 36,371 20,605 
9. Rai Bareilli 2 15,917 1,889 
10. Sitapur District 2 28,665 20,204 
11. Gonda District 2 17,949 13,447 
V. CENTRAL PROVINCES 
Name of the Constituency Seats Votes polled by Votes polled by 
successful Hindu successful Scheduled 
candidates Caste candidates 
I 2 8 4 
1. Nagpur City 2 21,905 23,595 
2. Nagpur-Umred 2 8,330 7,847 
3. Hinganghat-Wardha 2 11,677 10,781 
4. Chanda-Brahmapuri 2 10,208 8,144 
5. Chindwara-Sansad 2 16.365 6,190 
6. Saugor-Khurai 2 7,829 5,162 
7. Raipur 2 8,183 6,112 
8. Baloda Bazar 2 21,861 9,659 
9. Bilaspur 2 13,109 6.030 
10. Mungeli 2 9,600 6.418 
11. Tanjgir 2 11,914 7,419 
12. Drug 2 5,975 5,593 
13. Bhandara-Sakoli 2 16,824 10,491 
14. Yeotmal-Daresha 2 10,915 4,719 
15. Ellichpur 2 16,298 4,592 
16. Chikhli-Mehkar 2 16,397 2,748 
17. Akola-Balapur 2 6,455 5,567 


436 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


VI. ASSAM 
Name of the Constituency Seat Votes polled by Votes polled by 
successful Hindu successful 
candidates Scheduled 
Caste candidates 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Kamrup-Saor, South 3 15,890 14,971 13,693 
2. Nowgong 1 ae eee 14,560 
3. Jorhat, North 2 17,429 ghee 5,809 
4. Habibganj 2 10,985 see 9,770 
5. Karimganj 2 12,562 a 11,676 
6. Silchar 3 17,340 bape 7,081 
VII. ORISSA 


Name of the Constituency Seats Votes obtained by Votes obtained by 
successful Hindu successful Scheduled 


candidates Caste candidates 
1 2 3 4 
1. East Tajpur x. 2 8,427 8,712 
2. East Burgarh P 2 4,195 937 


437 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


8 qefunq 'g 
ƏUON Z Z SSO ` 
Z wessy ‘9 
ƏuoN 9 Ti: G II GT ‘adn ` 
Z FI LI FI LI BG ‘do $ 
Z qI GT GT GT SI £equog 'g 
ƏuoN 61 Fo 61 F0 08 [esueq `Z 
ƏuoN LI FI SI og serpeyy CI 
L 9 G 9 € G T 
soyeptrpueo 
pesoons 04 a4seg soyeprpuvo 
soyeprpues o4sed pəmpəuoəs npurH 
pəmpəuəs əy} 10} y0q Jo JO ssəƏoxə 0} soyseg 
Aresseoeu əursoəq JO ssooxe 04 ssooxe 0} onp ənp pə[npəuos əy} 
Uuor]eA49sƏ4 UO enp Sem }8s97U09 SEM 4}89}7U09 SEM 489}7U09 39T1T[Juoo B SEM IO} pƏA39sƏ4 ore 
ƏDULT[OI YOIYM UI Əy} YUM UI Əy} YOu UI Əy} YTM Ut Ə194} YIIYM UI syeos YTM UI 
sotouen4ytjsuod solouenjytjsuod sotouen4ytjsuod sotouen4ytjsuod sotouen4ytjsuod sərouənl1iqsuoo 
Jo a9quum N Jo Iəquny Jo aq9quum N Jo a9quum N Jo aq9quum N Jo zaquiny ƏSurAoid 


NOLLOWTY NI AHHOONG OL SALVGIGNVD ALSVOQ AHINAAHOS 
FHL YOA AMVSSHOHN ANVOUG NOILVANASAY HOIHAA NI SAIONANLILSNOD YO HAAWOAN 


seLIog puo 


438 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Third Series 


RELATIVE VOTING STRENGTH OF CASTE HINDUS AND 
SCHEDULED CASTES 


I. MADRAS 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
1. Madras City, 26,922 4,082 1: 6.6 
South-Central 
2. Chicacole š 90,496 8,070 1 :11.2 
3. Amalapuram ds 95,954 28,282 1: 3.4 
4. Cocanada T 86,932 17,616 1: 4.9 
5. Ellore z 88,249 16,835 1: 5.24 
6. Ongole i 1,10,152 11,233 1: 9.8 
7. Gudur w. 52,415 10,263 1: 5.1 
8. Cuddapah es 92,572 10,842 1: 8.5 
9. Penukonda = 74,952 11,896 1: 6.3 
10. Bellary P 85,928 10,146 1: 8.5 
11. Kurnool z 72,758 11,679 1: 6.2 
12. Tirutanni s: 77,337 15,248 1: 5.07 
13. Chingleput és 73,554 22.182 1: 3.3 
14. Tiruvallur A 81,814 21,287 1: 3.8 
15. Ranipet e 24,403 11,271 1: 2:1 
16. Tiruvannamalai .. 97,259 15,536 1: 6.2 
17. Tindivanam Fe 85,514 19,221 1: 4.4 
18. Chidambaram 2 96,086 16,762 1: 5.7 
19. Tirukoyilur m 1,02,482 21,733 T z 4.7 
20. Tanjore z 99,496 13,198 1: 7.5 
21. Manaargudi ú 69,579 11,547 1: 5.8 
22. Ariyalur ts 1,13,630 16,772 1: 6.7 
23. Palani 5 92,655 13,521 1: 6.8 
24. Sattur 5 84,169 8,033 1 :10.5 
25. Koilpatti k 1,00,521 20,907 1: 4.8 
26. Pollachi š 63,821 12,808 1: 4.9 
27. Namakkal s: 51,860 11,407 1: 4.5 
28. Coondapur s. 46,032 8,030 1 2 5:7 
29. Malapuram š 70,346 10,808 1: 6.5 


STATES AND MINORITIES 439 
II. BOMBAY 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 8 4 
General Urban 
1. Bombay City... 1,67,002 34,266 1: 4.8 
North and Bombay 
Suburban District 
2. Bombay City— 
Byculla and Parel 1,52,991 28,520 1: 5.3 
General Rural 
3. Kaira District 1,389,508 7,318 1: 19.06 
4. Surat District 85,670 4,765 1: 18.8 
5. Thana, South 67,749 4,668 1: 14.5 
6. Ahmednagar, South 73,162 7,882 1: 9.9 
7. East Khandesh, East 91,377 10,109 1: 9.35 
8. Nasik, West 99,274 12,698 1: 7.7 
9. Poona, West 73,551 13,055 1: 5.6 
10. Satara, North s: 95,459 11,152 1: 8.5 
11. Sholapur, North-East .. 64,583 9,718 1: 6.6 
12. Belgaum, North 79,422 18,303 1: 4.8 
13. Bijapur, North 60,655 8,993 1: 6.7 
14. Kolaba District 1,038,828 5,001 1: 20.7 
15. Ratnagiri, North 32,606 3,529 1: 9.2 
III. BENGAL 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
General Rural 
1. Burdwan, Central 74,306 24,610 1: 3.01 
2. Burdwan, North-West .. 80,035 16,830 1: 4.8 
3. Birbhum 1,03,231 37,637 1: 2.7 
4. Bankura, West 84,128 25,487 1: 3.3 
5. Midnapore, Central 99,961 20,167 1: 4.95 
6. Jhargam-cum-Ghatal 64,031 13,091 1: 4.85 
7. Hooghly, North-East. 67,697 20,318 1: 3.33 
8. Howrah 1,03,346 22,990 1: 4.5 
9. 24 Parganas, South- 82,366 47,378 T z 127 


West. 


440 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
HI. BENGAL—contd. 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
10. 24 Parganas, North- 85,477 30,607 1: 2.78 
East 
11. Nadia ™ 90,092 25,605 1: 3.5 
12. Murshidabad š 81,083 17,176 1 : 4.8 
13. Jessore š 1,21,760 55,052 122 
14. Khulna 1,45,335 76,848 1:1.87 
15. Malda u 73,664 29,010 1 : 2.54 
16. Dinajpur zs 1,48,804 1,18,454 1 : 1.25 
17. Jalpaiguri-cum- 78,552 65,679 1:1.2 
Siliguri 
18. Rangpur i 29,437 65,679 1 : 0.44 
19. Bogra-cum-Patna zs 87,704 33,873 1 2 58 
20. Dacca, East u 94,858 40,238 1 :2.35 
21. Myroensingh, West 98,795 38,046 1: 2.59 
22. Mymensingh, East 68,360 29,588 12233 
23. Faridpur Z 1,72,683 96,319 1:1.7 
24. Bakarganj, South- 78,796 49,014 1:1.6 
West. 
25. Tippera s 1,27,097 34,813 1 : 3.61 
IV. UNITED PROVINCES 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
General Urban 
1. Lucknow City š 89,412 9,079 1: 9.8 
2. Cawnpore City s 1,31,599 22,515 1: 5.8 
3. Agra City s 47,505 10,105 1: 4.7 
4. Allahabad City z 55,379 6,854 1: 8.07 
General Rural 
5. Charanpur District, 47,773 7,256 1: 6.5 
South-East. 
6. Bulandshah District, 49,699 7,506 1: 6.6 
South-East. 
7. Agra District, North- 61,515 8,290 1: 7.4 
East. 
8. Manipuri District North- 51,406 5,878 1: 8.7 


East. 


STATES AND MINORITIES 441 
IV. UNITED PROVINCES—Contd. 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
9. Budaun District, East 46,966 7,087 1: 6.6 
10. Jalaun District 68,815 14,611 1: 4.7 
11. Mirzapur District, North. 43,648 4,045 1 + 10.7 
12. Gorakhpur District, North. 43,441 5,626 Leo T 
13. Basti District, South 37,084 4,194 1: 8.8 
14. Azamgarh District, West. 51,194 8,127 1: 6.2 
15. Almora District 1,39,217 20,671 1: 6.7 
16. Rai Bareilli District, 48,697 10,488 1: 4.6 
North-East. 
17. Sitapur District, North- 76,682 22,913 1: 3.8 
East. 
18. Fyzabad District, East. 57,154 9,988 1: 5.7 
19. Gonda District, North- 64,225 8,274 TS 7.9 
East. 
20. Bara Banki District, 68,285 16,303 Le 418 
North. 
V. CENTRAL PROVINCES 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 8 4 
General Urban 
1. Nagpur City 72,329 14,388 1 :5.02 
General Rural 
2. Nagpur-Umrer š: 29,267 6,037 1 :4.8 
3. Hinghanghat-Wardha 35,201 4,011 1 :9.02 
4. Chanda-Brahmapuri 30,132 5,229 125.7 
5. Chindwara-Sausar 37,942 3,914 1 :9.7 
6. Jubulpure-Patan 20,587 1,186 1 :17.5 
7. Saugor-Khurai 30,660 5,224 1 :5.8 
8. Damoh-Hatta 38,284 3,608 1 :9.2 
9. Narsinghpur- 35,781 2,019 1 :17.6 
Gadarwara. 
10. Raipur 33,053 11,041 1 22.9 


442 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
V. CENTRAL PROVINCES—contd. 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled Caste proportion 
Constituency voters in the of columns 
Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
11. Baloda Bazar 46,943 15,636 1 :3.06 
12. Bilaspur 33,260 10,547 1:3.1 
13. Mungeli 28,028 10,067 1:2.7 
14. Janjgir 42,763 13,558 1 :3.15 
15. Drug 34,883 8,942 1 :3.19 
16. Bhandara-Sakoli 47,047 10,399 1:4.5 
17. Ellichpur-Dartapur- 30,094 2,885 1 :13.8 
Nelghat 
18. Akola-Belapur 25,912 3,233 1 :9.81 
19. Yeotmal-Darwha 20,327 2,020 1 :10.06 
20. Chikhli-Mehkar 37,936 3,468 1 :1.09 
VI. BIHAR 
Constituency Total number Total number of Relative 
of voters in Scheduled Caste proportion 
the voters in the of columns 
Constituency Constituency 2 and 3 
1 2 3 4 
1. East Bihar 35,631 4,618 1 :7.7 
2. South Gaya 49,363 10,360 1 :4.7 
3. Nawada 41,432 7,684 1 :5.3 
4. East Central Shahabad. 41,707 5,984 1 :6.9 
5. West Gopalganj 33,395 3,415 1 :9.7 
6. North Bettiah 25,760 2,831 1 :9.09 
7. East Muzaffarpur-Sadr. 27,271 3,133 1 :8.7 
8. Darbhanga Sadr 26,864 2,116 1 :12.6 
9. South-East Samastipur 37,291 2,672 1 :13.9 
10. South Sadr-Monghyr 54,229 6,465 1 :8.5 
11. Madhipura 26,523 1,284 1 :20.6 
12. South-West Purnea 44,232 2,938 1 :15.05 
13. Giridih-cum-Ghatra 55,246 4,667 1 :11.8 
14. North-East Palamnu 23,072 4,237 1 :5.3 
15. Central Manbhum 39,626 5,617 1 :7.05 


STATES AND MINORITIES 443 


VII. ASSAM 
Constituency Total number of Total number of Relative 
voters in the Scheduled proportion 
Constituency Caste of columns 
voters in the 2 and 3 
Constituency 
1 2 3 4 
Nowgong, North- 26,618 3,569 1: 7.2 
East 
Kamrup Sadr, South 33,234 2,117 1: 15.6 
Silchar >i 38,647 4,201 1: 9.2 
Karimganj, East s 25,701 10,132 L-25 
Jorhat, North se 26,733 1,360 1: 19.6 
Jonamganj š 39,045 11,603 1: 3.3 
Habibganj, North 31,511 9,996 1: 3.1 
VIII. PUNJAB 
Constituency Total number Total number of Relative 
of voters Scheduled Caste proportion 
in the voters in the of columns 
Constituency Constituency 2 and 3 
L 2 3 4 
South-East Gurgaon 37,815 6,049 dic? 62 
Karnal, North 31,967 5,120 1: 62 
Ambala and Simla 47,403 17,507 1: 3.27 
Hoshiarpur, West 51,084 7,281 1: ZO 
Jullundur 36,570 20,521 T + LS 
Ludhiana and Ferozepur 52,009 27,354 ds 138 
Amritsar and Sialkot 38,046 10,328 1: 3.68 


Lyallpur and Jhang 32,708 7,602 1: 4.2 


(ə3seoO ‘YPS I pue 
snputH š Sunveəq) 


`Aytaofeur sreg gogz 4ST g Suowe pug GgO‘Gt ssaisuodg tureASeKuƏd `d WW” TesDIeureN ' 
`&ytao[eur oynposqy ogr 4ST AS we ssoisuog uBquinpny BUYSIIM ‘Oo `` 1y od ` 
(snpurH g Sutyeeq) 
`ƏjoA pdg  c69'°Z 4ST G SuoweL 4ST QTT‘0gE  ssərSuoo IVIVYLOA OOSEIUT, Ipnsivuuepy ` 
(snpurH z Sutyeoq) 
‘aq0A AUG cg) ISI p Suome pug ZPrGg  ssəisSuoo sepreyyoysemy `3 `' WeUBAIPULY, ` 


(4589 “YS Z pue 
snpurH g sSunceəq) 
`Aytaoífeur əreg — Q96‘T ISI G Suowt JSJ ZEl‘sg  ssərSuoo npoavsueyy 'Y  IreureuueAnali, ` 
(4589 “YS z pue 
npurH T Suneəq) 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


444 


`Aqyraoífeur əreg  +9ç'¿ IST p Suoure IST GZI‘8T ssərSuoo eddiupey :G `` epuoynueg ' 
`Kytao[eur 
əyn[osqV Z98F'€ 4ST eee ssorsu0dg BkkOSBN BUIBMS `` yedeppng ` 
(snputH p Sunsəq) 
FT6°T (porez) pug 9 Suowe JSJ TE6‘OL  ssəaısuop ekkeuliny enue, `` repueg ' 
(snputH z Ssuneəq) 
TTE L (porez) UIP p Suome pug FPpg‘sz  ssərSuoo KY `S `q `` wepeucooo ` 
'tureA S 
ego“ (porez) pag g suOWe 4ST PZG‘sPr ssoisuoy -euveulysyey npueg © weandeTewy ` 
8 L 9 S + € 6 IL 
Kouəni1suoo 
940A yds IO Toqure w 
Kjrxolew aynposqe uornoə[ə ə[surs B se u uote E 
Io əxeq 0} ənp = AreutIg ¿Xouənjusuoo əy} uomoəələ 5104 JO Syed 
uoməələ ATeWIIg Əy} UL Sugea} UOTJeTO rIKwaəuəs əy} Jjusnoj IOMAN STH PUPH SIH 
ur poeuteyqo Areullig 94} oym  sə1eptpuso uoroələ peurg UT [NJssoeoons 
ssooons ST PYM SƏJOA ur UOT}ISOd STE] suowe JULI SIH SEM OYM 9l)eptpueo 9}seg pəm[Inpəuos Asuəongysuop 
SVdG(VI I 


NOILOYTA 'IVNLI ANV NOILOJTA ASdVINIdd AO NOSI4VdINOO 


səəg YANO 


445 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


91 (pəlrep pag pug 6IL ssərSuoo uewxn-4emeq eymaeq-ewgooy `f 
TLV (POLJ pag pug I6P‘OL S$əƏ18U00 weisy Unuiepy Hoyeg-vIıpueyg `E 
“eYpreM 
9¢ (PAP UI pug I8L‘OT ssexsuog [eyHA yuLys -yeysuvysurpy `Z 
`expucuo 
ZII (pert) pag pug LQ ssemsu0Q -wey %wapuə[əT Iərun-nd3ey `I 
8 L 9 S v £ G T 
Asuəngysuop 
Ioqwaw 
ƏqoA yds IO uomoəələ a[suIs B se pemooes uolyeryye 
Ayaofew oynjosqe Krew Kouənqmsuoo əy} uorgəələ səļoa jo Kjxed 
IO ə18q 0} ənp əy} ut 3U17891} uonoə[ə [etoues oy} 443noz 49qumN STH Əurcu STH 


uomoə[ə ATVUILIg peuteyqo 


AIVUILIg 94} 


oym soyeprpued uorgoələ peurg ut InJssəoons 


UI ssə99ns SUY SEM SƏOA ur uortsod stH sSuoure yULI ST SEM OUM ƏJEPIPULI ə3se9 pə[npəuoç Avuəngysuoo 
SQHONIAOqd IVALNAO TII 
(& suneəq) ‘qseq 
LÝTT (Per) puz p Suoure pug gEl‘9g ssərSuoO TueÁA[e3 [eer “ysopuvyy yey `g 
(soyeptpues [e1eues ‘yore 
gz saoqe Ssutpueys) pue emosg 
8607 (pore) pug g€ Suowe JSJ IGSZ°%€F ssəršSuoo reyporley `S `N ‘AHO Keqwog ‘z 
(snpuly 
Z oAoqe Surpueys) ‘Ieyoesuog `o N 
980“ (peTtey) pug g Ssuowe JSJ 9p9' GG ssəıguog tfepuny uerEe[ARS ‘Aug Aequog ‘T 
8 L 9 S v € 6 IL 
Kouən1risuoo 
3704 yds 10 Jəquəu 
Kataofeur əmjosqe uonoə[ə ə[Surs V se pəməəs uoreyze 
IO əxeq 0} ənp ABUT AouonzIysuog əy} uorqəələ səgoA JO Ayared 
wo ATBVUTIg ayy ut U17894} UWOTJDETO [eteues əy} WYSNoJ = =taquINN SIH əurcu STL 
ur poutezqo AIBVUILIg 94} oym seyeprpurod uoroəə [eur ut InJssəəəns 
ssooons STU SEM seJ0A ur uorysod STF suowe JULI SIH SBM OUM ƏJEpIPULI ə1seoO pə[npəuoç Avuəngyysuop 


AVAINO I 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


446 


SHONIAOUd G(DLLINI “Al 


99T'T (perez) pug puç GIES wey feyqrey Sueyf pue and[[eXT `, 
‘“mdəzoIə y 
618 (Prep UI IST GEEZ sung wey nye “euBIupNT 9 
ae 4ST 4ST 9LP‘IZ ssərSuoo ysuig eyueqiny anpun[m í “G 
IF9 (peTrey) pag pug LOS‘9T  sseasuog puxvsuo «yey ISM ‘Indaerysoy `f 
68“ (pəltep pag puç GOGOL ssezsuog pezy usurS tatu3jtaq BTWUIS-BlequUYy `S 
Kyrxolew əzeq 618 IST puz 981°€ ssorsu0g Iepung YWON ‘Teurey `Z 
‘uoesan4y 
970A Hds ESET BI pug 90L‘L 3STUOrU(] usurs werd wea YMOS TI 
8 L 9 G V € G I 
Kouəni1nsuoo 
: peammoes ur} eIT Le 
uol}eTO A1aəqurəur 
uomnoəə s9704 JO Ayred 
9}0A yds 10 Kagurad a[suIs B se 
[eroues əy} SNOJ sJequiInN sty aweU stH 
Aytaofeur aynjosqe oy} UL AdUONyIYSUOD Əy} OU Berapa - : Kouənynsuoo 
J0 a1eq 0} ənp pouteyqo sumvsəd41 uonoəə[ə k Pp 
: : suowe ULI SIH 
uomoələ Krew sS?J0A Kaceuradq 94} UOI}D9TO |BULJ ut I[ngJssəoons 
ur ssəoəo2ns STY SEM ur uorsod stH SBM OUM d}JepIpueBd 94SVQ pə[npəuosS 
dadVfNOd `A 
LE6 (popes) pug puç G09 06 ssorsu0y “ueq TSN y BJOUI[V '6 
`əqoA yds pue 
Ayrxolew əreg TOL'T IST pug 808°01 ssəısuo9 urq Blinseyy ANI peqeuws[[V ‘z 
`əqoA yITds pue 
Kjrxolew oreg 988 4ST puz ere'or ssoisuoy  pueyo wey ANQ 0@45V `I 
8 L 9 G v € G I 
Aouony1ysuod 
Iqu ur 
970A pds IO uomnoəə[ə a[sUIS e se pəanoəs uomsgr[UJe 
Katao[eur aynposqe Kxewtiq KuanjrsuoI əy} uoroələ SƏqoA JO Kyed Kouəninsuoo 
J0 o1ey 0) ənp əy} UI SUT}VOT] UOTJDETO waəuə3s əy} JYSNOJ Joquiny STE aweuU stH 
uor KIewtIq ut peurezqo Arewlig 94} OQA. seyeprpueo uor jeur ur InJssə5əns 
ssəoons STU SEM soj0/\ ut uorytsod stH suowe yuer stH SBM OUM ƏJEPIPULI ə1seoO pə[npəuoçs 


STATES AND MINORITIES 447 


Appendix IV 
STATISTICS OF POPULATION 


The population of the Scheduled Caste in 1941 is estimated at 48,793,180. 
Can this figure be accepted as accurate ? 


In coming to a definite conclusion on this issue the following points must 
be borne in mind : — 


G) The population of the Scheduled Castes in 1941 as compared with 
their population in 1931 shows a decline. 


Gi) The population of all other communities during the same period 
shows an increase of 15 per cent. 


The question is whether there is any special reason why the population 
of the Scheduled Castes should have declined. 


Was the basis for computation of the population of the Scheduled Castes 
in 1931 the same as in 1941 ? The answer is in the affirmative. The figures 
given for 1931 are the result of recasting of the Census of 1931 im the 
light of the definition of “Untouchables” given by the Lothian Committee. 
The same basis was adopted in 1941. It cannot therefore be said that the 
decline in the population of the Scheduled Castes in 1941 was due to an 
over-estimate made in 1931. 


It is true that the Census for 1941 does not give any figures for the 
Scheduled Castes for AJmer-Merwara and Gwalior State. But even adding to 
the total for 1941 the figures for these two areas as they stood in 1931 the 
population comes to only 49,538,145 which still shows a comparative decline. 


The want of any proper explanation for the decline of the Scheduled Caste 
population and an increase in the population of all other communities during 
the same decade only reinforces the impression which every honest student 
of Indian census has formed namely that the Census of India has over a 
number of decades ceased to be an operation in demography. It has become 
a political affair. Every community seems to be attempting to artificially 
augment its numbers at the cost of some other community for the sake of 
capturing greater and greater degree of political power in its own hands. 
The Scheduled Castes seem to have been made a common victim for the 
satisfaction of the combined greed of the other communities who through 
their propagandists or enumerators are able to control the operation and 
the results of the Census. 


In the light of these circumstances it is fair to demand that an accurate 
figure for the population of the Scheduled Castes would be the Census 
figure as corrected by the inclusion of the population for Ajmer-Merwara 
and Gwalior State plus an increase of 15 per cent to give them the benefit 
of the general rise in the population. 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


448 


G87 LPP GS 


VIANI 


EEZ 8L'8 sərouəsv pue s978} 
9GZ'ETL'9T SOOUTAOLg 
Sud 

"966879 SƏQUL x 

O6FFILT  ZZřOPI 9990709 LVP‘169'S 960'890'36 OST‘SI8'8h 9Z8“ Il 90 VIANI 
ZZ6‘ZI 89793 6S86°161 °“ 088°9z9'T g69'689“%T €LE‘Z68'8 081 LZ SS səruəSy pue soje1g 
GLE‘T €8€ ST LGE ‘TEL GhP‘SES 8089 F'8 SSTLIL TIT ITIS%60 “8 594845 popup) 
LZE? 168‘ 880‘987 TOP'LSL‘S GPS LIGOL CE9'SPST LEL‘T0e'9 qefung 
VG LE8 9GP'S 686‘L9 L61881“ ¿ 1Z8°O8I TTEWN 
698 199'85 GE0‘°T00°S SIP ZSP‘968'8 Z6P‘890'8 OSE TELE sezpe]W 
186 80r'e ¥6Pr OL LST‘9L IL6‘V0E g69“%z1 GES FEY eq 
ZI 08 608°8 HN 08; FT OFL'SS €10°GOT 31009 
P103 ggq% 09%°8r 966'FI L69'E8L SIP Tso €8S‘088'6 Ieiog pue seoutaoig [817090 
986'T TELZ GES EL TIO'I8 9Z8°g0%°8 FE9T6I G63 8E0'T pug 
LOV‘SP PEO TI G18 ‘SEE P709 896‘0Z6'T SPrT‘Ses'T GPS OOL FT Sequiog 
ST 68L F895 GES TOE ‘OFT TILT ‘SET GEg‘r6eg‘g BssliO 
LVS €96'¢ E697 ETZ'ST PIG OILY 6LE Ore Fr 068°ELT ‘SS reylg 
0LZ‘98 619‘ TS €66‘O1T T8391 pEPr‘soo'es OL6‘SLE‘L 1S0°089“L1 [esueg 
GL £97 g89“ SI6‘TI 086‘8EF ZOT‘S TZS‘6E ugystyonpeg 
Z 189 09;“L8 POV 6LY CPPS 163919 GE6-98S'e ,UleSSV 
8001 968“ L98 668‘68 ¿ I8F'9LE BIBMIOIN -Iouly 

896‘TOʻT 986%€1T  90L'GPZ'E L60991“ €0S‘868‘6L L08‘0Z6°6E 9VT‘068‘0ST SOOUTAOI 

L 9 g f g Z I 
Susrtpu SULTJSIT sə1su 
sisieg aoe se SUIS susny has, Ñ snpurH 


TV6LT AO SASNAQ AHL OL ONI8000V SQHLILINIIWIWO O LN02634dI(T AO NOLLVTINdOg 


T əlquL 
SHUANDIA NOILVINdOd 
AI xrpuəddv 


449 


STATES AND MINORITIES 


= 
SET + 068 FII ZZ6‘ZI 896‘TOT Z91601 80%°8I 67996 sSIsIed 
98161 + 6IT‘9TS'9 GIT PES‘ 08F'ILE S g9,'962'9 801081“ 099°098'8 suemnstuuo 
9L9‘GGET + LPP TIG9'G 0S88°9Z8'1 L60‘S9T P TLL'SESP DLL VIL I L66‘0GG'E SUIS 
IS9'T88“I + 960°840‘G6 96%'6g9° I £09866. 9F9°“LL9 LL ZOT‘LS9‘OT ShP‘0Z0°L9 suut[sn] 
069“ — 081861 ‘87 €LE‘Z68‘8 L08‘0Z6‘°6E OLL‘OFS‘*6Y TOL‘TET TI 600°60F‘8E sejse9 pəl[npəuos 
9G6Z9F IZ + 9281190 — O81229 9PT'O68OST — 0¿8°FS9'681 T6s‘cee‘0g 6L6'61E‘6ET snpuly 
L 9 g 7 g Z I 
aseyuso1ed soetouese sotouese 
TEIL BIpUJ [eIOT, pue sə1e1s SOOUTAOL d BIpUy [e1OT, pue sojejg SOOUTAOI 


(-) əseə Də q 
(+) Əseə rvu] 


TIF6T1-IS61 ‘SAMLINAWWOD Ad NOLLVINdOg NI NOLLVINVA 


H Ə[qur 


PART V 


ON ECONOMIC PROBLEMS 


11 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA 
AND 
THEIR REMEDIES 


Published: Journal of the Indian Economic Society 
Vol. I, 1918 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND 
THEIR REMEDIES 


I 
IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE 


A study of the economic ways of getting a living will ever remain important. 
These ways generally take the form of industries or services. Confining 
ourselves to industries, they may be divided into primary and secondary. 
The primary industries are concerned with extracting useful material from 
the earth, the soil or water and take the form of hunting, fishing, stock- 
ralsing, lumbering and mining. These primary or extractive industries are 
fundamental in two ways: (1) They extract from the physical world useful 
materials which become the original sources of man’s subsistence. (2) They 
provide raw materials for the secondary or manufacturing industries, for, 
manufactures, in the language of Dr. Franklin, are simply, “substance 
metamorphosed”. From a national point of view as well, the importance 
of primary industries is beyond question. But important as are the 
primary industries, farming is by far the most important of them all. It is 
most ancient and abiding of all industries, primary or secondary : while the 
fact that it is concerned with the production of food is enough to make its 
problems demand our most serious thought. But when a country, like India, 
depends almost wholly upon farming its importance cannot be exaggerated. 
The problems of agricultural economy dealing directly with agricultural 
production are what to produce, the proper proportion of the factors of 
production, the size of holdings, the tenures of land etc. In this paper it is 
attempted to deal only with the problem of the size of holdings as it affects 
the productivity of agriculture. 


II 
SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA 


It may be said that some countries are predominantly countries of small 
holdings while in others it is the large holdings that prevail. According to 


456 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Adam Smith it is the adoption of the law of primogeniture chiefly due to 
the exigencies of a military life that leads to the creation and preservation 
of large holdings. While it is the adoption of the law of equal sub-division 
necessitated by the comparatively peaceful career of a nation that gives rise 
to small holdings. He says : — 


“When land like moveables is considered as the means only of subsistence 
and enjoyment, the natural law of succession divides it like them among all 
the children of the family ; of all of whom the subsistence and enjoyment may 
be aupposed equally dear to the father, [thus tending to have small holdings]. 
But when land was considered as the means, not of subsistence merely, but of 
power and protection it was thought better that it should descend undivided 
to one. In those disorderly times....... to divide it was to ruin it, and to expose 


every part of it to be opposed and swallowed up by its neighbours. The law of 


primogeniture, therefore came to take place in the succession of landed estates 


[thus tending to preserve large holdings]”! 


England is, therefore, a country of large holdings. Post-Revolutionary 
France is a country of small holdings. So are Holland and Denmark. Turning 
to India, we find holdings of the following size held separate and direct for 
the years 1896-97 and 1900-01: 


Average area of holdings in acres 


Years Assam 
1896-97 3.37 
1900-01 3.02 


Bombay 
24.07 
23.9 


Central Provinces Madras 
17 7 
48 7 


Data, more recent, more exact, though from more restricted area, is 
available from the Baroda State.” Statistics of land holdings in the State 
are summarised in bighas in the following table :* 


Total Survey No. Number Average Average 
Name of the Agricul- into which of under area per 
District tural itis divided Khatedars Khatedar Survey 
land No. 
Baroda 17,17,319 4,30,601 107,638 15—19—2 4 
Kadi 25,138,982 5,839,687 141,145 17—16—5 A 
Naosari 10,46,176 2,16,748 52,652 19—17—8 4 
Amveli 9,72,040 55,635 17,214 36—9—7 3% 
Total 82,49,517 12,92,671 318,649 17—10—10 37/3 


1.Wealth of Nations. Bk. III Ch. 11. 


(8 bighas = 5 acres) 


2.Report of the Committee appointed to make proposals on the Consolidation of Small and 
Scattered holdings in the Baroda State, 1917. This will be throughout referred to as R.B.C. 


3. ibid., p. 3 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 457 


Another investigation conducted by Dr. H. S. Mann and his colleagues 
indicates more specifically the fact of small holdings in the village of Pimpala 
Saudagar near Poona. The size of holdings in that village is indicated by 


the table below?: 


1 to 2 acres 


Over 20 acres 
10 to 20 acres 
5 to 10 acres 
3 to 5 acres 
2 to 3 acres 
30 to 40 gunthas 
20 to 30 gunthas 
15 to 20 gunthas 
10 to 15 gunthas 
5 to 10 gunthas 
Below 5 gunthas 


Number of 
plots of each 1 7 21 | 25 | 67 |164| 75 |116| 71 | 57 | 59 | 25 


size. 


(40 Gunthas = 1 acre) 


In this table the model holding is between 1 and 2 acres. A mode is a statistical average 
indicating the point of largest frequency in an array of instances. 


From these tables it can be easily seen that the average size of holdings 
varies from 25.9 acres in the Bombay Presidency to an acre or two in 


Pimpala Saudagar. 


This diminutive size of holdings is said to be greatly harmful to Indian 
Agriculture. The evils of small holdings no doubt, are many. But it would 
have been no slight mitigation of them if the small holdings were compact 
holdings. Unfortunately they are not. A holding of a farmer though compact 
for purposes of revenue is for purposes of tillage composed of various 
small strips of land scattered all over the village and interspersed by 
those belonging to others. How the fields are scattered can only be shown 
graphically by a map. Herein we shall have to remain content, since we 
cannot give a map, with knowing how many separate plots are contained 
in a holding. The number of separate plots in each holding will show how 
greatly fragmented it is. We have no figures at all for the whole of India 
bearing on this aspect of the question. But the Hon’ble Mr. G. F. Keatinge 
in his note”? submitted to Government in 1916 has collected figures of typical 


4. Land and Labour in a Deccan Village 1927, p. 48. 
5. The author is thankful to him for a copy of this valuable note. 


458 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


cases from all the districts of the Bombay Presidency. The following table 
is constructed to present his data in an intelligible form: 


Case II Case V 
V. Shirgaon V. Badlapur 
T. Ratnagiri T. Kalyan 
D. Ratnagiri D. Thana 


No. of separate 
plots 
Area of a holding 


Area of a holding 


10% 


29% 
20% 
35% 


NWO Re 
w 
w 


w O —1 (O & WW tS w 


No. of separate 


Case VI Case VII 
V. Kara V. Althan 
T. Mawal T. Ghorssi 
D. Poona D. Surat 


Area of a holding 


No. of separate plots 
Area of a holding 


No. of separate plots 


Case IX 


Sur 


at 


District 


Area of a holding 


No. of separate plots 


Case X 
Kairs 
District 


Area of a holding 


onwnmarnauwcu 


No. of separate plots 


w 


Case XII 
V. Lhasurna 
T. Koregaon 

D. Satara 


Area of a holding 


No. of separate plots 


(A = acre g = guntha V = village T = taluka D = district) 


These small and scattered holdings have given a real cause for anxiety 
regarding our great national industry. Comparative Statistics go to swell this 
feeling by laying bare two very noteworthy but equally sad facts regarding 
economic life in India; (1) that it is largely an agricultural country ;* and 
(2) that its agricultural productivity is the lowest+— 


* (1) Occupational Statistics 


E =] 
a s | = = 8 
RIBER: Ë 8 Š 8 ##| s| < 
Dilla a E = g/t] n 
rs 213 2 RJAD 
BF) Ajajaj El = 3|” 
m= n 
Percentage of Agricul- 
tural Population. 15.3 | 44.7 | 60.9 | 20.7 | 82.6 | 48.2 | 42.7 | 35.2 | 30.7 | 69.7 | 59.4 | 58.3 | 30.9] 71.5 | 33.3 


+(2) Produce in Lbs. per acre 


Indian Provinces 
ae} 
g 
4 > | = " 
g 8 H > 
SiN] 2] 2] 8] ¢] > Sel 
s 6 a a g G ~| Ad = 2 
x< a) 5] 8] el] el] al] 5 ele) alal] |5| 5 |ë 
D oO Z < m= = | Ó lam) > |P| = B Z| 58 mp5 
Wheat ç 1973 | 1054 | 1723 | 1150 | 1634 | 1172| 1796 | 1056| 1176|.. |1318|850 |555|555 |510 |322 
Maize a & 3487 | 3191 | 1135 | 2059 | 1097|.. 1489| 1525|.. |1372 |1100 | 735 | 766 |.. 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 459 


Both these truths are painful enough to have startled many people into 
inquiring the causes of this low productivity. As a result, attention has 
now been concentrated on the excessive sub-division and fragmentation of 
agricultural holdings. Enlarge and consolidate the holdings, it is confidently 
argued, and the increase in agricultural productivity will follow in its wake!! 


HI 
CONSOLIDATION 


Consolidation of holdings is a practical problem while the enlargement of 
them is a theoretical one, demanding a discussion of the principle which can 
be said to govern their size. Postponing the consideration of the theoretical 
question of enlargement, we find that the problem of consolidation raises the 
following two issues:—(1) how to unite such small and scattered holdings as 
the existing ones, and (2) once consolidated how to perpetuate them at that 
size. Let us consider them each in turn. Sub-division of land need not involve 
what is called the fragmentation of land. But unfortunately it does, for, every 
heir desires to secure a share from each of the survey numbers composing 
the entire lands of the deceased instead of so arranging the distribution that 
each may get as many whole numbers as possible, i.e. the heirs instead of 
sharing the lands by survey numbers, claim to share in each survey number, 
thus causing fragmentation. Though fragmentation does subserve the ends 
of distributive justice it renders farming in India considerably inefficient 
as it once did in Europe. It involves waste of labour and cattle power, 
waste in hedges and boundary marks, and waste of manure. It renders 
impracticable the watching of crops, sinking of wells and the use of labour 
saving implements. It makes difficult changes in cultivation, the making of 
roads, water channels, etc., and it increases the cost of production. These 
disadvantages of fragmentation arc to be recounted only to lend their support 
to the process of restripping or consolidation. The methods of “restripping” are 
many, though all are not equally efficacious. Voluntary exchanges can hardly 
be relied upon for much. But a restricted sale of the right of occupancy may 
be expected to go a good deal. For, under it, when survey numbers are put 
to auction on account of their being relinquished by the holders or taken in 
attachment for arrears of assessments, only those may be allowed to bid in 
the auction for the sale of the right of occupancy whose lands are contiguous 
to the land hammered out. Again as further helping the process of reunion, 
the right of pre-emption may be given to farmers whose neighbour wishes to 
sell his land. These methods, it must be admitted, can achieve the desired 
result in a very small measure. The evils of fragmentation are very great 
and must be met by a comprehensive scheme of consolidation. It is, therefore, 
advocated* that if two-thirds of the Khiatedars, dealing more than half of 


*RBC, p. 38. 


460 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the village lands, apply, Government, should undertake compulsorily to 
restrip the scattered fields of the village. This compulsory restripping 
is to be executed on two principles, (1) of “Economic Unit” and (2) of 
“Original Ownership”. Regarding the merits of these two principles the 
Baroda Committee observes.® 


“In the first the value of each holding is ascertained, then the 
original boundaries are removed, roads are marked out, lands required 
for public purposes are set apart, and the rest of the land is parcelled 
out into new plots. Each of these new plots must be of such a size 
as, having regard to the local conditions of soil, tillage etc. to form an 
economic field, i.e., a parcel of land necessary to keep fully engaged 
and support one family. These new plots may be sold by auction among 
the old occupants, restriction being placed on purchase so as to prevent 
a large number of cultivators from being ousted. The purchase, money 
may then be divided in a certain proportion among the original owners 
of pieces, a portion being reserved for expenses, in which Government 
would also contribute a share. Another mode would be to acquire all 
the land of the village then to sell it in newly constituted plots by 
auction as is done by City Improvement Trusts or by Government 
when laying out new roads in Cities or when extending a town. But 
we do not recommend its adoption in the improvement of agricultural 
land. It may result in land speculation and the small holders may be 
ousted in such numbers as to cause a real hardship.” 


“According to the second method when the restripping has been 
decided, a list of Khatedars and their holdings is made and the 
latter are valued at their market price by Panchas. Then the land is 
redistributed and each Khatedar is given new land in proportion to his 
original holding and as far as possible of the same value, difference to 
be adjusted by cash payment. In this method no Khatedar is deprived 
of his land. Each is accommodated and in the place of his original 
small and scattered fields gets one plot of almost their aggregate size. 
It is only a few people whose holding may be very small and whom it 
would not be expedient to keep on as farmers, that may have to lose 
their small pieces. But they too would benefit as they would get their 
full value in money.” 


The Baroda Committee prefers the second method because: 


“It takes as its starting principle, that nobody (except perhaps a few, 
holding plots of insignificant sizes) is going to be driven off the land. It 
will give even the smallest man, chance to better his condition. Each 
land holder receives a new compact piece of land proportionate to the 


6. R. B. C, p. 35 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 461 


value of his old small and scattered field. In this way the previous sub- 
divisions together with their attendant evils totally disappear.” 


Regarding consolidation, Prof. H. S. Jevons says: 


“The principles which should guide the choice of a method of carrying 
out the re-organization of villages on the lines above described are the 
following. In the first place compulsion should be avoided as far as 
possible and the principle adopted that no charge should be imposed 
upon any area unless the owners of more than one-half of that area 
desire the change. Should this condition be satisfied for an area....... at 
would seem expedient that legal power should be taken to compel the 
minority to accept the redistribution of holdings under the supervision 
of Government. In the second place............. the expense of the operation 
should be kept as low as possible......... In the third place considerable 
elasticity should be permitted in the methods of carrying through 
the re-organization in the different places during the first few years, 
as the whole undertaking would be in an experimental stage so that 
different methods might be tried, and the best be ultimately selected 
for a permanent set of regulations. Fourthly, the possible necessity for 
a considerable change of the existing tenancy law in the re-organised 
villages must be faced.......... .. .For the sake of completeness I may 
add as a fifth principle the obvious condition that redistribution of land 
must be made upon the most equitable basis possible, and that liberal 
compensation should be given to those, if any, who may be excluded 
from a former cultivating ownership.” š 


As for procedure in the compulsory consolidation of holdings both 
Prof. Jevons and the Baroda Committee propose the appointment of 
Commissioners to hear applications for consolidation and to carry it out, 
leaving to any objector the right to petition the Court to stay the proceedings 
in case he felt that an injustice was being done to him. 


The problem of perpetuating such a consolidated holding will next demand 
the care of the legislator. It is accepted without question by many that the 
law of inheritance that prevails among the Hindus and the Mohomedans 
is responsible for the sub-division of land. On the death of a Hindu or a 
Mahomedan his heirs are entitled without let or hindrance to equal shares 
in the property of the deceased. Now a consolidated holding subject to the 
operation of such a law of inheritance will certainly not endure for long. 
It will be the task of Sisyphus over again if, after consolidation, the law 
of inheritance were to remain unaltered. 


7. R. B.C. . p. 35. 


8. The Consolidation of Agicultural Holdings in the United Provinces, 1918, pp. 45-46. 
The author is grateful to Prof. Jevons for a copy. 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


But how is the existing law of inheritance to be changed ? If it is not to 
be the law of equal sub-division shall we have the law of primogeniture.° 
The Baroda Committee thanks that,— 


“It is not necessary that it should be introduced. All that it wanted 
is, that there should not be sub-divisions of land beyond a certain 
limit, which may be fixed for the sake of good agriculture. There is no 
objection to a holding being sub-divided, so long as by so doing each 
of the parts does not become less than the limit fixed for the sub- 
division of land. But when a holding reaches a stage to render further 
sub-division uneconomic, the other members of the family may not be 
allowed to force further sub-division of the holding. Instead of being 
sub-divided, it may be either cultivated in common or be given to one 
of the members of the family as a whole, and that member made to 
pay amounts equal to the value of their shares as compensation to the 
other members.”!° 


The principle of not dividing immovable property among the heirs, when 
division would result in inconveniently small shares, but of giving to the 
highest bidder among the sharers or in case none of them is willing to 
have it, to outside bidders, and dividing the money realized in proportion 
to the recognized shares, has been accepted in the Indian Partition Act, 
No. 4 of 1893, section 2 of which runs thus : 


“Whenever in any suit for partition, in which, if instituted prior to 
the commencement of this Act, a decree for partition might have been 
made, it appears to the Court that, by reason of the nature of the 
property to which the suit relates, or of the number of the shareholders 
therein or of any other special circumstance, a division of the property 
cannot reasonably or conveniently be made and that a sale of the 
property and distribution of proceeds would be more beneficial for 
all the share-holders, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the request 
of any such share-holder interested individually or collectively to the 
extent of one moiety or upwards direct a sale of the property and a 
distribution of the proceeds.” 


Granting the advisability of thus changing the law of inheritance it only 
requires to amend the Civil Procedure Code so as to make it obligatory 
on the Courts to refuse partition whenever it would reduce a field beyond 
the economic limit fixed in advance. 


9. Besides these two systems of inheritance there is a third which allows a father liberty to do 
as he likes with a part of his estate provided he leaves sufficient for his heir to constitute what 
is called pars legitima. Under it the Germans have enacted a permissive law of Anerbenrecht 
designed to obviate the effects of the law of inheritance in causing unnecessary sub-division of 
land. In some aspects it anticipates the proposals of the Baroda Committee; in others those of 
the Hon. Mr. Keatings. For a description of it see Prof. N. G. Pierson's Principles of Economics, 
Vol. II, pp. 286-90. 


10. R.B.C., p. 26. 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 463 


Another method of dealing with the problem is advocated by the Hon. 
Mr. G. F. Keatinge, Director of Agriculture, Bombay Presidency. In the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to his draft bill he says: 


aa AN . The object of this bill is to enable such landowners 
as may wish to do so to check the further sub-division of their lands 
and to enable them, when it is otherwise possible, to effect a permanent 
consolidation of their holdings; and also to enable the executive 
government to secure the same results in respect of unoccupied land. 
The legislation proposed is purely enabling, and it will be operative 
in the case of any holding only upon the expressed wish of any person 
possessing an interest in that holding. 


“5. The scheme embodied in this bill for securing these objects is 
briefly as follows. In order to be constituted an economic holding a plot 
of land must be entered as such in a register prescribed by rules. If 
the land is occupied, it will rest with some person having an interest 
in the land to make an application to the Collector to have the land 
registered as an economic holding............. . Unless the Collector 
considers that there are sufficient grounds for rejecting the application, 
he holds a careful enquiry in which he follows a procedure similar to 
that prescribed in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. If the proceedings 
show that all persons interested agree, the land is registered. Land 
vesting absolutely in Government may be registered without inquiry. 
The holding must in any case be registered in one name only, and the 
act of registration annuls all the interest of all other persons, except 
the registered owner, in the holding. Thereafter the owner cannot 
divide the plot but must so long as he owns it, keep it entire. He 
may sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose of it as an entire unit, but 
not dispose of part of it or do anything that might result in splitting 
up the holding. On the death of the holder, if he has not disposed of 
the land by will it will devolve upon a single heir. If the provisions of 
the bill are contravened (for instance if the holder mortgages a part 
of his holding and the mortgagee obtains a decree for possession), the 
Collector is empowered to send a certificate to the Court, and the 
Court will set aside its decree or order. The Collector may also evict a 
person in wrongful possession. When a plot has been once constituted 
an economic holding, the registration cannot be cancelled except with 
the consent of the Collector; the grounds on which cancellation will 
be allowed, will be laid down by rule and it is proposed that it shall 
be permitted chiefly in cases where economic considerations indicate 
that it is expedient.” 


Summing up this discussion of the two issues of consolidation, it must be 
said that the problem has not been viewed as a whole by all its advocates. 
The Baroda Committee alone endeavours to consolidate as well as to preserve 


464 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the consolidated holding. Prof. Jevons makes no provision to conserve the 
results of consolidation. Mr. Keatinge does not deal with consolidation at 
all. He is concerned only with the prevention of further fragmentation. 
But fragmentation, there will be in a holding even after it is entered as 
an economic holding. By his measure he will only succeed in preserving 
the holdings as they will be found at the time of registration, i.e., he will 
not allow them to be reduced in size. But they will be small and scattered 
all the same. Mr. Keatinge, notwithstanding his legislation, leaves the 
situation more or less as it exists. Real consolidation is, however, aimed at 
by Prof. Jevons and the Baroda Committee. The principles they advocate 
for the purpose are almost the same; and so are their procedures for 
carrying it out. 


As for the preservation of consolidated holdings Mr. Keatinge as well 
as the Baroda Committee establish the one-man rule of succession. The 
Baroda Committee would adopt this rule only when division of land would 
result in uneconomic holdings and then too would compel the successor 
to buy off the claims of the other dispossessed heirs. Mr. Keatinge would 
let the dispossessed heirs off without compensation. 


A more serious criticism against these projects of consolidation consists 
in the fact they have failed to recognize that a consolidated holding must 
be an enlarged holding as well. If it is said that Indian agriculture suffers 
from small and scattered holdings we must not only consolidate, but also 
enlarge them. It must be borne in mind that consolidation may obviate 
the evils of scattered holdings, but it will not obviate the evils of small 
holdings unless the consolidated holding is an economic, i.e. an enlarged 
holding. The Committee as well as Mr. Keatinge have entirely lost sight 
of this aspect of the question. Prof. Jevons, alone of the advocates, keeps 
it constantly before his mind that consolidation must bring about in its 
train the enlargement of holdings. 


IV 
ENLARGEMENT 


Granted that enlargement of holdings is as important as their 
consolidation we will now turn to the discussion of regulating their 
size. It is desired by all interested in our agriculture that our holdings 
should be economic holdings. We would have been more thankful to the 
inventors of this new, precise and scientific terminology had they given 
us a precise and scientific definition of an economic holding. On the 
other hand, it is believed that a large holding is somehow an economic 
holding. It may be said that even Prof. Jevons has fallen a victim to 
this notion. For when discussing what the size of a holding should 
be he dogmatically states that in the consolidated village the mode 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 465 


should be between 29 and 30 acres. !1! But why should the mode be at this 
point and not at 100 or say 200? We might imagine Prof. Jevons to reply 
that his model point is placed at that particular acreage because it would 
produce enough for a farmer to sustain a higher standard of living. Raising 
the general standard of living in India is the one string on which Prof. Jevons 
harps even to weariness throughout his pamphlet.!2 The error underlying 
this doctrine we shall consider later on. It is enough to say that he does 
not give any sound economic reason for his model farm. 


The case with the Baroda Committee is much worse, Prof. Jevons at least 
sticks to one definition of an ideal economic holding; but the Report of the 
Baroda Committee suffers from a plurality of definitions. While comenting 
on the size of an average holding in the state as is summarized in the above 
table, it should be noted that the Committee, though it desired consolidation, 
was perfectly satisfied with the existing size of the holding as is clear, from 
the following: 


“If the average holding of a Khatedar was a .compact field of those figures, 
the situation would be an ideal one and would not leave much to be desired.” 


But absent-minded as it were, the Committee, without any searching 
analysis of the question it was appointed to investigate and report upon, 
lays down that: 


“An ideal economic holding would consist of 30 to 50 bighas of fair land im 
one block with at least one good irrigation well and a house situated in the 
holding.” 


If the size of existing holdings is an ideal size why should they be 
enlarged ? To this, the Committee gives no answer. But this is not all. The 
Committee does not even adhere to the quantitative limit it has already set 
down to its ideal economic holding. When it comes to discuss the project 
of re-arrangement of the scattered fields of the village on the principle of 
“Economic unit” it presents a third ideal of an economic holding. To realize 
this ideal it says: 


“Each of these new plots must be of such a size, as having regard to the 
local conditions of soil, tillage, etc., to form an Economic field, i.e., a parcel of 
land necessary to keep fully engaged and support one family.”!” 


Thus with perfect equanimiy (1) the Baroda Committee holds, not too 
fast, to three notions of an ideal economic holding. No wonder then that 
the Report of the Committee is a model of confused reasoning though it is 
a valuable repository of facts bearing on the subject. 


11. Opt. Cit. chart on p. 38. 
12. Opt. Cit. Introduction. 
13. Ibid., p. 4. 

14. R.B.C., p. 31. 

15. Ibid., p. 53. 


466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


According to the Hon. Mr. Keatinge an economic holding is :— 


“a holding which allows a man chance of producing sufficient to support 
himself and his family in reasonable comfort, after paying his necessary 
expenses.”!6 


His definition of an economic holding will be accepted, we may expect, 
by the Baroda Committee; for, it does not differ from its own, given above 
as third in order. Assuming they agree, we may now proceed to see how 
far tenable this definition is. 


It is plain that these definitions including that of Professor Jevons 
vlew an economic holding from the stand-point of consumption rather 
than of production. In this lies their error; for consumption is not the 
correct standard by which to judge the economic character of a holding. 
It would be perverse accounting to condemn a farm as not paying because 
its total output does not support the family of the farmer though as a 
pro-rata return for each of his investments it is the highest. The family 
of a farmer can only be looked upon in the light of so much labour corps 
at his disposal. It may well be that some portion of this labour corps is 
superfluous, though it has to be supported merely in obedience to social 
custom as is the case in India. But if our social custom compels a farmer 
to support some of his family members even when he cannot effectively 
make any use of them on his farm we must be careful not to find fault 
with the produce of the farm because it does not suffice to provide for the 
workers as well as the dependants that may happen to compose the family. 
The adoption of such an accounting system will declare many enterprises 
as failures when they will be the most successful. There can be no true 
economic relation between the family of the entrepreneur and the total 
out-turn of his farm or industry. True economic relation can subsist only 
between the total out-turn and the investments. If the total out-turn pays 
for all the investments no producer in his senses will ever contemplate 
closing his industry because the total out-turn does not support his family. 
This is evident; for though production is for the purpose of consumption it 
is for the consumption only of those who help to produce. It follows, then, 
that if the relation between out-turn and investments is a true economic 
relation, we can only speak of a farm as economic, i.e., paying in the 
sense of production and not in the sense of consumption. Any definition, 
therefore, that leans on consumption mistakes the nature of an economic 
holding which is essentially an enterprise in production. 


Before going further, we must clear the ground by a few preliminary 
remarks to facilitate the understanding of an economic holding from the 
standpoint of production. 


16. Rural Economy in the Bombay Deccan, p. 51. 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 467 


It must be premised at the outset that in a competitive society the daily 
transactions of its members, as consumers or producers, are controlled by 
a price regime. It is production, then, in a price regime that we have to 
analyse here for our purpose. In the main the modern process of production 
is captained by the entrepreneur, is guided and supervised by him and is 
worked out through him. All employers of labour or hirers of instrumental 
goods are entrepreneurs. His computations run, as they must, in a 
pecuniary society, in terms of price-outlay as over against price-product, 
no matter whether the prospective product is offered for sale or not. The 
entrepreneur, in producing for gain, apportions his outlays in varieties of 
investments. These investments, the same as factors of production or costs 
to the entrepreneur, have by tradition been confined to wages (labour) 
profits, rent (land) and interest (capital). Industrial facts do not support this 
classification. There are many other factors, it is contended, which as they 
share in the distributive process must have functioned in the productive 
process, in some way immediate or remote. But it is immaterial how 
many factors there are and whether they differ in kind or degree. What is 
important for the purpose of production is the process of combining them. 


This combination of necessary factors of production is governed by a law 
called the law of proportion. It lays down that disadvantage is bound to 
attend upon a wrong proportion among the various factors of production 
employed in a concern. Enlarged, the principle means that as a certain 
volume of one factor has the capacity to work only with a certain volume 
of another to give maximum efficiency to both, an excess or defect in 
the volume of one in comparison with those of the others will tell on 
the total output by curtailing the efficiency of all. Having regard then to 
this interdependence of factors, an economically efficient combination of 
them compels the producer if he were to vary the one to vary the rest 
correspondingly. Neither can it be otherwise. For, the chief object of an 
efficient production consists in making every factor in the concern contribute 
its highest; and it can do that only when it can co-operate with its fellow 
of the required capacity. Thus, there is an ideal of proportions that ought 
to subsist among the various factors combined, though the ideal will vary 
with the changes in the proportions." 


These proportions it must be acknowledged are affected by the principle 
of substitution chiefly brought into play owing to variations in the prices 
of the factors. But this principle of substitution is too limited in its 
application to invalidate the law of proportion which is the law governing all 


17. This description of the process of production is pieced together from the remarks of 
Prof. H. J. Davenport in his masterly treatise “The Economics of Enterprize” New York. 
Macmilian, 1913, In this connection see also the able paper by Prof. Henry C. Taylor on 
“Two Dimensions of Productivity” read before the 29th Annual Meeting of the American 
Economic Association held in December 1916 and the remarks on the same by Prof. A. 
A. Young. Both these will be found in the American Economic Review for March 1917. 


468 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


economic production and which no producer can hope to ignore with 
impunity.!š 


Bringing to bear the above remarks regarding production on the definition 
of an economic holding, we can postulate that if agriculture 1s to be treated 
as an economic enterprise, then, by itself, there could be no such thing as 
a large or a small holding. To a farmer a holding is too small or too large 
for the other factors of production at his disposal necessary for carrying on 
the cultivation of his holding as an economic enterprise. Mere size of land 
is empty of all economic connotation. Consequently, it cannot possibly be the 
language of economic science to say that a large holding is economic while 
a small holding is uneconomic. It is the right or wrong proportion of other 
factors of production to a unit of land that renders the latter economic or 
uneconomic. Thus a small farm may be economic as well as a large farm ; 
for, economic or uneconomic does not depend upon the size of land but upon 
the due proportion among all the factors including land. 


An economic holding, therefore, if it is not to be a hollow concept, consists 
in a combination of land, capital and labour, etc., in a proportion such that 
the pro rata contribution of each in conjunction with the rest is the highest. 
In other words to create an economic holding it will not do for a farmer solely 
to manipulate his piece of land. He must also have the other instruments 
of production required for the efficient cultivation of his holding and must 
maintain a due proportion of all the factors for, without it, there can be no 
efficient production. If his equipment shrinks, his holding must also shrink. 
If his equipment augments, his holding must also augment. The point is 
that his equipment and his holding must not be out of proportion to each 
other. They must be in proportion and must vary, if need be, in proportion. 


The line of argument followed above is not without support from actual 
practice. It is happy from an economist's point of view, to find it recognized 
and adopted in India itself by the fathers of the Survey and Settlement 
System in the Bombay Presidency. The famous Joint Report (1840) contains 
an illuminating discussion of the problem. The question before the officers 
deputed to introduce the Survey System in the Deccan was how to levy 
the assessment. Was it to be a field assessment or an assessment to 
be placed on the whole lands of the village or on the entire holdings of 
individuals or co-parceners, whether proprietors or occupants. That after 


18. Some economists who hold that it is the law of Diminishing Returns that governs 
agricultural production will demur to the universal applicability that is claimed for the 
Law of Proportion. Briefly stated the Law of Dininishing Returns asserts that additional 
‘doses’ of capital and labour administered to a given piece of land will be responded to 
by a less and less yield. This means that if only the non-land expense of production is 
doubled there results less than a doubled product. But if this is the fact that is intended 
to be generallised by the Law of Diminishing Returns then there is nothing in it that is 
peculiar to agricultural production. If the expense to the land be doubled but the land not 
doubled it is certain that the extra return will fall short of the increased expense. This 
is simply another way of saying that if the returns are to grow all the factors must be 
increased in proportion. But so stated is not the Law of Diminishing Returns a confused 
version of the Law of Proportion? 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 469 


much deliberation the system of field assessment was finally adopted 
is known to many. But as the reasons that led to its adoption are 
known only to a few the following explanatory parts from the Joint 
report will be found to be both interesting and instructive: 


“Para 6. That one manifest advantage of breaking up the 
assessment of a village into portions so minute [as indicated by 
a survey number] is the facilty it affords to the cultivators of 
contracting or enlarging his farm from year to year, according 
to the fluctuating amount of agricultural capital at their 
disposal which is of incalculable importance to farmers possessed 
of so limited resources as those of the cultivating classes throughout 
India. 


“Para 7. The loss of a few bullocks by disease or other causes 
may quite incapacitate a ryot from cultivating profitably the extent 
of land he had previously in village and, without the privilege of 
contracting his farm, and consequent liabilities on occassion of such 
loss, his ruin would be very shortly consummated.”!® 


Judging in the light of this conclusion the proposal to regulate the 
size of holdings appears ill-considered and futile. For as Prof. Richard 
T. Ely observes” : 


“Obviously no simple answer can be given to the question [as to 
what should be the size of a farm]. The value of land or the rent it will 
bring is perhaps the most important factor..................... In addition 
to the factor of rent the amount of capital that he can command, 
the kind of fanning in which he is most skilled, the character of the 
labour he can secure, the proximity of markets, and the adequacy 
of transportation facilities, all must be taken into account by the 
farmer in determining how large a farm he will attempt to manage 
and how intensively he will farm it. 


“This question is primarily one of private profit which the individual 
must decide for himself, but the legislator and the scientific student 
can be of some assistance in helping to develope that most difficult 
branch of commercial science—farm accounting—and in keeping the 
farmer alive to those charges in prices, wages, and transportation 
charges to which the farm organization must adjust itself.” 


To those who have the temerity to fix the size of a holding Prof. Ely’s 
well-considered opinion will bring home that in spite of good intentions 
their vicarious mission will end in disaster; for none but the cultivator 
can decide what should be the size of his holding. They would do well to 
remember that the size of his holdings will vary in time. Consequent to 


19. Survey Settlement Manual Bombay Presidency, 1882. p. 3. 
20. Outlines of Economics, pp. 531-32 (Italics ours). 


470 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the changes in his equipment with which he has to adjust the size 
of his farm, at one point in time he will decide in favour of a small, 
as at another he will decide in favour of a large holding. He would 
therefore be a poor economist who would legally fix the size of the 
holding which in the interest of economic production must be left to 
vary when variation is demanded. By fixing the size of a holding he 
can only make it a large holding but not an economic holding. For an 
economic holding is not a matter of the size of land alone but is a 
matter of the adjustment of a piece of land to the necessary equipment 
for its efficient cultivation. 


Vv 
CRITIQUE OF THE REMEDIES 


The proposal to enlarge the existing holdings which is brought 
forward as a cure to the ills of our agriculture can be entertained only 
if it is shown that farms have diminshed in size while the agricultural 
stock has increased in amount. Facts regarding the size of farms have 
already been recorded. It only remains to see if the agricultural stock 


has increased- Mr. K. L. Datta in his exhaustive survey says”: 


“178. Most of the Indian witnesses, whom we examined, appeared 
to be under the belief that there has been a decrease in the supply of 
agricultural products, owing to the inefficient tillage of land. It was said 
that land is not now cultivated as carefully and efficiently as before, 
owing to the scarcity and dearness of plough, cattle and labour. In order 
to effect, a saving in the cost of cultivation, cultivators do not also plough 
their lands as often as they did before, and manuring and weeding, as 
also the amount of irrigating where wells are used for the purpose, have 
all been reduced.” 


“179. As regards the scarcity of plough cattle............ (the) figures bear 
testimony to the deplorable effects of famine, the inevitable result of which 
has always been to reduce the number of cattle, though the deficiency is 
generally made good in a few years if otherwise favourable. The number 
of plough cattle in the latest year (1908-09) included in the statement 
was lower than in the commencement (1893-94), in some of the circles 
namely Assam, Bundelkhund. Agra Provinces—North and West, Gujarat, 
Deccan, Berar, Madras-North and Madras-West. Although great reliance 
cannot be placed on these statistics, they can be accepted as showing 
that in some areas at any rate there has been a dearth of plough cattle.” 


Regarding the existence of capital Mr. Elliot James says: 


“The ryots have a keen eye to the results of a good system of farming 
as exhibited on model farms, but they cannot derive much good from 


21. Report on the Enquiry into the Rise of Prices in India, 1914, Vol. 1, pp. 66-67, (Italics ours). 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 471 


the knowledge though they may take it in and thoroughly understand that 
superior tillage and proper manuring mean a greater out turn in crops. 
Their great want is capttal.”22 


The farmer knows, says the same author, that his agricultural 


equipment is inefficient and antiquated but he cannot substitute better 
ones in its place for: 


“A superior class of cattle and superior farm implements mean to him 
so much outlay of what he has not—Money.” 


Similar facts for the Baroda State have been collected in another 


connection by Mr. M. B. Nanavali, Director of Commerce and Industry. 


But unfortunately he did not bring his knowledge of such facts to bear 
upon the conclusions of the Committee for the consolidation of holdings 
in the State of which he was also a member, apparently thinking that 


the size of a holding bore no relation to the instruments of production. 
He bemoans that: 


“The farmers are not fully equipped with draught-cattle. They have 
today (1918) 8,34,901 bullocks, etc., for use on farms, that is one pair for 
36 bighas of land. On an average a pair of good bullocks can cultivate 25 
bighas of land. But the present breed has much deteriorated and one pair 
is supposed to cultivate 20 bighas at the most, while the present actual 
averages comes to about 36 bighas. Under the circumstances it is not 
likely that ploughing can be deep. It must be like scratching the surface. 
The small cultivators do not possess any draught-cattle or at the most a 
single one and cultivate land in co-operation with their friends similarly 
situated. As for farm implements there are 1,54,364 ploughs in the State, 
i.e., one for two Khatedars. It must be understood here that the number 
of cultivators and tenants is much more than three lakhs. Every one of 
them needs full equipment. Therefore actually the average must be much 
smaller than shown above.” 


In fact the equipment for agricultural production in the State has 


considerably deteriorated since 1898 as shown by the table below : 


Year Plough Carts Plough Cattle Other Domestics 
1898 N” 1,75,989 ie 4,15,089 5,70,517 
1910 a 1,51,664 68,946 3,384,801 5,09,416 


Given, this state of affairs can we not say with more propriety that not 


only the existing equipment is inadequate for the enlarged holdings but 


22 Indian Industries, p. 6. 
23. Report on Agricultural Indebtedness in the Baroda State, 1913, para. 35. 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that the existing holdings, small as they are, are too big for the available 
instruments of production other than land ? Facts such as these interpreted 
in the light of our theory force upon us the conclusion that the existing 
holdings are uneconomic, not, however, in the sense that they are too small 
but that they are too large. Shall we therefore argue that the existing 
holdings should be further reduced in size with a view to render them 
economic in the sense in which we have used the term ? Unwary readers 
might suppose that this is the only logical and inevitable conclusion— a 
conclusion that is in strange contrast with the main trend of opinion 
in this country. Contrary, no doubt, the conclusion is; but it is by no 
means inevitable. For, from our premises we can with perfect logic and 
even with more cogency argue for increase im agricultural stock and 
implements which in turn will necessitate enlarged holdings which will 
be economic holdings as well. 


Consequently the remedy for the ills of agriculture in India does not 
He primarily in the matter of enlarging holdings but in the matter of 
increasing capital and capital goods. That capital arises from saving 
and that saving is possible where there is surplus is a commonplace of 
political economy. 


Does our agriculture—the main stay of our population—give us any 
surplus ? We agree with the answer which is unanimously in the negative. 
We also approve of the remedies that are advocated for turning the deficit 
economy into a surplus economy, namely by enlarging and consolidating 
the holdings. What we demur to is the method of realizing this object. 
For we most strongly hold that the evil of small holdings in India is not 
fundamental but is derived from the parent evil of the mal-adjustment in 
her social economy. Consequently if we wish to effect a permanent cure 
we must go to the parent malady. 


But before doing that we will show how we suffer by a bad social 
economy. It has become a tried statement that India is largely an 
agicultural country. But what is scarcely known is that notwithstanding 
the vastness of land under tillage, so little land is cultivated in proportion 
to her population. 


Mulhall’s figures for the year 1895 clearly demonstrate the point. 
Acres per inhabitant in 1895 


Great Ireland France Germany Russia Austria Italy Spain U.S.A. India 
Britain and 
Portugal 


0.91 3.380 2.30 1.70 5.60 2.05 1.75 2.90 8.90 1.0 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 473 


That since 1895 the situation, however, has gone from bad to worse figures 
eloquently bear out: 


1881 1891 1901 1911 
Bengal m" š š 1.5 0.8 1:12 Sa 
Bombay % 3 s 1.7 1.6 1.41 1.3 
Madras A " .. 1.3 0.3 .68 .79 
Assam s P j sis 0.5 .78 .85 
Punjab i m i 1.2 1.3 1.05 1.11 
Oudh 7 .. P .81 0.7 | .73 .75 
N. W. P. s: š s ks 0.8 
Burmah <2 2 ‘ats 1.5 1.08 1.09 
Central P. yi oe š 1.67 2.4 1.8 1.79 
B. India m š s 1.04 1.0 0.86 0.88 


Now, what does this extraordinary phenomenon mean ? A large agricultural 
population with the lowest proportion of land in actual cultivation means that 
a large part of the agricultural population is superfluous and idle. How much 
idle labour there is on Indian farms it is not possible to know accurately. 
Sir James Caird who was the first to notice the existence of this idle labour 
estimated in 1884 that, 


“A square mile of land in England cultivated highly gives employment to 50 
persons, in the proportion 25 men, young and old, and 25 women and boys. If 
four times that number, or 200, were allowed for each square mile of cultivated 
land in India, it would take up only one-third of the population.” 


Out of the total population of 254 millions in 1881 nearly two-thirds were 
returned as agricultural. Allowing, as per estimate, one-third to be taken up, 
we can safely say that a population of equal magnitude was lying idle instead 
of performing any sort of productive labour. With the increasing ruralization 
of India and a continually decreasing proportion of land under cultivation, 
the volume of idle labour must have increased to an enormous extent. 


The economic effects of this idle labour are two-fold. Firstly, it adds to 
the tremendous amount of pressure that our agricultural population exerts 
on land. A quantitative statement will serve to bring home to our mind how 
high the pressure is: 


Mean density per square mile in 1911 


E Al = n 2 > Ë = 

s= & 58 s S| 5 sas P|] zE 

a=) 85 |2|58| Ee) 8]85l á ša 

5 ° Ë O 

a z| m = £ m | < Š m MA 
of Total Area 427 | 551 |291 |177 1451115 | 122 |111| 53 
of Cultivated Area 829 |1162 | 785 | 453 |444| 766| 360 | 792| 575 


24. India, the Land and the People, p. 225. 


474 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Such high pressure of population on land is probably unknown in any 
other part of the world. The effect of 1t is, of course, obvious. 


Notwithstanding what others have said, this enormous pressure is the 
chief cause of the subdivision of land. It is the failure to grasp the working 
of this pressure on land that makes the law of inheritance such a great 
grievance. To say that the law of inheritance causes sub-division of land is 
to give a false view by inverting the real situation. The mere existence of 
the law cannot be complained of as a grievance. The grievance consists in 
the fact that it is invoked. But why is it invoked even when it is injurious ? 
Simply because it is profitable. There is nothing strange in this. When 
farming is the only occupation, to get a small piece of land is better than 
to have none. Thus the grievance lies in the circumstances which put a 
premium on these small pieces of land. The premium, is no doubt, due to 
the large population depending solely on agriculture to eke out its living. 
Naturally a population that has little else to prefer to agriculture will try to 
invoke every possible cause to get a piece of land however small. It is not 
therefore the law of inheritance that is the evil, but it is the high pressure 
on land which brings it into operation. People cultivate the small (piece not 
because their standard of living is low as Prof. Jevons seems to think” but 
because it is the only profitable thing for them to do at present. If they had 
something more profitable to do they would never prefer the small piece. It 
is therefore easy to understand how the universal prevalance of the small 
farms or petit culture is due to this enormous pressure on land. 


In spite of the vehement struggle that our agricultural population 
maintains in trying to engage itself productively as cultivators of a farm 
however small, it is true that judged by the standard of Sir James Caird 
a large portion of it is bound to remain idle. Idle labour and idle capital 
differ in a very important particular. Capital exists, but labour lives. That 
is to say capital when idle does not earn, but does not also consume much 
to keep itself. But labour, earning or not consumes in order to live. Idle 


25. Opt. cit. Introduction. The Impression that Prof. Jevons leaves on his readers is that 
agriculture suffers in India because of the low standard of living. That a higher standard of 
life once established will necessitate a large holding because people with a high standard of life 
will prefer to migrate rather than accept a small holding. As his argument that holdings and 
standard of life are related is likely to mislead his less thoughtful readers, a word of comment 
is necessary. A standard of living is merely a level of consumption fixed in habit. But what 
determines the depth of a particular level of consumption? Undoubtedly the level of production. 
We may grant the truth of the statement that a rise in the standard of living works as a 
stimulus to higher production but it is foolish to expect mere wish to be father to the deed. It 
is actual production alone that can support rise in the standard and not wish, generated though 
it be either by “travel or education”. If Prof. Jevons means that an opportunity for increased 
production, leading to a higher standard of life, will disfavour small holdings we are one with 
him. But he can make himself more intelligible by dropping standard of living and only arguing 
for increased production; that increased production leads to a rise in standard will be granted by 
all; but the reverse cannot be maintained Prof. Jevons seems to do, for it may lead to production 
or predation. To speak of raising the standard of life without speaking of increased production 
is to give expression to a pious wish, if it does not lead to mischief. 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 475 


labour is, therefore, a calamity ; for if it cannot live by production as it 
should, it will live by predation as it must. This idle labour has been the 
canker of India gnawing at its vitals. Instead of contributing to our national 
dividend it is eating up what little there is of it. Thus the depression of 
our national dividend is another important effect of this idle labour. The 
income of a society as of an individual proceeds (1) from the efforts made, 
and (2) from possessions used. It may be safely asserted that the aggregate 
income of any individual or society must be derived either from the proceeds 
of the current labour or from productive possession already acquired. All 
that society can have today it must acquire today or must take out of its 
past product. Judging by this criterion a large portion of our society makes 
very little current effort; nor does it have any very extensive possessions 
from which to derive its sustenance. No doubt then that our economic 
organization is conspicuous by want of capital. Capital is but crystallized 
surplus ; and surplus depends upon the proceeds of effort. But where there 
is no effort there is no earning, no surplus, and no capital. 


We have thus shown how our bad social economy is responsible for the 
ills of our agriculture. We have also proved how our entire dependence 
on agriculture leads to small and scattered farms. How a large portion 
of our population which our agriculture cannot productively employ is 
obliged to remain idle has been made clear. We have also shown how the 
existence of this idle labour makes ours a country without capital. This 
being our analysis of the problem, it will be easy to see why the remedies 
for consolidation and enlargement under the existing social economy are 
bound to fail. 


Those who look on small holdings as the fundamental evil naturally 
advocate their enlargement. This, however, is a faulty political economy 
and as Thomas Arnold once said “a faulty political economy is the fruitful 
parent of crime”. Apart from the fact that merely to enlarge the holding 
is not to make it economic, this project of artificial enlargement is fraught 
with many social ills. The future in the shape of an army of landless and 
dispossessed men that it is bound to give rise to is neither cheerful from 
the individual, nor agreeable from the national, point of view. But even if 
we enlarged the existing holdings and procured enough capital and capital 
goods to make them economic, we will not only be not advocating the proper 
remedy but will end in aggravating the evils by adding to our stock of idle 
labour; for capitalistic agriculture will not need as many hands as are now 
required by our present day methods of cultivation. 


But if enlargement is not possible, can we not have consolidation? It 
can be shown that under the existing social economy even consolidation 
is not possible. The remedy for preventing sub-division and fragmentation 


476 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of consolidated holdings cannot be expected to bring real relief. Instead it 
will only serve to be a legal eyewash. This becomes easy of comprehension 
if we realize at the start what the one man rule of succession means in 
actual practice. For this we shall have to note the changes it will introduce 
in the survey records. At present according to the Bombay Land Revenue 
Code Chapter I, Section 3, clause (6). 


“Survey Number” means a portion of land of which the area and other 
particulars are separately entered, under an indicative number in the survey 
records of the village, town or city in which it is situated, and includes a 
recognized share of a survey number. Again by clause (7). 


“Recognized share of a survey number” means a sub-division of a survey 
number separately assessed and registered. 


After the adoption of the one man rule of succession a survey number 
will be made to cover a piece of land which will be of the size fixed for an 
ideal economic holding. Secondly, it will be necessary to refuse separate 
registration to any sub-division of such a survey number ; i.e., in order that 
a piece of land should be registered with a separate and a distinct survey 
number it must not be below the economic limit. Then too this survey 
number covering a piece of land large enough to be styled economic will be 
registered in the name of one person. This is precisely what will happen 
if we put into practice the project of the Baroda Committee. Mr. Keatinge 
instead of having one survey number covering a large and compact holding 
will have in the name of one person many survey numbers covering a unit 
of land composed of small and scattered fields. Abandoning Mr. Keatinge's 
scheme as serving no practical purpose the one man rule of succession 
to a consolidated holding means in practice refusal to recognize legally a 
piece of land if it were below a certain size. Now this refusal to recognize 
smaller pieces of land, it is claimed, will prevent the sub-division of a 
consolidated holding. Sub-division of land may be due to many causes the 
operation of which is rendered economic or uneconomic by the nature of the 
occasion which evokes it. Not to allow sub-division on any ground, as does 
Mr. Keatinge, is to cause a serious depreciation of the value of land. But if 
sub-division is needed as when the stock has depleted, not to grant it is to 
create an uneconomic situation—a result just opposite of what is intended 
to be achieved, apart from this to prevent sub-division legally is not to 
prevent it actually, if necessitated by the weight of economic circumstances. 
Granting the pressure of population on land and the scanty agricultural 
equipment—evils to which the authors of consolidation and enlargement 
have paid no attention—we must look forward to the sub-division of 
holdings. If we legislate in the face of this inevitable tendency and refuse 
to record on our survey roll holdings below a certain limit required for a 
separate survey number we will not only fail to cure what we must know 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 477 


we cannot, atleast by this means, but will help to create a register that will 
be false to the true situation. 


This being our criticism of the means for preventing sub-division and 
fragmentation it will not take us long to state our view as regards the 
project of consolidation. Consolidation and its conservation are so intimately 
connected that the one cannot be thought of without the other. Now if we 
cannot conserve a consolidated holding, is it worth our while to consolidate, 
however feasible the project may be? This work of Sysiphus will not fail 
to fall to our lot unless we make effective changes in our social economy. 


As the evils of this surplus and idle labour which will be added on to 
by the consolidation and enlargement of holdings are likely to outweigh 
their advantages', the proposals do not find much favour at the hands of 
Prof. Gilbert Slater.2° 


As against Prof. Slater we hold that the evils are avoidable and it is because 
we are anxious to avoid them that we wish to advocate different remedies 
for bringing about the enlargement of holdings. Consequently, we maintain 
that our efforts should be primarily directed towards this idle labour.” 


If we succeed in sponging off this labour in non-agricultural channels of 
production we will at one stroke lessen the pressure and destroy the premium 
that at present weighs heavily on land in India. Besides, this labour when 
productively employed will cease to live by predation as it does to-day, and 
will not only earn its keep but will give us surplus; and more surplus is more 
capital. In short, strange though it may seem, industrialization of India is 
the soundest remedy for the agricultural problems of India. 'The cumulative 
effects of industralization, namely, a lessening pressure and an increasing 
amount of capital and capital goods will forcibly create the economic necessity 
of enlarging the holding. Not only this, but industralization by destroying 
the premium on land will give rise to few occasions for its sub-division and 
fragmentation. Industrialization is a natural and powerful remedy and is to 
be preferred to such ill-conceived projects as we have considered above. By 
legislation we will get a sham economic holding at the cost of many social 
ills. But by industrialization a large economic holding will force itself upon 
us as a pure gain. 


26. “The village in the Melting Pot” Journal of the Indian Economic Society. Vol. 1, No. 1, p. 10. 


27.Prof. Jevons does speak of removing the surplus agricultural population to towns. The 
author is happy to note that Prof. Jevons had recognised that there is the evil of surplus 
population. What he has failed to recognize is that this evil is the faithful parent of all other 
evils that affect our agriculture. When it is recalled that industrialization of India is the 
one theme against which Prof. Jevons never fails to argue with all the aid of his knowledge 
and influence, his remedy of removing the surplus population to towns sounds starnge; for 
migration to towns is simply euphemism for the industrialization of India. On the other 
hand Prof. Jevons has forgotten that there are few towns in India. If we believe, as does 
Prof. Jevons, that there is the evil of surplus population the only logical and inevitable 
conclusion, however unplatable it be, is the creations of more towns i.e,, industrialization. 


478 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Our remedy for the enlargement as for the consolidation of holdings as 
well as the preservation of consolidated holdings reduces itself to this: We 
prefer to cure agriculture by the reflex effects of industrialization. Lest this 
might be deemed visionary we proceed to give evidence in support of our 
view. How agriculture improves by the reflex effects of industrialization 
has been studied in the United States in the year 1883. We shall quote 
in extenso the summary given by the London Times: 


“The statistician of the Agricultural Department of the United States has 
shown in a recent report that the value of farm lands decreases in exact 
proportion as the ratio of agriculture to other industries increases. That is, 
where all the labour is devoted to agriculture, the land is worth less than 
where only half of the people are farm labourers ; and where only a quarter 
of them are so engaged the farms and their product are still more valuable. It 
is, in fact, proved by statistics that diversified industries are of the greatest 
value to a Stale, and that the presence of a manufactory near a farm increases 
the value of the farm and its crops. It is further established that, dividing 
the United States into four sections or classes, with reference to the ratio of 
agricultural workers to the whole population, and putting those States having 
less than 30 per cent of agriculture and of agricultural labourers in the first 
class, all having over 30 and less than 50 in the second, those between 50 
and 70 in the third, and those having 70 or more in the fourth, the value 
of farms is in inverse ratio to the agricultural population, and that where 
as in the purely agricultural section, the fourth class, the value of farms 
per acre is only $ 5.28, in the next class it is $ 13.03, in the third $ 22.21, 
and in manufacturing districts $ 40.91. This shows an enormous advantage 
for a mixed district. Yet not only is the land more valuable the production 
per acre is greater, and the wages paid to farm hands larger. Manufactures 
and varied industries thus not only benefit the manufacturers, but are of 
equal benefit and advantage to the farmers as well.” 


This will show that ours is a proven remedy. It can be laid 
down without fear of challenge that industrialization will foster the 
enlargement of holdings and that it will be the most effective barrier 
against sub-division and fragmentation. Agreeing in this, it may be 
observed that industrialization will not be a sufficient remedy for 
consolidation. That it will require direct remedies may be true. But 
it is also true that industrialization, though it may not bring about 
consolidation, will facilitate consolidation. It is an incontrovertible 
truth that so long as there is the premium on land consolidation will 
not be easy, no matter on how equitable principles it is proposed to 
be carried out. Is it a small service if industrialization lessens the 
premium as it inevitably must ? Certainly not. Consideration of another 
aspect of consolidation as well points to the same conclusion: That 


SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES 479 


industrialization must precede consolidation. It should never be forgotten 
that unless we have constructed an effective barrier against the future sub- 
division and fragmentation of a consolidated holding it is idle to lay out plans 
for consolidation. Such a barrier can only be found in industrialization ; for it 
alone can reduce the extreme pressure which, as we have shown, causes sub- 
division of land. Thus, if small and scattered holdings are the ills from which 
our agriculture is suffering to cure it of them is undeniably to industrialize. 


But just where does India stand as an industrial country ? : 


England and Germany U.S.A. France India 
Wales 

Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban 
1790 z x s z 87.5 3 z 
1840 i s > z, 77.5 ': 756 24.4 
1851 49.92 50.08 < és i 
1871 38.20 61.80 ss 36 47.6 š: 
1881 32.1 67.9 a 41 44.3 29.5 x sy wie 
1891 27.95 72.05 x 47 39.2 361 ë ia 64.4 
1901 23.00 77.00 a 54 35.7 40.5 “i ¿y 67.5 
1911 19.9 78.1 Ç < 333 46.3 57.9 “42.1 71.5 


(The figures for the various countries do not correspond with the years. The range of variation 
is 3 years), 

Sir Robert Giffen after a survey of the economic tendencies of various 
countries concludes that; 


“The wants of men increasing with their resources the proportion of people 
engaged in agiculture and mining and analogous pursuits, in every country is 
destined to decline, and that of people engaged in miscellaneous industry—in 
other words in manufactures using the latter phrase in a wide sense to Increase.” 


Figures for India, however, run counter to this dictum illustrating a universal 
tendency observed by an expert. While other countries like the U.S.A. starting 
as agricultural are progressively becoming industrial, India has been gradually 
undergoing the woeful process of de-urbanization and swelling the volume 
of her rural population beyond all needs. The earlier we stem this ominous 
tide, the better. For notwithstanding what interested persons might say” no 
truer and more wholesome words of caution were ever uttered regarding our 
national economy than those by Sir Henry Cotton when he said “There is 
danger of too much agriculture in India.” 


28. “Essays in Finance” 2nd Series, p. 240. 

29. Prof. Jevons in his paper on the “Capitalistic Development of Agriculture” read 
before the Indian Industrial Conference, held at Bombay in December 1915 argues 
against industrialisation. It can however be maintained against Prof. Jevons that it 
is industrialisation only that can make capitalistic agriculture possible. As a needful 
corrective to his paper cf. Sir Robert Giffen’s Essay IV in his Essays in Finance, 1st 
Series. 


12 


MR. RUSSELL AND 
THE RECONSTRUCTION OF 
SOCIETY 


Review on 
the “ Principles of Social Reconstruction” 
by 
the Hon'ble Mr. Bertrand Russell 


Published : Journal of the Indian Economic Society 
Vol. I, 1918 


MR. RUSSELL AND 
THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 


The “Principles of Social Reconstruction”' by the Honourable Mr. Bertrand 
Russell is a war book. Bellicose literature, on the whole, is either propagandist 
or preventive. Mr. Russell's book, though it falls under the latter, must be 
distinguished from the rest of the same class. Of the preventive books some 
argue against the unnatural geographical barriers within which have been 
impounded some unwilling nations by their masterful conquerors : others like 
Mr. Angell’s Great Illusion, attempt to show that in the calculus of war loss 
prevails over gain even to the victor. Mr. Russell’s however, is a diagnosis, 
altogether different. Wars, he believes, cannot be banished by rationalistic 
appeals such as above, “It is not by reason alone” he says “that wars can 
be prevented but by a positive life of impulses and passions antagonistic to 
those that lead to war. It is the life of impulse that needs to be changed, 
not only the life of conscious thought”.? As his diagnosis is different so is 
his social philosophy. To him, “the chief thing to be learned through the 
war has been a certain view of the springs of human action what they are, 
and what we may legitimately hope that they will become. This view, if 
it is true, seems to afford a basis for political philosophy more capable of 
standing erect in a time of crisis than the philosophy of traditional liberalism 
has shown itself to be.”? 


In consonance with this attitude he adopts the standpoint of the 
behaviouristic psychology. A most important contribution of this new 
development in the Science of Psychology consists in a novel view of the 
springs of human action. It has overthrown the doctrine that external 


1. London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. 1917, 6/—net. 
2. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 13. 
3. Ibid:, p. 9. 


4. Readers of Mr. Russell will do well to aquaint themselves with Prof. E. L. Thorndike’s 
“Educational Psychology”, Vol. I, “On the Original Nature of Man”. 


484 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


circumstances are responsible for man’s activity If it were so, contends the 
behaviourist, it would presuppose a quiescent being which is a biological 
untruth. Man, it propounds, has the springs of action within him for he 
is born with certain tendencies to act. External circumstances do not 
induce activity. They only re-direct it. These tendencies to act, further 
says the behaviourist, in their working, become modified by the effect of 
the Social milieu in which they function. The modifications which these 
original tendencies undergo are of the highest importance, They constitute 
Education in the broadest sense of the word. All modifications, however, 
are not equally valuable and it is the business of the reformer to eliminate 
the circumstances and institutions that modify these tendencies for the 
socially worse and preserve and introduce those that will modify them 
for the socially better. Whatever that may be, it is of immense social 
value that these tendencies are capable of indefinite modifications. This 
is possible only because as Mr. Russell says “ Man’s impulses are not 
fixed from the beginning by his native dispositions. Within certain limits, 
they are profoundly modified by his circumstances and his way of life. 
The nature of these modifications ought to be studied, and the results 
of his study ought to be taken account of in judging the good or harm 
that is done by political and social institutions.” 


In six illuminating chapters Mr. Russell studies the modifications 
that human nature has undergone under the institutions of State, War, 
Property, Education, Marriage and Religion. It is impossible to give an 
adequate idea of Mr. Russell’s social philosophy by summarizing the 
contents of each one of these chapters. They are living contributions to 
the literature of the several subjects they deal with. Full of suggestions, 
they provoke thought and ought therefore to be read from the original. 
This might be unconventional so far as reviewing is concerned but is 
justified by the fact that this review is meant for an economic journal 
for the purposes of which, we need only attend to the analysis of the 
institution of Property and the modifications it is alleged by Mr. Russell 
to produce in human nature. 


Before, however, proceeding to the task, it may be worth while discussing 
how the philosophy of war is related to the principles of growth as 
expounded by Mr. Russell. 


At the outset it must be said that, because his is an anti-war book, those 
who read in him the philosophy of quieticism will have read him all wrong. 
For, though Mr. Russell is anxious for the abolition of war, he explicitly 
states that “in spite of all the destruction which is wrought by the impulses 
that lead to war, there is more hope for a nation which has these impulses 


5. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 19. 


MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 485 


than for a nation in which all impulse is dead. Impulse is the expression of 
life and while it exists, there is hope of its turning towards life instead of 
towards death ; but lack of impulse is death, and out of death no new life 
will come.” He further acknowledges that “a great many of the impulses 
which now lead nations to go to war are themselves essential to any 
vlgorous or progressive life. Without imagination and love of adventure a 
society becomes stagnant and begins to decay. Conflict, provided it is not 
destructive and brutal, is necessary in order to stimulate men's activities 
and to secure the victory of what is living over what is dead and merely 
traditional. The wish for the triumph of one’s cause, the sense of solidarity 
with large bodies of men, are not things which a wise man will wish to 
destroy. It is only the outcome in death and destruction and hatred that 
is evil. The problem is to keep these impulses without making war the 
outlet for them.” 


The gist of it all is that activity is the condition of growth. Mr. Russell, 
it must be emphasized, is against war but is not for quieticism ; for, 
according to him, activity leads to growth and quieticism is but another 
name for death. To express it in the language of Professor Dewey he is 
only against “force as violence” but is all for “force as energy.” It must 
be remembered by those who are opposed to force that without the use 
of it all ideals will remain empty just as without some ideal or purpose 
(conscious or otherwise) all activity will be no more than mere fruitless 
fooling. Ends and means (= force in operation) are therefore concomitants 
and the common adage that the end justifies the means contains a profound 
truth which is perverted simply because it is misunderstood. For if the 
end does not justify the means what else will? The difficulty is that we 
do not sufficiently control the operations of the means once employed for 
the achieving of some end. For a means when once employed liberates 
many ends—a fact scarcely recognised—and not the one only we wish it to 
produce. However, in our fanaticism for achievement we attach the article 
“the” to the end we cherish and pay no heed to the ends simultaneously 
liberated. Of course for the exigencies of an eminently practical life we 
must set an absolute value on some one end. But in doing this we must 
take precaution that the other ends involved are not sacrificed. Thus, the 
problem is that if we are to use force, as we must, to achieve something, 
we must see that while working for one end we do not destroy, in the 
process, other ends equally worthy of maintenance. Applying this to the 
present war, no justification. I think, is needed for the use of force. What 
needs to the justified is the destructive violence. The justification must 
satisfy the world that the ends given prominence to by one or other of 


6. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 21. 
7. Ibid., p. 93. 


486 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the combatants could not be achieved otherwise than by violence, i.e., without 
involving the sacrifice of other ends equally valuable for the stability of 
the world. True enough that violence cannot always be avoided and non- 
resistance can be adopted only when it is a better way of resistance. But 
the responsibility for an intelligent control of force rests on us all. In short, 
the point is that to achieve anything we must use force : only we must 
use 1t constructively as energy and not destructively as violence. 


The length of this discussion of the philosophy of war as related to 
the principles of growth can be justified, if need be, by more extenuating 
circumstances than one. The present European war has brought into 
unmeasured and even thoughtless censure the philosophy of force and 
has ushered to the forefront the gospel of quieticism and the doctrine 
of non-resistance. The fact that Mr. Russell's is an anti-war book, the 
author of which was sentenced to six months’ goal, not for writing the 
book under review but for being a pacifist crank, will be construed to lend 
its support to the lurking desire in many a mind for a passive life as a 
natural reaction from the turmoil of war. It was therefore necessary to 
know how far Mr. Russell shared in this condemnation of force. A second 
justifying circumstance is furnished by the bias in the minds of the Indian 
readers of Mr. Russell. It will be realized that what is advocated to take 
the place of the philosophy of force is essentially an Eastern philosophy or 
to be specific, Indian philosophy. It was therefore much more important to 
present Indian readers of Mr. Russell with a correct interpretation of his 
attitude. Their innate craving for a pacific life and their philosophic bias 
for the doctrine of non-resistance, I am afraid, might lead them to read 
in Mr. Russell a justification of their view of life, if not guarded against. 


Is the Indian view of life a practicable view ? Nietzsche in his cynical 
mood said of Christianity that there was only one Christian and he was 
crucified-implying the impracticability of the Christian view of life. This 
remark, if it is true of the Christian, must be true, in a larger degree, 
of the Eastern view of life as well: for, though regionally Western yet 
Christianity in its origin as well in its content is essentially Eastern. 
Equally condemnatory, though not so severely, as shown above, is the 
attitude of Mr. Russell towards this philosophy of quieticism. One cannot 
however, fail to notice with dismay the persistence of this attitude towards 
life on the part of Indians notwithstanding its theoretical impossibility and 
the many vissicitudes through which the country has passed. Nay, in the 
present days of Indian Nationalism—which sadly enough is tantamount 
to justifying everything Indian—the attitude is likely to be upheld and 
continued. Note, that of the stock contrasts between the East and the West, 
thrown in relief by the war, the East is ever eager to give prominence in 
terms of self-glorification to one—that of its being free from the extreme 


MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 487 


materialism of the West leading to war and devastation. There is 
however no justification for setting the West in such a cruel contrast. 
The East is too prone to forget that materialist we all are ; even the 
East in spite of itself. Regarding the war, perhaps, the West may 
be blamed. But it can retort and say, “not to act is to be dead. Life 
consists in activity: It is better to act even violently as in war than 
not at all for only when we act that we may hope to act well.” Thus, 
surprising as it may be, the pacifist Mr. Russell thinks even war as 
an activity leading to the growth of the individual and condemns it 
only because it results in death and destruction. He would welcome 
milder forms of war for according to him, “Every man needs some kind 
of contest, some sense of resistance overcome, in order to fee] that he 
is exercising his faculties”š in other words to feel that he is growing. 


Of the many reasons urged in support the Indian view of life one 
is that it is chiefly owing to its influence that India alone of all the 
oldest countries has survived to this day. This is a statement that 
is often heard and even from persons whose opinions cannot be too 
easily set aside. With the proof or disproof however of this statement 
I do not wish to concern myself. Granting the fact of survival I mean 
to make a statement yet more important. It is this; there are many 
modes of survival and not all are equally commendable. For instance, 
mobility to beat a timely retreat may allow weaker varieties of people 
to survive. So the capacity to grovel or lie low may equally as the 
power of rising to the occasion be the condition of the survival of a 
people. Consequently, it cannot be granted—as is usually supposed— 
that because a people have survived through ages that therefore they 
have been growing and improving through ages. Thus it is not survival 
but the quality, the plane of survival, that is important. If the Indian 
readers of Mr. Russell probe into the quality of their survival and 
not remain contented merely with having survived I feel confident 
that they will be convinced of the necessity of a revaluation of their 
values of life. 


This much for Mr. Russell’s outlook towards the philosophy of war. 
We will now turn to his analysis of the effects of property. Mr. Russell 
passes in review the various existing economic organizations of society, 
the social ills they produce and the remedies put forth. His critique is 
summarized by himself as follows: 


“The evils of present system result from the separation between the 
several interests of consumer, producer and capitalist. No one of these 
three has the same interests as the community or as either of the other 
two. The co-operative system amalgamates the interests of consumer and 


8. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 96. 


488 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


capitalist; syndicalism would amalgamate the interests of producer 
and capitalists. Neither amalgamates all three, or makes the 
interests of those who direct industry quite identical with those of 
the community. Neither, therefore, would wholly prevent industrial 
strife or obviate the need of the State as arbitrator. But either would 
be better than the present system, and probably a mixture of both 
would cure most of the evils of industrialism as it exists now. It is 
surprising that, while men and women have struggled to achieve 
political democracy, so little has been done to introduce democracy in 
industry. I believe incalculable benefits might result from industrial 
democracy either on the co-operative model or with recognition of a 
trade or industry as a unit for purposes of Government, with some 
kind of Home Rule such as syndicalism aims at securing. There is 
no reason why all Governmental units should be geographical. The 
system was necessary in the past because of the slowness of means 
of communication, but it is not necessary now. By some such system 
many men might come to feel again a pride in their work and to 
find again that outlet for the creative impulse which is now denied 
to all but a fortunate few. Such a system requires the abolition of 
the land owner and the restriction of the Capitalist, but does not 
entail equality of earnings. And unlike Socialism, it is not a static 
or final system; it is hardly more than a frame-work for energy and 
initiative. It is only by some such method, I believe that the free 
growth of the individual can be reconciled with the huge technical 
organizations which have been rendered necessary by industrialism”.® 


It is a common place criticism of the industrial system that 
it gives rise to compartmental ethics, dwarfs the personality 
and makes slaves of the workers. To obviate such a result Mr. 
Russell approaches with a cautious spirit, a breadth of outlook and 
philosophic grasp of the social effects of the Economic Institutions. 
I wish the same could be said of his analysis of the mental effects 
of property. On the other hand his discussion of this aspect of 
property is marked by certain misconceptions which it is necessary 
to expose. 


The first misconception is embodied in a statement about 
the “love of money” in which he says “it leads men to mutilate 
their own nature from a mistaken theory of what constitutes 
success and to give admiration to enterprises which add nothing 
to human welfare. It promotes a dead uniformity of character 
and purpose, a diminution in the joy of life, and a stress and 
strain which leaves whole communities weary, discouraged, and 
disillusioned.”!° This is a sentiment that smacks of the antique and 


9. Principles of Social Reconstruction, pp, 141-42. 
10. Ibid,. p. 113. 


MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 489 


once served as a basic philosophy of life, probably with justification. The 
economic life and the philosophic outlook of a society are more intimately 
connected than is commonly supposed”! and chipped off its exaggerations, 
the Economical Interpretation of History holds true. This time-honoured 
complaint of the moralists against “love of money” is only a part of their 
general complaint against the goods of the world and finds its justification 
in the economic circumstances which gave rise to this particular belief. 
Bearing this in mind, it becomes easy to understand why the philosophy 
of sour grapes, of the have-nots, is the most human of all beliefs and why 
it so largely pervades our values about things which we can and things 
which we cannot possess in spite of our efforts to have them. When we 
cannot have a thing we argue that it is not worth having. There is thus 
a genuine difference between the outlooks of the “haves” and the “have- 
nots” towards worldly goods as there is between the religions of the down- 
cast and the successful. Each one in obedience to its profoundly moral 
nature—moral even in its immorality in that it seeks justification for 
everything it does—idealises its own attitude. At a time when the whole 
world was living in “pain economy” as did the ancient world and when 
the productivity of human labour was extremely low and when no efforts 
could augment its return, in short, when the whole world was living in 
poverty it is but natural that moralists should have preached the gospel of 
poverty and renunciation of worldly pleasures only because they were not 
to be had. The belief of a society of “pain economy” is that a thing must 
be bad if it cannot be had just as a society of “pleasure economy” addicted 
to “ conspicuous consumption “ believes that a thing must be nasty if it 
is cheap. Neither does the re-statement of the evils of “love of money” by 
Mr. Russell add any philosophic weight to its historic value. The 
misconception arises from the fact that he criticises the love of money 
without inquiring into the purpose of it. In a healthy mind, it may be 
urged, there is no such thing as a love of money in the abstract. Love of 
money is always for something and it is the purpose embodied in that “for 
something” that will endow it with credit or cover it with shame. Having 
regard to this, there can be no “dead uniformity of character” among the 
individual for, though actuated by love of money, their purposes on different 
occasions are likely to be different. Thus even love of money as a pursuit 
may result in a variety of character. 


If Mr. Russell’s thesis is shaky when looked at from the production 
side of our life, it entirely falls to the ground when looked at from the 
consumption side. Really to prove that human nature mutilates itself by 
feeding, exclusively, some one appetite we shall have to find our support 
by scrutinizing not the production but the consumption side of life. Now 


11. Cf James Bonar “Philosophy in its Relation to Political Economy”, more particularly, 
Achille Lorla, “Economic Foundations of Society”. 


490 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


knowing as we do the laws of consumption” is there a possibility of such 
mutilation? The answer, as we shall see, is in the negative. 


The laws of consumption, it may be noted, are simply certain deductions 
from the economic doctrine of the utility theory of value Formulated, as a 
reaction to the classical theory by Cournot, Gossen, Walres Menger and 
Jevons, it no longer thinks of utility as a quality inherent in the objective 
thing or condition but as dependent upon the capacity it possesses to satisfy 
human wants. This being so, the utility of an object varies according to the 
varying condition of the organism needing satisfaction. Even an object of our 
strongest desire like food may please or disgust, according as we are hungry 
or have over-indulged the appetite. Thus utility diminishes as satisfaction 
increases. In other words as satisfaction is the pleasurable activity of a 
particular organ or a group of them, the curve representing the relation of 
the organ to the object of its satisfaction varies inversely with the condition 
of the organ. 


If Mr. Russell had carefully gone into the implications of this psychological 
analysis, he would certainly have avoided the misconception in question. For 
what does the psychological analysis really mean ? Why does the utility of an 
object tend to be zero or even negative ? This takes place it may be argued 
either (1) because at some point in the process of satisfaction the particular 
organ irritated ceases to derive any further satisfaction by feeding itself on 
the object of its craving or (2) because other organs needing a different kind 
of satisfaction clamour against the over-indulgence of some one organ at their 
expense. Prof. Giddings holding the latter view says “ if the cravings of a 
particular organ or a group of organs are being liberally met with appropriate 
satisfactions, while other organs suffer deprivation, the neglected organs 
set up a protest, which is usually sufficiently importunate to compel us to 
attempt their appeasing. The hunger of the neglected parts of our nature 
normally takes possession of consciousness, and diverts our attention and 
our efforts from the organ which is receiving more than its due share of 
indulgence”.'® Of the two alternative explanations that of Prof. Giddings is 
probably the more correct. Having regard to the behaviouristic hypothesis, of 
the organism as an active entity, it is but proper to suppose that there does 
exist this hunger of the entire organism for a varied satisfaction appropriate 
to each of its organ which would engender such a protest. It is this protest 
that compels obedience to what is called the law of variety in consumption. 
If this is a fact it is difficult to understand how one organ by perpetual 
dominance can mutilate the whole organism. On the other hand, though 
one at a time, all the appetites have their turn. Human nature is, thus, 
fortunately, provided by its very make-up against a one-sided development 
leaving no doubt as to its promise for an all-round development in a 
congenial environment. Whether it will be able to obtain the miscellaneous 


12. For a brilliant discussion of them C/o. Prof. S. N. Patten’s “A Theory of Consumption”. 
13. Democracy and Empire, p. 19. 


MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 491 


food-material, intellectual or spiritual it craves for is a matter beyond its 
control. If it is mutilated by the lack of variety of food, it will be through 
social default and not its own. 


Another allegations of Mr. Russell is that property as the embodient of 
the possessive instinct leads to war. One may agree with Mr. Russell and 
yet say that Fredric Nietzsche understood the effects of property better than 
Mr. Russell. This effect is well summed up in a story which Thucydides 
relates somewhere. He depicts a farmer who having gathered his harvest 
was sitting by the side of the heap brooding over the market and the gains 
of his business; while deeply engrossed in his reverie he was surprised by a 
robber. Thus aroused, the farmer, without even uttering a word of protest, 
at once consented to share his pile and thanked heavens for having escaped 
with the loss only of a half. Whether the above is a fact or a fable, it contains 
a kernel of truth not always perceived. How much man is tamed of his wild 
nature by his acquisitions through the course of time it is not possible to 
measure. But that it is so is beyond doubt. Nietzsche was perfectly aware 
of this and would not therefore let his Superman hold any property lest he 
(the Superman) might not play the havoc Nietzsche wanted him to play for 
the fear of losing his acquisitions in the bargain. The trouble therefore one 
might say, is not with property but with the unequal distribution of it; for 
those who have none of it are prone to perpetrate more destruction for its 
possession than, those who have. An industrial dispute of the modern time 
is another illustration and that workers, in a strike, use more violence than 
their employers can only be understood in the light of the above remarks. 
It is the existence of the stake that blunts the sword and it is the non- 
existence thereof that sharpens it. Thus property may be aggressive. Yet it 
is not without its compensating effects. 


It would be unjust to pass over silently a most fundamental notion that 
pervades the whole outlook of Mr. Russell. He says that “men’s impulses 
and desires may be divided into those that are creative and those that are 
possessive. Some of our activities are directed to creating what would not 
otherwise exist, others towards acquiring or retaining what exists already. 
The best life is that in which creative impulses play the largest part and 
possessive impulses the smallest.'* Is it possible so to divide the impulses ? 
Is there such a thing as an impulse to appropriate? It is beyond the scope 
of this review to discuss this large question. I simply intend to raise a query 
because I feel, that by making the distinction as one of instinct, Mr. Russell 
is not quite on safe ground. Every impulse if uninhibited, will lead to some 
creative act. Whether the product will be appropriated or not is a matter 
wholly different from any act of impulse or instinct. It depends, I submit, 
upon the method of its production—whether individualistic or otherwise—and 
upon the nature of its use—whether communal or otherwise. No one sets 


14. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 234. 


492 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


up a right of appropriation to anything that is produced by common efforts 
nor to anything that is of joint use. Of the former one may cite the game 
of a communal hunt of the primitive folks. For an example of the latter 
the situation in a family presents a happy illustration, No member, it can 
be said without fear of being challenged, will ever set up a right of private 
appropriation to the articles of the Table or to the articles of decoration just 
as nobody will ever set up a right of exclusive ownership regarding public 
monuments. They are of the house. But every one of the family will surely 
set up a right to the exclusive use of his or her clothes. They are of the 
Individual. It is therefore, Just a question of production and use and not of 
impulse that a thing is appropriated. Thus the creative and the possessive 
are on different levels and the methods of augmenting the former as of 
diminishing the latter are bound to be different. The more of one will not 
ensure the less of the latter. 


With this we must close the review of Mr. Russell's book. There is much in 
it that can be laid at the foundation of the future reconstruction of Society. 
Mr. Russell deserves full credit for having emphasized the psychic basis of 
social life. Social reconstruction depends upon the right understanding of 
the relation of individual to society—a problem which has eluded the grasp 
of many sociologists. Mr. Russell's conception of the relation—as being of 
impulse to institution is, beyond doubt the truest. However, to understand 
this and many other problems the book touches I will strongly recommend 
the reader to go to the original. I have confined myself to putting Mr. 
Russell in his right place where I thought he was likely to be misunderstood 
and to guarding his uncritical readers against certain misconceptions that 
may pass off unnoticed. In both cases I have attempted to do my duty to 
Mr. Russell and to his readers. 


INDEX 


A 

Aborigines: 46-52. 

Act: Burmah Anti Boycott: 417-18. 
Civil Rights Protection: 408. 
Govt. of India, 1919: 322-24, 331. 
Govt. of India, 1935: 283, 285-86, 292, 295, 308, 

314, 322, 329, 331-32, 335, 343. 

Acton, Lord: 122-24, 168. 

Addison, Joseph: 267. 

Agarkar, G. C.: 352. 

Agra: 470. 

Ahimsa: 93. 

Alexander: 43, 213. 

Allah: 91. 

Ambedkar, B. R.: 31-33, 81-85. 

America: 248, 284-85, 293, 295, 300. 

American Economic Association: 467. 

American Indians: 8. 

Amritsar: 29. 

Anandacharya, P.: 224. 

Anaryas: 53. 

Andhras: 105-06, 109,133. 

Angell: 483. 

Anglo Indians: 368-75. 

Anvil Brahmin: 123. 

Arabs: 44. 

Arnold Mathew: 17, 95. 

Arnold Thomus: 475. 

Aryans: 6, 21. 

Arya Samajists: 58-59, 63, 77, 92. 

Ashoka: 159. 

Ashtadhikar: 72. 

Asia: 64. 

Assam:, 103, 121, 470. 

Attila: 213. 

Aungier, Governor: 114. 

Austria: 124. 

Austro-Hungarian Empire: 104 

B 

Bagehot, Walter: 18,231. 

Balais: 39-40, 114-16. 

Balfour: 231-32. 

Baluchis: 248. 

Banias: 67, 90. 115-16. 

Baroda Committee: 460, 462-66, 476. 

Baroda State: 456, 471. 

Bateson, Prof,: 49 

Benaras: 44 

Benaras Hindu University: 425. 

Bengal: 103, 121, 126, 131, 135. 

Bengalis: 106, 126. 

Berar: 109, 470. 

Berkenhead, Lord: 110, 378. 

Bhagwat: 64. 

Bhai Parmanand: 29. 

Bhandarkar, D. R.: 48. 

Bhils: 248. 

Bhimji Parakh: 114. 

Bhishma: 240. 

Bhopal: 131,152. 

Bhungis: 11, 30. 

Bible: 220. 

Bicholi Hapsi: 39, 131, 135. 

Bihar: 103. 109. 120-21, 148, 150-51. 

Bismark: 231-32. 

Blue Ridge: 234. 

Bombay: 27-28. 34. 37, 109-14, 118-21, 125-27, 
144-45, 155-58, 165, 258,417. 

Bombay Army: 261. 

Bonnerjee, Surendranath: 276, 352. 

Bonnerjee, W. C: 38-39,41. 

Brahma: 91, 342. 

Brahmins: 15-16, 18-20, 37, 49, 52-53, 59, 61-62, 
64, 70-71, 74, 83, 90, 95, 115-16, 134, 158, 162, 
218-21, 253-56, 267-69, 274 of Ver; : 115-16. 


Brahminism: 31, 77. 
Brahmo Samaj: 268. 
Brihaspati: 73. 
British, the; 113-14, 131 
Bryce, James: 143, 236-38, 316-17. 
Buckle: 212. 
Buddha: 44, 69, 91, 219, 240. 
Buddhists: 248. 
Bundelkhand: 470. 
Burke, Edmand: 76, 79, 222. 
Burmah: 248. 
C 
Caesar: 213. 
Caird, Sir James: 473-74. 
Calcutta: 102, 104, 121, 124, 126, 156, 171. 
Cambridge: 39. 
Canada: 144, 284-86, 295, 301, 307, 309, 344, 426. 
Carlyle: 65, 90, 213-15, 224, 230. 
Carson: 378. 
Carver: 78. 
Caste and Caste System: 5, 7-22, 27-28, 31, 33, 41, 
47-58, 60, 62, 64-74, 83-84, 87-93. 
Catholies: 42. 
Cawnpore: 151. 
C. P. & Berar: 103, 109, 111, 148, 150, 151. 
Chaitanya: 83, 88-89. 
Chakwara: 40. 
Chalukyas: 112. 
Chamars: 49, 257, 275. 
Chandragupta: 44. 
Chaturvarnya: 58-64, 86, 89. 
China: 234-35. 
Chiplunkar, Vishnushastri: 218. 
Christ: 244, 264. 
Christians: 16, 20, 45, 54, 80, 85, 94, 115, 116, 
134, 249-50, 267, 365, 368-71, 373, 375, 423. 
Church, American Protestant Episcopal; 143, 317. 
Clemenceau: 214. 
Clement: 294. 
Coleridge : 222. 
Columbia University: 274. 
Communal Award: 42-43. 
Congress : 38-39, 131, 145, 217, 219, 224-25, 228, 
236-37, 263, 297, 329-30 334, 348, 350, 358. 
Consent Bill: 225. 
Constituent Assembly: 360-61, 364, 366. 
Constitution of America: 360, 377; 
Canada: 294, India: 358-60, 367; 
South Africa: 375. 
Cotton, Sir Henry: 479. 
Cournot: 490. 
Cripps Committee: 361-65. 
Crito: 235. 
Cromwelllan war; 52 
Crump: 276. 
D 
Dadabhoy Naoroji: 264. 
Daman: 112. 
Dantwala: 111, 119, 122-23. 
Dashodh: 37. 
Datta, K.L. 470. 
Davenport, H. J,: 467. 
Dayanand Saraswati: 92. 
Deccan Sabha: 207. 
Delaware: 108. 
Delhi: 170. 
Democles: 416. 
Democracy: 251. 
Denmark: 456 


494 


INDEX 


Depressed Classes: 34, 37, 84. 
Depressed Class Mission: 34, 265. 
Desai, Morarji: 155,162. 
Dewey, John: 79. 
Dhar: 132. 
Dheds: 257. 
Dicey: 70, 302, 334. 
Dictatorship: 411-12. 
Diu, city of: 115. 
Dnyaneshwar: 83, 88. 
Dominion Status: 330, 331, 333-34, 345-48, 359. 
Dravidians: 6, 21. 
Dufferin, Lord: 247. 
Dutch: 114, 248. 
E 
East India Company: 53, 114-18, 220, 261. 
Education: 484. 
Eknath: 87. 
Elphinston: 274. 
Ely: 469. 
Endogamy: 8-12, 14. 
England 44, 300, 365, 368, 456, 473. 
English People: 114-15. 
Ethnology: 5. 
Eton: 269. 
Eugenics 49, 50. 
Europe: 44-45, 63-64, 102, 112, 120, 248. 
Europeans: 119-20, 364. 
Exogamy: 9-10. 
F 
Falcon, the: 114. 
France: 456. 
Franklin, Doctor: 455. 
French: 114, 118, 143. 
French Revolution: 168. 
Fundamental Rights: 377. 
G 
Gadgil, D. R.: 113,125, 281-83. 
Gandhi, Mahatma: 37, 68, 86-96, 131, 134, 
208-09, 226, 228-29, 346, 350-52, 422. 
Gardiner: 227. 
Gazetteer of Bombay Town and Island: 114. 
Germans: 462 
Germany: 143, 147, 284-285, 311, 325, 378. 
Gheewala: 111, 113,123-25. 
Giddings: 490. 
Giffen Robert: 479. 
Girdhar Moody: 117. 
Gladstone: 269. 
Gokhale, G. K.: 269, 283, 352. 
Gonds: 248. 
Gotra: 9. 
Gujarat: 470. 
Gujaratis, the: 67, 110, 111-15, 119-120, 122-24. 


Gujars: 134. 

Great Man: 212-17, 224, 226, 230, 232. 
H 

Hailey: 270. 


Hansraj, Mahatma: 28. 

Har Bhagwan: 29-30, 32. 

Harijan ((Community): 27. 

Harijan (Journal): 27, 82, 86. 

Haripura: 329. 

Harrow: 249. 

Hart, A. B.: 247. 

Hindus; 6, 13, 15-22, 25, 28-31, 33, 35-37, 39-40, 50- 
57, 59, 63-66, 72-74, 76-79, 84-85, 88-89, 91-92, 
94-96,112, 134, 146, 167, 169, 209, 224, 248-50, 
252, 256, 261-62, 264, 267, 270, 274, 276-79, 


348-50, 362, 364-65, 368-71, 373-74 376-78,414, 
416-17, 420-23, 425-56, 431, 461. 

Hindu Maha Sabha: 28, 146, 350. 

Hindu Raj: 37. 

Hindu Religion: 31-34, 75-76, 83, 93, 135. 

Hirey: 162. 

Hobhouse, L. T.:261. 

Holland: 456. 

Home Rule: 267. 

I 

Ibbetson, Sir Denzil: 17. 

India: 6, 8-9, 14, 16, 25, 45-47, 50, 111-13, 121, 126, 
181, 456, 466, 479. 

Indian Army Commission: 261. 

Indian Merchants Chamber: 110. 

Indore: 152. 

Indra Singh: 27. 

Instrument of Accession: 286-88, 292, 301-02, 306, 
336-38. 

Interdining: 67-68, 92. 

Intermarriage: 67-68, 92. 

Iqbal Mohomed: 342. 

Ireland: 42-43, 365, 378. 

Irish Home Rule: 42. 


Italy: 143. 

J 
Jadhav, Ganpat Mahadev: 357. 
Jaimini: 75. 
Jains: 67. 


James Elliot: 470. 
Jan Sangh: 146. 
Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal: 25, 27-37, 67, 81, 84-86. 
Jats: 417-418. 
Jat State: 134. 
Jennings: 237. 
Jevons, H. S.: 461, 464-66, 474-77, 479. 
Jews: 20, 134, 222, 251. 
Jinnah: 208-09, 226, 228-29, 337. 
Jnyandeo: 83, 87. 

K 
Kabir: 74. 
Kale, R. R.: 283. 
Kali: 91. 
Kammas, the: 134. 
Kappus, the: 134. 
Karnatak: 109,113. 
Karwar: 112. 
Kashmir: 133. 
Kathiawar: 120. 
Kaurava: 240. 
Kavitha: 40. 
Kayastha: 52,67. 
Keatinge, G. M.: 457, 462-64, 466, 476. 
Keralat:109. 
Ketkar, S. V.: 7-8, 13, 21. 
Khaparde Dadasaheb: 264. 
Kheri Jessore: 417-18. 
Kalis, the: 134. 
Konkan: 110, 256. 
Kranti: 27. 
Krishna: 64. 
Kshatriya: 17-18, 59, 61-62, 64, 91. 
Kumarswami, A. K.: 13. 
Kurtakoti, Shankaracharya: 270. 

L 
Labour and Caste System: 47-48, 61, 64. 
Lahore: 28, 37. 
Land Acquisition Act: 340, 463. 
Land Revenue Code: 476. 
Lassalle, Ferdinand: 42. 


INDEX 


495 


League of Nations: 102, 376. 

Lecky: 223. 

Legislature: 393-95, 398, 404, 406. 

Liberal Party of India: 236, 238-40. 

Liberty; 57, 86, 

Lincoln, Abraham: 215, 234. 

Lingayats: 253-254, 273. 

Linguistic Provinces: 101-03, 109, 121-22, 124-25, 132. 

London Times: 478. 

Lothian Committee: 429. 

Luther, Martin: 44. 

M 

Macaulay: 324. 

Machigars: 257. 

Madig: 257. 

Madras: 21, 103, 132, 144, 156, 470. 

Mahabharata: 64, 73, 82. 

Mahakoshal: 152. 

Mahars: 211, 248, 253-54, 256-57, 274-75, 346. 

Maharashtra: 102, 106, 108-13, 118-27, 132-34, 144-53. 

Maharashtrians: 105-06, 110, 121-22, 134. 

Mahavamsa: 159-61. 

Maheswara: 13. 

Maitland, Prof.: 233. 

Malis: 134. 

Mangs: 257. 

Mann, H. S. 457. 

Manu: 16-63, 71-74, 218-19. 

Manusmruti: 61, 73. 

Marathas: 113, 121, 123, 134, 161-63, 253, 256, 261, 
273-74. 

Marquis Tweedledale: 261. 

Marwaris: 67. 

Marx, Karl: 42, 72, 212, 

Mathai, John: 165. 

Mazzini: 239-40. 

Mecca: 44. 

Meerut: 151. 

Mehta, Nani: 351. 

Mehta, Phirozeshah: 352. 

Menger: 490. 

Mill, J. S.: 41. 

Mochis: 257. 

Moghuls: 170. 

Mohammed, Prophet: 44, 264. 

Mongolians: 6, 248. 

Montague: 267. 

Montague Chelmsford Retorm: 322. 

Morley, Lord: 231-32, 262, 265. 

Morris: 55. 

Mourya Empire: 63,135. 

Mulhall: 472. 

Muslims: 20, 53-55, 64-65, 70, 80, 85, 93, 112, 115, 
134. 146, 169, 248, 250, 252-54, 256,263, 267, 
273-76, 348-50, 362, 364-65, 368-72, 374, 376-77, 
422-423, ,461. 

Muslim League: 228. 

N 

Nanak: 69. 

Nanak, Guru: 44. 

Nanavati. M. B.:471. 

Nanga Sadhus: 149. 

Napoleon, Bonaparte: 213-14, 234-35, 269. 

Narang, Gokalchand: 28. 

Narendranath, Raja: 28. 

Natarajan: 276. 

Nationality: 123-25. 

National Liberation Federation: 329-330. 

Negroes: 8, 222, 408. 

Nehru, Jawaharlal: 131, 133, 145, 149, 152. 


Nesfields: 7-8,17. 
New York: 108,147. 
Nietzsche, Fredric: 486,491. 
Nima Parakh: 115-18. 
Nizam: 162. 
Non-Brahmins: 15-16, 19-20, 50, 253, 274. 
North West Frontier Provinces: 401. 

(0) 
Ohio: 231. 
Oracle of Delphi: 45. 
Orissa: 103, 121, 131. 
Oxford: 39. 

P 
Pakistan: 146, 376. 
Pali: 159. 
Pandava: 240. 
Pannikar, K. M.: 147-48. 
Pant, G. V.: 151. 
Paramanand, Bhai: 28. 
Pariah: 49,407. 
Parliament: 69-70. 
Parliamentary Democracy: 411-12. 
Parsees: 20, 250, 370, 375. 
Parsuram: 91. 
Patel Vallabhbhai: 132. 
Patel Vitthalbhai: 266. 
Pathans: 248. 
Patidars: 123. 
Patricians: 43, 45. 
Pax Britanica: 233. 
Pendleton Herring: 239. 
Peshwa: 39-54, 216. 
Phuley, Mahatma: 225-26. 
Pierson, N. G.: 462. 
Pimpla Saudagar: 457. 
Pius IX (Pope): 227. 
Plebians: 43, 45. 
Poles: 248. 
Political Reform Party: 37, 
Pompeii: 5. 
Poona: 131, 263, 457. 
Poona Pact: 401, 409, 421, 424-25, 429-3. 
Pope: 264. 
Poritt: 426. 
Portuguese: 114-15. 
Prabhus, Pathare: 53-54. 
Prakasham T.: 132. 
Prarthana Samaj: 268. 
Protestants: 43. 
Prussia: 42, 147. 
Punjab: 19, 27, 30, 41, 103, 121. 
Puranas: 64,76,82,92. 
Puritanism: 44. 

Q 


R 
Radhakrishnan, S.: 66. 
Radicals: 263. 
Raja, M. C: 82. 
Rajasthan: 148. 
Rajendra Prasad: 132. 
Rajgopalachari, C.: 133, 149-50, 237. 
Rama: 61, 69, 86. 
Ramanuja: 74. 
Ramayana: 82, 61. 
Ramdas: 37. 
Ramkrishna Paramhamsa: 83, 88. 
Ranade, M. G.: 162, 207, 211-12, 215-16, 220-26, 
230-40, 352. 
Redmond: 42, 110, 378. 
Risley, Sir H.: 7-8, 17. 
Rohtak: 417-18. 
R Roman Republic: 44. 


Quebec: 427. 


496 


INDEX 


Rome: 43, 45. 

Roosevelt, Theodore: 212, 227. 

Rosebery, Lord: 213. 

Round Table Conference: 342, 350-51, 378. 

Roy, Raja Ram Mohan: 83. 

Russell, Bertrand: 483-84, 488-92; on 
Impulse: 485-86; on property: 487; 
on war: 483. 

S 

Sagotras: 9. 

Sahara: 132. 

Sahyadrikhand: 52. 

Samson, the: 114. 

Sangathan: 55. 

Sankhya: 219. 

Sanskrit: 12, 50. 

Santram: 24, 27-28, 30, 32, 84-85, 93. 

Sanyasa: 13. 

Sapindas: 9, 

Sapru Committee: 361-62, 364-65, 379, 416. 

Sati: 13, 20. 

Scheduled Castes: 37, 39-41, 74, 133, 157, 250, 
252-58, 261-65, 268, 271, 274-76, 358, 365, 
368-72, 401-04, 407, 414, 416-17, 419-23, 425- 
26, 428-31. 

Scheduled Caste Federation; 375. 

Scotland: 300, 365. 

Scythians: 6. 

Secretary of State: 311, 332, 335-36, 345, 

Senart: 6-7, 17. 

Separate Electorates: 401. 

Settlement Commission: 403. 

Shambuka: 61. 

Shankar or Shiva: 9,342. 

Shastras: 16, 68-69, 73-76, 84, 87-88, 93, 95, 263. 

Shastri, Srinivas: 211, 240. 

Shilahars: 112. 

Shivaji: 37, 44, 50, 52, 

Shore, John: 269. 

Shuddhi: 55. 

Shudra: 18, 58, 61-62. 

Sikhs: 44, 55, 64-65. 80, 248, 364-65, 368-71, 373, 
375, 423. 

Simla: 170. 

Simon Commission; 332, 421. 

Sind: 271, 276. 

Slater. Gilbert: 457. 

Sly, Sir Frank; 38.40-41, 274. 

Smith, Adam: 456. 

Smritis: 73-75, 82. 

Social Conference: 217, 225, 263. 

Socialism: 460. Socialists: 44-47. 

Social Reform Party; 37-38, 41-42. 

Socrates: 235. 

Solicitor-General: 335-36. 

Sonar: 53-54, 

South Africa: 144, 426, 428. 

Spencer, Sir, Herbert: 17. 

Srinivasan, Diwan Bahadur: 82. 

Sriramulu, Potti: 132. 

States, Indian: 203-04. 286-88, 301-02, 308, 311-12, 
317-21, 327, 332-33, 339-41, 343-47. 
States Reorganisation Commission: 141-42. 

State Socialism: 408-09, 411. 

Stephen, Leslie: 71. 

St. Helena: 235. 

Sultan: 69,264. 

Supreme Court; 395, 398. 

Superintendent of Minority Affairs: 398. 

Surat: 114, 274. 

Surplus Man: 10-14 


Surplus Woman: 10-14. 
Swedes: 248. 
Switzerland: 144, 284-85, 311, 335. 
Sydenham College: 274. 
T 

Tagore, Devendranath: 83. 
Tamerlane: 214. 
Tamillants: 105-06. 
Tamils: 132, 
Tarde, Gabriel: 19-20. 
Taylor, Henry C.: 467. 
Telang, Justice: 221. 
Texas; 108. 
Thakkar Bappa: 346. 
Thana: 272. 
Thayer: 212. 
Tibet: 371. 
Tilak, B. G.: 38, 87, 162, 217-18, 229, 270, 352. 
Times of India: 39. 
Tiruvallur: 83, 88. 
Toby, Sir: 237. 
Tories: 263. 
Thorndike, E L,: 483. 
Tral Maharashtrikas; 159-60. 
Tribes, Criminal: 219-20. 
Trimurti: 342. 
Tukaram: 83, 88. 
Turkish Empire: 104, 

U 
lster: 43, 
ma: 13, 
nited Provinces: 103, 121, 148, 150-51. 
nited States of India: 143, 389-90, 392, 395-98, 
02, 405-06. 
ntouchables. see 8. Cs. 
ntouchability: 87-88. 
panishads: 18, 82, 92. 
.S.A.: 8, 108, 143, 147, 478-79. 
.S.S.R.: 147, 408, 415, 428. 

v 
Vakil, N.C.: 111, 113, 119, 121-122. 
Valshashlka: 219. 
Vaishya: 18, 59, 61-62, 90. 
Varna: 64, 73, 83-84, 86-87, 89, 91-92. 
Veda: 17, 30-31, 63, 69, 72-76, 82, 92-93. 
Vedanta: 219. 
Vishnu: 90, 342. 
Vivekanand: 83. 


pacdddd 


aad ac 


w 
Walres: 490. 
Wanchoo, Justice: 133. 
War; 484. 


Warangal: 133. 
War or Roses: 52. 
Washington City: 313-14. 
Waterloo: 235. 
Wellington: 269. 
Wilson, Woodrow: 239. 
Wiseman, Cardinal: 215. 
Wyoming: 108. 

Y 
Young, A.A.: 91, 467 
Young India: 97. 
Yuan Shih-K’ai : 235 

Z 
Zanu: 40
