---
title: Elinor Ostrom, Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance (Nobel Lecture 2009)
collection: 22-commons
note: the commons cases Ostrom studied — self-governance in the real world
source: nobelprize.org (Prize Lecture)
source_url: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/ostrom_lecture.pdf
language: English
license: Nobel Foundation published lecture
---
Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric
Governance of Complex Economic
Systems
Prize Lecture, December 8, 2009
by
Elinor Ostrom
Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47408, and Center for the Study of Institutional Diversity,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, U.S.A.

Contemporary research on the outcomes of diverse institutional arrangements for governing common-pool resources (CPRs) and public goods at
multiple scales builds on classical economic theory while developing new
theory to explain phenomena that do not fit in a dichotomous world of “the
market” and “the state.” Scholars are slowly shifting from positing simple
systems to using more complex frameworks, theories, and models to understand the diversity of puzzles and problems facing humans interacting
in contemporary societies. The humans we study have complex motivational
structures and establish diverse private-for-profit, governmental, and
community institutional arrangements that operate at multiple scales to
generate productive and innovative as well as destructive and perverse
outcomes (North 1990, 2005).
In this article, I will describe the intellectual journey that I have taken the
last half century from when I began graduate studies in the late 1950s. The
early efforts to understand the polycentric water industry in California were
formative for me. In addition to working with Vincent Ostrom and Charles
Tiebout as they formulated the concept of polycentric systems for governing
metropolitan areas, I studied the efforts of a large group of private and
public water producers facing the problem of an overdrafted groundwater
basin on the coast and watching saltwater intrusion threaten the possibility
of long-term use. Then, in the 1970s, I participated with colleagues in the
study of polycentric police industries serving U.S. metropolitan areas to find
that the dominant theory underlying massive reform proposals was incorrect.
Metropolitan areas served by a combination of large and small producers
could achieve economies of scale in the production of some police services
and avoid diseconomies of scale in the production of others.
These early empirical studies led over time to the development of the
Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) framework. A common
framework consistent with game theory enabled us to undertake a variety
of empirical studies including a meta-analysis of a large number of existing
408

case studies on common-pool resource systems around the world. Carefully
designed experimental studies in the lab have enabled us to test precise
combinations of structural variables to find that isolated, anonymous individuals overharvest from common-pool resources. Simply allowing communication, or “cheap talk,” enables participants to reduce overharvesting and
increase joint payoffs, contrary to game-theoretical predictions. Large studies
of irrigation systems in Nepal and forests around the world challenge the
presumption that governments always do a better job than users in organizing
and protecting important resources.
Currently, many scholars are undertaking new theoretical efforts. A core effort is developing a more general theory of individual choice that recognizes
the central role of trust in coping with social dilemmas. Over time, a clear
set of findings from the microsituational level has emerged regarding
structural factors affecting the likelihood of increased cooperation. Due
to the complexity of broader field settings, one needs to develop more
configural approaches to the study of factors that enhance or detract from
the emergence and robustness of self-organized efforts within multilevel,
polycentric systems. Further, the application of empirical studies to the policy
world leads one to stress the importance of fitting institutional rules to a
specific social-ecological setting. “One-size-fits-all” policies are not effective.
1. The Earlier World View of Simple Systems
In the mid-twentieth century, the dominant scholarly effort was to try to fit
the world into simple models and to criticize institutional arrangements that
did not fit. I will briefly review the basic assumptions that were made at that
time but have been challenged by scholars around the world, including the
work of Herbert Simon (1955) and Vincent Ostrom (2008).
A. Two Optimal Organizational Forms
The market was seen as the optimal institution for the production and
exchange of private goods. For nonprivate goods, on the other hand, one
needed “the” government to impose rules and taxes to force self-interested
individuals to contribute necessary resources and refrain from self-seeking
activities. Without a hierarchical government to induce compliance, selfseeking citizens and officials would fail to generate efficient levels of public
goods, such as peace and security, at multiple scales (Hobbes [1651] 1960;
W. Wilson 1885). A single governmental unit, for example, was strongly
recommended to reduce the “chaotic” structure of metropolitan governance,
increase efficiency, limit conflict among governmental units, and best serve a
homogeneous view of the public (Anderson and Weidner 1950; Gulick 1957;
Friesema 1966). This dichotomous view of the world explained patterns of
interaction and outcomes related to markets for the production and exchange
of strictly private goods (Alchian 1950), but it has not adequately accounted
for internal dynamics within private firms (Williamson 1975, 1986). Nor does
it adequately deal with the wide diversity of institutional arrangements that
409

humans craft to govern, provide, and manage public goods and commonpool resources.
B. Two Types of Goods
In his classic definitional essay, Paul Samuelson (1954) divided goods
into two types. Pure private goods are both excludable (individual A can be
excluded from consuming private goods unless paid for) and rivalrous
(whatever individual A consumes, no one else can consume). Public goods
are both nonexcludable (impossible to keep those who have not paid for a
good from consuming it) and nonrivalrous (whatever individual A consumes
does not limit the consumption by others). This basic division was consistent
with the dichotomy of the institutional world into private property exchanges
in a market setting and government-owned property organized by a public
hierarchy. The people of the world were viewed primarily as consumers or
voters.
C. One Model of the Individual
The assumption that all individuals are fully rational was generally accepted
in mainstream economics and game theory. Fully rational individuals are
presumed to know (1) all possible strategies available in a particular situation,
(2) which outcomes are linked to each strategy given the likely behavior of
others in a situation, and (3) a rank order for each of these outcomes in
terms of the individual’s own preferences as measured by utility. The rational
strategy for such an individual in every situation is to maximize expected
utility. While utility was originally conceived of as a way of combining a diversity of external values on a single internal scale, in practice, it has come to
be equated with one externalized unit of measure – such as expected profits.
This model of the individual has fruitfully generated useful and empirically
validated predictions about the results of exchange transactions related to
goods with specific attributes in a competitive market but not in a diversity
of social dilemmas. I will return to a discussion of the theory of individual
behavior in section 7A.
2. Early Efforts to Develop a Fuller Understanding of
Complex Human Systems
The mid-twentieth-century world views of simple systems have slowly been
transformed as a result of extensive empirical research and the development
of a framework consistent with game-theoretical models for the analysis of a
broad array of questions.
A. Studying Polycentric Public Industries
Undertaking empirical studies of how citizens, local public entrepreneurs,
and public officials engage in diverse ways of providing, producing, and
managing public service industries and common-property regimes at
multiple scales has generated substantial knowledge that is not explained
410

by two models of optimal organizational forms. Vincent Ostrom, Charles
Tiebout, and Robert Warren (1961) introduced the concept of polycentricity
in their effort to understand whether the activities of a diverse array of
public and private agencies engaged in providing and producing of public
services in metropolitan areas was chaotic, as charged by other scholars – or
potentially a productive arrangement.
‘Polycentric’ connotes many centers of decision making that are
formally independent of each other. Whether they actually function
independently, or instead constitute an interdependent system of
relations, is an empirical question in particular cases. To the extent
that they take each other into account in competitive relationships,
enter into various contractual and cooperative undertakings or have
recourse to central mechanisms to resolve conflicts, the various political
jurisdictions in a metropolitan area may function in a coherent manner
with consistent and predictable patterns of interacting behavior. To
the extent that this is so, they may be said to function as a ‘system’.
(V. Ostrom, Tiebout, and Warren 1961: 831–32)
Drawing on the concept of a public service industry (Bain 1959; Caves
1964; V. Ostrom and E. Ostrom 1965), several studies of water industry
performance were carried out in diverse regions of California during the
1960s (V. Ostrom 1962; Weschler 1968; Warren 1966; E. Ostrom 1965).
Substantial evidence was found that multiple public and private agencies
had searched out productive ways of organizing water resources at multiple
scales contrary to the view that the presence of multiple governmental units
without a clear hierarchy was chaotic. Further, evidence pointed out three
mechanisms that increase productivity in polycentric metropolitan areas: (1)
small- to medium-sized cities are more effective than large cities in monitoring performance of their citizens and relevant costs, (2) citizens who are
dissatisfied with service provision can “vote with their feet” and move to
jurisdictions that come closer to their preferred mix and costs of public
services, and (3) local incorporated communities can contract with larger
producers and change contracts if not satisfied with the services provided,
while neighborhoods inside a large city have no voice.
In the 1970s, the earlier work on effects of diverse ways of organizing the
provision of water in metropolitan areas was extended to policing and public
safety. We found that while many police departments served 80 metropolitan
areas that we studied, duplication of services by more than one department
to the same set of citizens rarely occurred (E. Ostrom, Parks, and Whitaker
1978). Further, the widely held belief that a multiplicity of departments
in a metropolitan area was less efficient was not found. In fact, the “most
efficient producers supply more output for given inputs in high multiplicity
metropolitan areas than do the efficient producers in metropolitan areas
with fewer producers” (E. Ostrom and Parks 1999: 287). Metropolitan areas
with large numbers of autonomous direct service producers achieved higher
411

levels of technical efficiency (ibid.: 290). Technical efficiency was also enhanced in those metropolitan areas with a small number of producers providing indirect services such as radio communication and criminal laboratory
analyses. We were able to reject the theory underlying the proposals of the
metropolitan reform approach. We demonstrated that complexity is not the
same as chaos in regard to metropolitan governance. That lesson has carried
forth as we have undertaken further empirical studies of polycentric governance of resource and infrastructure systems across the world (Andersson
and Ostrom 2008; E. Ostrom, Schroeder, and Wynne 1993).
B. Doubling the Types of Goods
Studying how individuals cope with diverse public problems in the world led
us to reject Samuelson’s two-fold classification of goods. Buchanan (1965)
had already added a third type of good, which he called “club goods.” In
relation to these kinds of goods, it was feasible for groups of individuals
to create private associations (clubs) to provide themselves nonrivalrous
but small-scale goods and services that they could enjoy while excluding
nonmembers from participation and consumption of benefits.
In light of further empirical and theoretical research, we proposed
additional modifications to the classification of goods to identify fundamental
differences that affect the incentives facing individuals (V. Ostrom and E.
Ostrom 1977).
1.	Replacing the term “rivalry of consumption” with “subtractability of
		 use.”
2.	Conceptualizing subtractability of use and excludability to vary from
		 low to high rather than characterizing them as either present or ab		 sent.
3.	Overtly adding a very important fourth type of good – common-pool
		 resources – that shares the attribute of subtractability with private
		 goods and difficulty of exclusion with public goods (V. Ostrom and E.
		Ostrom 1977). Forests, water systems, fisheries, and the global atmos-		 phere are all common-pool resources of immense importance for
		 the survival of humans on this earth.
4.	Changing the name of a “club” good to a “toll” good, since many
		 goods that share these characteristics are provided by small-scale
		 public as well as private associations.
Figure 1 provides an overview of four broad types of goods that differentially affect the problems individuals face in devising institutions to enable
them to provide, produce, and consume diverse goods. These four broad
types of goods contain many subtypes of goods that vary substantially in
regard to many attributes. For example, a river and a forest are both commonpool resources. They differ substantially, however, in regard to the mobility
of the resource units produced, the ease of measurement, the time scale for
regeneration, and other attributes. Specific common-pool resources also
differ in regard to spatial extent, number of users, and many other factors.
412

Subtractability of Use

Difficulty of High
Excluding
Potential
Beneficiaries
Low

High

Low

Common-pool resources:
groundwater basins, lakes,
irrigation systems, fisheries,
forests, etc.
Private goods: food, clothing,
automobiles, etc.

Public goods: peace and security
of a community, national defense,
knowledge, fire protection,
weather forecasts, etc.
Toll goods: theaters, private clubs,
daycare centers

Figure 1. Four types of goods. Source: Adapted from E. Ostrom, 2005: 24.

When one engages in substantial fieldwork, one confronts an immense
diversity of situations in which humans interact. Riding as an observer in a
patrol car in the central district of a large American city at midnight on a
Saturday evening, one sees different patterns of human interaction than in a
suburb on a weekday afternoon when school is letting out. In both cases, one
observes the production of a public good – local safety – by an official of a
local government. Others who are involved in each situation differ in regard
to age, sobriety, why they are there, and what they are trying to accomplish.
And this context affects the strategies of the police officer one is observing.
Contrast observing the production of a public good to watching private
water companies, city utilities, private oil companies, and local citizens
meeting in diverse settings to assess who is to blame for overdrafting their
groundwater basin, causing massive saltwater intrusion, and what to do next.
These individuals all face the same problem – the overdraft of a commonpool resource – but their behavior differs substantially when they meet
monthly in a private water association, when they face each other in a courtroom, and when they go to the legislature and eventually to the citizens to
sponsor a Special Replenishment District. These and many other situations
observed in irrigation systems and forests in multiple countries do not closely
resemble the standard models of a market or a hierarchy.

3. Developing a Framework for Analyzing the Diversity of
Human Situations
The complexity and diversity of the field settings we have studied has generated an extended effort by colleagues associated with the Workshop in Political
Theory and Policy Analysis (the Workshop) to develop the IAD framework (V.
Ostrom 1975; Kiser and Ostrom 1982; McGinnis 1999a, b, 2000; E. Ostrom
1986, 2005). The framework contains a nested set of building blocks that
social scientists can use in efforts to understand human interactions and outcomes across diverse settings. The IAD builds on earlier work on transactions
(Commons [1924] 1968), logic of the situation (Popper 1961), collective structures (Allport 1962), frames (Goffman 1974), and scripts (Schank and Abelson
1977). The approach also draws inspiration from the work of Koestler
(1973) and Simon (1981, 1995), who both challenged the assumption
413

that human behavior and outcomes are entirely based on a small set of
irreducible building blocks.
While the terms frameworks, theories, and models are used interchangeably by many scholars, we use these concepts in a nested manner to range
from the most general to the most precise set of assumptions made by a
scholar. The IAD framework is intended to contain the most general set of
variables that an institutional analyst may want to use to examine a diversity of institutional settings including human interactions within markets,
private firms, families, community organizations, legislatures, and government
agencies. It provides a metatheoretical language to enable scholars to discuss
any particular theory or to compare theories.
A specific theory is used by an analyst to specify which working parts of a
framework are considered useful to explain diverse outcomes and how they
relate to one another. Microlevel theories including game theory, microeconomic theory, transaction cost theory, and public goods/common-pool
resource theories are examples of specific theories compatible with the IAD
framework. Models make precise assumptions about a limited number of
variables in a theory that scholars use to examine the formal consequences of
these specific assumptions about the motivation of actors and the structure
of the situation they face.
The IAD framework is designed to enable scholars to analyze systems that
are composed of a cluster of variables, each of which can then be unpacked
multiple times depending on the question of immediate interest. At the
core of the IAD framework is the concept of an action situation affected by
external variables (see Figure 2). The broadest categories of external factors
affecting an action situation at a particular time include:
1. Biophysical conditions, which may be simplified in some analyses to be
		 one of the four types of goods defined in Figure 1.
2.	Attributes of a community, which may include the history of prior
		 interactions, internal homogeneity or heterogeneity of key attributes, and
		 the knowledge and social capital of those who may participate or be
		 affected by others.
3.	Rules-in-use, which specify common understanding of those involved
		 related to who must, must not, or may take which actions affecting others
		 subject to sanctions (Crawford and Ostrom 2005). The rules-in-use may
		 evolve over time as those involved in one action situation interact with
		 others in a variety of settings (E. Ostrom 2008; E. Ostrom and Basurto
		 forthcoming; Boyd and Richerson 1985) or self-consciously change the
		 rules in a collective-choice or constitutional-choice setting.
The set of external variables impacts an action situation to generate patterns
of interactions and outcomes that are evaluated by participants in the action
situation (and potentially by scholars) and feed back on both the external
variables and the action situation.

414

External Variables
Biophysical
Conditions
Attributes of
Community

Action
Situations

Interactions
Evaluative
Criteria

Rules-in-Use
Outcomes

Figure2.2.AA framework
framework forfor
institutional
analysis.
Source:Source:
Adapted Adapted
from E. Ostrom,
15.
Figure
institutional
analysis.
from 2005:
E. Ostrom,
2005:
15.

The internal working parts of an action situation are overtly consistent with
the variables that a theorist uses to analyze a formal game.1 This has meant
that colleagues have been able to use formal game theory models consistent
with the IAD framework to analyze simplified but interesting combinations of
theoretical variables and derive testable conclusions from them (see Acheson
and Gardner 2005; Gardner et al. 2000; Weissing and Ostrom 1993) as well
as agent-based models (ABMs) (Jager and Janssen 2002; Janssen 2008). It
is not feasible to develop a formal game (or even an ABM) to analyze the
more complex empirical settings with many variables of relevance affecting
outcomes and of importance for institutional analysis. It is possible, however,
to use a common set of structural elements to develop structured coding
forms for data collection and analysis. And one can design experiments
using a common set of variables for many situations of interest to political
economists and then examine why particular behavior and outcomes occur
in some situations and not in others.
To specify the structure of a game and predict outcomes, the theorist
needs to posit the:
1. characteristics of the actors involved (including the model of human
		 choice adopted by the theorist);
2. positions they hold (e.g., first mover or row player);
3. set of actions that actors can take at specific nodes in a decision tree;
4. amount of information available at a decision node;
5. outcomes that actors jointly affect;
6. set of functions that map actors and actions at decision nodes into
		 intermediate or final outcomes; and
7. benefits and costs assigned to the linkage of actions chosen and out
		 comes obtained.

1	I am much appreciative of the many hours of productive discussions that I had with Reinhard Selten in the
early 1980s as we started to develop the IAD framework about the internal working parts of a formal game that
could be used in the framework.

415

These are also the internal working parts of an action situation as shown
in Figure 3. As discussed below, using a common framework across a wide
diversity of studies has enabled a greater cumulation of understanding of
interactions and outcomes in very complex environments. The IAD framework overtly embeds a particular situation of interest in a broader setting of
external variables, some of which can be self-consciously revised over time.

Figure 3. The internal structure of an action situation. Source: Adapted from E. Ostrom,
2005: 33.

4. Are Rational Individuals Helplessly Trapped in Social
Dilemmas?
The classic assumptions about rational individuals facing a dichotomy of organizational forms and of goods hide the potentially productive efforts of individuals and groups to organize and solve social dilemmas such as the overharvesting of common-pool resources and the underprovision of local public
goods. The classic models have been used to view those who are involved in
a Prisoner’s Dilemma game or other social dilemmas as always trapped in the
situation without capabilities to change the structure themselves. This analytical step was a retrogressive step in the theories used to analyze the human
condition. Whether or not the individuals who are in a situation have capacities to transform the external variables affecting their own situation varies
dramatically from one situation to the next. It is an empirical condition that
varies from situation to situation rather than a logical universality. Public investigators purposely keep prisoners separated so they cannot communicate.
The users of a common-pool resource are not so limited.
When analysts perceive the human beings they model as being trapped
inside perverse situations, they then assume that other human beings external to those involved – scholars and public officials – are able to analyze
416

the situation, ascertain why counterproductive outcomes are reached, and
posit what changes in the rules-in-use will enable participants to improve outcomes. Then, external officials are expected to impose an optimal set of rules
on those individuals involved. It is assumed that the momentum for change
must come from outside the situation rather than from the self-reflection
and creativity of those within a situation to restructure their own patterns of
interaction. As Sugden has described this approach:
Most modern economic theory describes a world presided over by a
government (not, significantly, by governments), and sees this world
through the government’s eyes. The government is supposed to have
the responsibility, the will and the power to restructure society in
whatever way maximizes social welfare; like the US Cavalry in a good
Western, the government stands ready to rush to the rescue whenever
the market ‘fails’, and the economist’s job is to advise it on when and
how to do so. Private individuals, in contrast, are credited with little or
no ability to solve collective problems among themselves. This makes
for a distorted view of some important economic and political issues.
(Sugden 1986: 3; emphasis in original)
Garrett Hardin’s (1968) portrayal of the users of a common-pool resource
– a pasture open to all – being trapped in an inexorable tragedy of overuse
and destruction has been widely accepted since it was consistent with the prediction of no cooperation in a Prisoner’s Dilemma or other social dilemma
games. It captured the attention of scholars and policymakers across the
world. Many presumed that all common-pool resources were owned by no
one. Thus, it was thought that government officials had to impose new external variables (e.g., new policies) to prevent destruction by users who could
not do anything other than destroy the resources on which their own future
(as well as the rest of our futures) depended.
A. Scholars from Diverse Disciplines Examine Whether Resource Users are Always
Trapped
Dramatic incidents of overharvested resources had captured widespread attention, while studies by anthropologists, economic historians, engineers,
historians, philosophers, and political scientists of local governance of small
to medium-scale common-pool resources over long periods of time were not
noticed by many theorists and public officials (see Netting 1972; McCay and
Acheson 1987; Coward 1980). Cumulation of the knowledge contained in
these studies did not occur, due to the fact that the studies were written by
scholars in diverse disciplines focusing on different types of resources located
in many countries.
Fortunately, the National Research Council (NRC) established a committee in the mid-1980s to assess diverse institutional arrangements for effective
conservation and utilization of jointly managed resources. The NRC committee brought scholars from multiple disciplines together and used the
417

IAD framework in an effort to begin to identify common variables in cases
where users had organized or failed to organize (Oakerson 1986; NRC 1986).
Finding multiple cases where resource users were successful in organizing
themselves challenged the presumption that it was impossible for resource
users to solve their own problems of overuse. The NRC report opened up the
possibility of a diversity of studies using multiple methods. The NRC effort
also stimulated an extended research program at the Workshop that involved
coding and analyzing case studies of common-pool resources written by
other scholars.
B. Meta-Analyses of Common-Pool Resource Cases
In an effort to learn more than just the existence of multiple cases where
resource users had self-organized, colleagues at the Workshop undertook
a meta-analysis of existing case studies that were identified as a result of the
activities of the NRC panel.2 Because of our prior studies of complex urban
systems and the development of a framework and common language for linking the parts of complex systems, we could use the framework to help organize our efforts. The IAD framework became the foundation for designing a
coding manual that was used to record a consistent set of variables for each
common-pool resource study.
This was an immense effort. More than two years was devoted to developing the final coding manual (E. Ostrom et al. 1989). A key problem was the
minimal overlap of variables identified by case study authors from diverse disciplines. The team had to read and screen over 500 case studies in order to
identify a small set of cases that recorded information about the actors, their
strategies, the condition of the resource, and the rules-in-use.3 A common
set of variables was recorded for 44 subgroups of fishers who harvested from
inshore fisheries (Schlager 1990, 1994) and 47 irrigation systems that were
managed either by farmers or by a government (Tang 1992, 1994).
Of the 47 irrigation systems included in the analysis, 12 were managed by
governmental agencies of which only 40 percent (n = 7) had high performance. Of the 25 farmer-managed, over 70 percent (n = 18) had high performance (Tang 1994: 234). Rule conformance was a key variable affecting the
adequacy of water over time (ibid.: 229). None of the inshore fishery groups
analyzed by Schlager were government-managed and 11 (25 percent) were
not organized in any way. The other 33 subgroups had a diversity of informal
rules to define who was allowed to fish in a particular location and how harvesting was restricted (Schlager 1994: 260).

2	This meta-analysis effort is described in chapter 4 of Poteete, Janssen, and Ostrom (2010).
3	Scholars across disciplines tend to use very different vocabularies and theoretical frameworks when they
describe empirical settings. Other scholars, who have used metaanalysis, have also needed to screen many
publications to obtain consistent data about human used resource systems. Pagdee, Kim, and Daugherty
(2006) report screening over 100 articles in order to analyze 31 cases related to forest management. Rudel
(2008) reported that he had screened nearly 1,200 studies for a meta-analysis of 268 cases of tropical forest
cover change.

418

In addition to finding significant levels of cooperation, we found some
support for earlier theoretical predictions of no cooperation in particular
settings.
In CPR dilemmas where individuals do not know one another, cannot
communicate effectively, and thus cannot develop agreements, norms,
and sanctions, aggregate predictions derived from models of rational
individuals in a noncooperative game receive substantial support. These
are sparse environments and full rationality appears to be a reasonable
assumption in them. (E. Ostrom, Gardner, and Walker 1994: 319)
On the other hand, the capacity to overcome dilemmas and create effective governance occurred far more frequently than expected and depended
upon the structure of the resource itself and whether the rules-in-use developed by users were linked effectively to this structure (Blomquist et al. 1994).
In all self-organized systems, we found that users had created boundary rules
for determining who could use the resource, choice rules related to the allocation of the flow of resource units, and active forms of monitoring and
local sanctioning of rule breakers (ibid.: 301). On the other hand, we did not
find a single case where harvesters used the “grim trigger” strategy – a form
of punishment that was posited in many theoretical arguments for how individuals could solve repeated dilemmas (Dutta 1990: 264).
C. The Bundles of Property Rights Related to Common-Pool Resources
Resource economists have used the term “common property resource” to
refer to fisheries and water resources (Gordon 1954; Scott 1955; Bell 1972).
Combining the term “property” with “resource” introduced considerable
confusion between the nature of a good and the absence or presence of
a property regime (Ciriacy-Wantrup and Bishop 1975). A common-pool
resource can be owned and managed as government property, private property, community property, or owned by no one (Bromley 1986). A further
reason for the lack of awareness about property systems developed by local
users was that many scholars presumed that unless users possessed alienation
rights – the right to sell their property – they did not have any property rights
(Alchian and Demsetz 1973; Anderson and Hill 1990; Posner 1975).
Schlager and Ostrom (1992) drew on the earlier work of John R. Commons
([1924] 1968) to conceptualize property-rights systems as containing bundles
of rights rather than a single right. The meta-analysis of existing field cases
helped to identify five property rights that individuals using a common-pool
resource might cumulatively have: (1) Access – the right to enter a specified
property,4 (2) Withdrawal – the right to harvest specific products from a resource, (3) Management – the right to transform the resource and regulate

4	The concept of access rights has puzzled some scholars. An everyday example of an access right is the
buying of a permit to enter a public park. This assigns the holder of a permit the right to enter and enjoy
hiking and other nonharvesting activities for a defined period of time.

419

internal use patterns, (4) Exclusion – the right to decide who will have access,
withdrawal, or management rights, and (5) Alienation – the right to lease or
sell any of the other four rights. Conceiving of property-rights bundles is now
widely accepted by scholars who have studied diverse property-rights systems
around the world (Brunckhorst 2000; Degnbol and McCay 2007; Paavola and
Adger 2005; Trawick 2001; J. Wilson et al. 1994).
D. Linking the Internal Parts of an Action Situation to External Rules
Actors who have specific property rights to a resource also face more fundamental rules that affect the structure of the action situations they are in.
In our meta-analysis, we found an incredible array of specific rules used in
different settings (e.g., who could withdraw how many resource units at what
location and time, what information was required of all users, what costs
and benefits were attached to which actions, etc.). As we attempted to find a
consistent way of coding and analyzing this rich diversity of specific rules described by case authors, we turned again to the IAD framework. Since we had
identified seven working parts of a game or action situation itself, it seemed
reasonable to think of seven broad types of rules operating as external variables affecting the individual working parts of action situations (see Figure
4). The seven types of rules are:
1. Boundary rules that specify how actors were to be chosen to enter or
		 leave these positions;
2. Position rules that specify a set of positions and how many actors hold
		 each one;
3.	Choice rules that specify which actions are assigned to an actor in a position;
4.	Information rules that specify channels of communication among actors
		 and what information must, may, or must not be shared;
5.	Scope rules that specify the outcomes that could be affected;
6.	Aggregation rules (such as majority or unanimity rules) that specify how
		 the decisions of actors at a node were to be mapped to intermediate or
		 final outcomes; and
7. Payoff rules that specify how benefits and costs were to be distributed to
		 actors in positions (Crawford and Ostrom 2005).

420

A useful way of thinking about institutional rules is to conceptualize what
part of an action situation is affected by a rule (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Rules as exogenous variables directly affecting the elements of an action situation.
Source: Adapted from E. Ostrom, 2005: 189.

Conceptualizing seven broad types of rules (rather than one or two) has
been upsetting to scholars who wanted to rely on simple models of interactions among humans. In addition to finding seven broad types of rules, however, we also found multiple variants of each type. For example, we found
27 boundary rules described by case study authors as used in at least one
common-pool resource setting (E. Ostrom 1999: 510). Some rules specified
diverse forms of residence, organizational memberships, or personal attributes that are ascribed or acquired. Similarly, we found 112 different choice
rules that were usually composed of two parts – an allocation formula specifying where, when, or how resource units could be harvested and a specific basis for the implementation of the formula (such as the amount of land held,
historical use patterns, or assignment through lottery) (ibid.: 512).
E. Long-Surviving Resource Institutions
After working for several years with colleagues to code cases of successful
and failed systems, I thought my next task would be to undertake careful
statistical analysis to identify which specific rules were associated with successful systems. I had not yet fully absorbed the incredible number and
diversity of rules that the team had recorded. In 1988, I spent a sabbatical
leave in a research group organized by Reinhard Selten at the Center for
Interdisciplinary Research at Bielefeld University. I struggled to find rules
that worked across ecological, social, and economic environments, but the
specific rules associated with success or failure varied extensively across sites.
Finally, I had to give up the idea that specific rules might be associated with
successful cases.
421

Moving up a level in generality, I tried to understand the broader institutional regularities among the systems that were sustained over a long period of time and were absent in the failed systems. I used the term “design
principle” to characterize these regularities. I did not mean that the fishers,
irrigators, pastoralists, and others overtly had these principles in their minds
when they developed systems that survived for long periods of time. My effort
was to identify a set of core underlying lessons that characterized the long
sustained regimes as contrasted to the cases of failure (E. Ostrom 1990).5
Since the design principles are described extensively in E. Ostrom (1990,
2005), I will list only a brief updated list as developed by Cox, Arnold, and
Villamayor-Tomás (2009):
1A. User Boundaries: Clear and locally understood boundaries between
		
legitimate users and nonusers are present.
1B.	Resource Boundaries: Clear boundaries that separate a specific common		
pool resource from a larger social-ecological system are present.
2A. 	Congruence with Local Conditions: Appropriation and provision rules
		
are congruent with local social and environmental conditions.
2B. 	Appropriation and Provision: Appropriation rules are congruent with
		
provision rules; the distribution of costs is proportional to the
		
distribution of benefits.
3.	Collective-Choice Arrangements: Most individuals affected by a resource
		
regime are authorized to participate in making and modifying its
		
rules.
4A. Monitoring Users: Individuals who are accountable to or are the
		
users monitor the appropriation and provision levels of the users.
4B. Monitoring the Resource: Individuals who are accountable to or are
		
the users monitor the condition of the resource.
5. Graduated Sanctions: Sanctions for rule violations start very low but
		
become stronger if a user repeatedly violates a rule.
6. 	Conflict-Resolution Mechanisms: Rapid, low-cost, local arenas exist for
		
resolving conflicts among users or with officials.
7. Minimal Recognition of Rights: The rights of local users to make their
		
own rules are recognized by the government.
8.	Nested Enterprises: When a common-pool resource is closely connected
		
to a larger social-ecological system, governance activities are organized
		
in multiple nested layers.
The design principles appear to synthesize core factors that affect the probability of long-term survival of an institution developed by the users of a resource. Cox, Arnold, and Villamayor-Tomás (2009) analyzed over 100 studies
by scholars who assessed the relevance of the principles as an explanation of
the success or failure of diverse common-pool resources. Two-thirds of these
5	The term “design principle” has confused many readers. Perhaps I should have used the term “best
practices” to describe the rules and structure of robust institutions.

422

studies confirm that robust resource systems are characterized by most of
the design principles and that failures are not. The authors of some studies
that found the design principles inadequate tended to interpret them very
rigidly and felt that successful systems were characterized by more flexibility.
In three instances, the initial wording of the design principles was too general and did not distinguish between ecological and social conditions. Thus,
I have adopted the improvements to principles 1, 2, and 4 suggested by Cox
and coauthors.
5. Conducting Experiments to Study Common-Pool
Resource Problems
The existence of a large number of cases where users had overcome social
dilemmas in order to sustain long-term use of common-pool resources successfully challenged the presumption that this was impossible. Many variables
simultaneously affect these outcomes in the field. Developing game-theoretical models of common-pool resource situations (Weissing and Ostrom 1993;
E. Ostrom and Gardner 1993) has been one strategy we have used to assess
the theoretical outcomes of a set of variables we have observed in the field.
We have also thought it was important to examine the effect of precise combinations of variables in an experimental setting.
A. Common-Pool Resource Experiments in University Laboratories
Roy Gardner and James Walker joined me in an extended effort to build and
test well-specified, game-theoretical models consistent with the IAD framework (see E. Ostrom, Walker, and Gardner 1992; E. Ostrom, Gardner, and
Walker 1994). The initial CPR experiments started with a static, baseline situation that was as simple as could be specified without losing crucial aspects
of the appropriation problems facing harvesters in the field. We used a quadratic payoff production function based on Gordon’s (1954) classic model.
The initial resource endowment ω for each of eight subjects was a set of
tokens that the subject could allocate between Market 1 (which had a fixed
return) and Market 2 (which functioned as a common-pool resource with
a return affected by the actions of all subjects in the experiment). Subjects
received aggregated information so they did not know each individual’s
actions. Each subject i could invest a portion xi of his/her endowment in
the common resource (Market 2) and the remaining portion would then be
invested in Market 1. The payoff function we used (E. Ostrom, Gardner, and
Walker 1994: 110) was:
ui(x) = we
ui(x) = w(e – xi) + (xi/Σxi)F(Σxi)

if xi = 0

(1)

if xi > 0.

(2)

The baseline experiment was a commons dilemma in which the gametheoretic outcome involved substantial overuse of a resource while a much
better outcome could be reached if subjects were to reduce their joint
423

allocation. The prediction from noncooperative game theory was that
subjects would invest according to the Nash equilibrium – 8 tokens each
for a total of 64 tokens. Subjects could earn considerably more if they reduced their allocation to a total of 36 tokens in the common-pool resource.
Subjects in baseline experiments with multiple decision rounds substantially
overinvested – they invested even more tokens than predicted, so the joint
outcome was worse than the predicted Nash equilibrium.6
Building off prior public goods research (Isaac and Walker 1988), we then
conducted a series of face-to-face communication experiments in which
the same payoff function was retained. After an initial ten rounds without
communication, subjects were told they could communicate with each other
in a group setting before returning to their terminals to make their own
private decisions. This provided an opportunity for “cheap talk.” The same
outcome was predicted in these experiments as in the baseline since a subject
could promise to cooperate but no external “third party” ensured that the
promise was fulfilled.
Subjects used face-to-face communication to discuss strategies to gain the
best outcomes and then to agree – if possible – on what each subject should
invest. They learned about their aggregate investments after each round,
but not the decision of individual subjects. This gave them information as
to whether the total investments were greater than agreed upon. In many
rounds, subjects kept their promises to each other. In other rounds, some
defections did occur. Subjects used information about the aggregate investment levels to scold their unknown fellow subjects if the total investment was
higher than they had agreed upon. The opportunity for repeated face-to-face
communication was extremely successful in increasing joint returns. Findings
from communication experiments are consistent with a large number of
studies of the impact of face-to-face communication on the capacity of subjects to solve a variety of social dilemma problems (see E. Ostrom and Walker
1991; Orbell, van de Kragt, and Dawes 1988; Sally 1995; Balliet 2010).
In many field settings, resource users have devised a variety of formal or
informal ways of sanctioning one another if rules are broken, even though
this behavior is not consistent with the theory of norm-free, complete
rationality (Elster 1989: 40–41). It was thus important to see if subjects in
a controlled experimental setting would actually use their own assets to
financially punish other subjects. After subjects played ten rounds of the
baseline common-pool resource game, they were told that in the subsequent
rounds they would have an opportunity to pay a fee in order to impose a
fine on another subject. We found much more sanctioning occurred in this

6	In simple, repeated public goods experiments, subjects initially tended to contribute at a higher level than
predicted by the Nash equilibrium (Isaac et al. 1984, 1985, 1994; Isaac and Walker 1988, Marwell and Ames
1979) and outcomes slowly approach the predicted Nash equilibrium from a higher level. In common-pool
resource games, on the other hand, subjects initially achieved outcomes that were much worse than the
	Nash equilibrium that they then slowly approached from below (see also Casari and Plott 2003).

424

design than the zero level predicted.7 Subjects did increase gross benefits
through their sanctioning but substantially reduced net returns due to the
overuse of costly sanctions.8 Sanctioning was primarily directed at those who
defected, but a few sanctions appeared to be directed at low contributors as
a form of revenge by those who had fined themselves. In a further design,
subjects were given a chance to communicate and decide whether or not
to adopt a sanctioning system of their own. Subjects who decided to adopt
their own sanctioning system achieved the highest returns achieved in any of
the common-pool resource laboratory experiments – 90 percent of optimal
after the fines related to the small number of defections were subtracted
(E. Ostrom, Walker, and Gardner 1992).
The predictions of noncooperative game theory are roughly supported
only when participants in a laboratory experiment do not know the
reputation of the others involved in a common-pool resource dilemma
and cannot communicate with them. On the other hand, when subjects
communicate face-to-face, they frequently agree on joint strategies and keep
to their agreements – substantially increasing their net returns. Further,
communication to decide on and design a sanctioning system enables those
choosing this option to achieve close to optimal returns.
B. Studying Common-Pool Resources in Field Experiments
A series of field experiments have now been conducted by colleagues in
Colombia to assess whether experienced villagers who are dependent on
resources make decisions about the “time spent in a forest” in a design that
is mathematically consistent with those reported on above. Cardenas (2000)
conducted field experiments in rural schoolhouses with over 200 users of
local forests. He modified the design of the common-pool resource experiments without, and with, face-to-face communication so that villagers were
asked to make decisions regarding “harvesting trees.” The outcomes of
these experiments were broadly consistent with the findings obtained with
university students.
In a different design, Cardenas, Stranlund, and Willis (2000) ran ten
rounds of baseline experiments with resource users from five villages who
were then given a chance to communicate face-to-face for the next set of
experiments. In five additional villages, participants were told after the
baseline rounds that a new regulation would go into force that mandated them
to spend no more than the optimal time in the forest each round. The probability of an inspection was 1/16 per round – a low but realistic probability
for monitoring rule conformance in rural areas in developing countries. If
the person was over the limit imposed, a penalty was subtracted from that

7	See Henrich et al. (2006) in which field experiments were conducted in multiple countries testing whether
a much broader set of participants would also use punishments in public goods experiments. See
also Henrich et al. (2004) for the reports of earlier field experiments of social dilemmas in fifteen small
communities.
8	Similar findings exist for public goods experiments where punishers typically punish low contributors
(Yamagishi 1986; Fehr and Gächter 2002).

425

person’s payoff, but the penalty was not revealed to the others. Subjects in this
experimental condition increased their withdrawal levels when compared to
the outcomes obtained when face-to-face communication was allowed and
no rule was imposed. Other scholars have also found that externally imposed
regulation that would theoretically lead to higher joint returns “crowded
out” voluntary behavior to cooperate (see Frey and Oberholzer-Gee 1997;
Reeson and Tisdell 2008).
Fehr and Leibbrandt (2008) conducted an interesting set of public goods
experiments with fishers who harvest from an “open-access” inland lake
in northeastern Brazil. They found that a high percentage (87 percent) of
fishers contributed in the first period of the field experiment and that contributions leveled off in the remaining periods. Fehr and Leibbrandt examined
the mesh size of the nets used by individual fishermen and found that those
who contributed more in the public goods experiment used nets with bigger
mesh sizes. Larger mesh sizes allow young fish to escape, grow larger, and
reproduce at a higher level than if they are caught when they are still small.
In other words, cooperation in the field experiment was consistent with
observed cooperation related to a real CPR dilemma. They conclude that
the “fact that our laboratory measure for other-regarding preferences
predicts field behavior increases our confidence about the behavioral relevance of other-regarding preferences gained from laboratory experiments”
(ibid.: 17).
In summary, experiments on CPRs and public goods have shown that
many predictions of the conventional theory of collective action do not hold.
More cooperation occurs than predicted, “cheap talk” increases cooperation,
and subjects invest in sanctioning free-riders. Experiments also establish that
motivational heterogeneity exists in harvesting or contribution decisions as
well as decisions on sanctioning.
6. Studying Common-Pool Resource Problems in the Field
Having conducted extensive meta-analyses of case studies and experiments,
we also needed to undertake field studies where we could draw on the IAD
framework to design questions to obtain consistent information about key
theoretically important variables across sites.
A. Comparing Farmer- and Government-Managed Irrigation Systems in Nepal
An opportunity to visit Nepal in 1988 led to the discovery of a large number
of written studies of farmer-built and maintained irrigation systems as well
as some government-constructed and managed systems. Ganesh Shivakoti,
Paul Benjamin, and I were able to revise the CPR coding manual so as to
include variables of specific relevance to understanding irrigation systems in
a new coding manual for the Nepal Irrigation and Institutions (NIIS) project.
We coded existing cases and again found numerous “missing variables” not
discussed by the original author. Colleagues made several trips to Nepal to
visit previously described systems in written case studies to fill in missing data
426

and verify the data in the original study. While in the field, we were able to
add new cases to the data set (Benjamin et al. 1994).
In undertaking analysis of this large data set, Lam (1998) developed three
performance measures that could be applied to all systems: (1) the physical
condition of irrigation systems, (2) the quantity of water available to farmers
at the tail end of a system at different seasons of the year, and (3) the agricultural productivity of the systems. Controlling for environmental differences
among systems, Lam found that irrigation systems governed by the farmers
themselves perform significantly better on all three performance measures.
On the farmer-governed systems, farmers communicate with one another at
annual meetings and informally on a regular basis, develop their own agreements, establish the positions of monitors, and sanction those who do not
conform to their own rules. Consequently, farmer-managed systems are likely
to grow more rice, distribute water more equitably, and keep their systems
in better repair than government systems. While farmer systems do vary in
performance, few perform as poorly as government systems – holding other
relevant variables constant.
Over time, colleagues have visited and coded still further irrigation
systems in Nepal. The earlier findings regarding the higher level of performance of farmer-managed systems was again confirmed using the expanded
database containing 229 irrigation systems (Joshi et al. 2000; Shivakoti and
Ostrom 2002). Our findings are not unique to Nepal. Scholars have carefully
documented effective farmer-designed and operated systems in many countries including Japan (Aoki 2001), India (Meinzen-Dick 2007; Bardhan
2000), and Sri Lanka (Uphoff 1991).
B. Studying Forests around the World
In 1992, Dr. Marilyn Hoskins, who headed the Forest, Trees and People
Program at the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United
Nations, asked colleagues at the Workshop to draw on our experience in
studying irrigation systems to develop methods for assessing the impact of
diverse forest governance arrangements in multiple countries. Two years of
intense development and review by ecologists and social scientists around the
world led to the development of ten research protocols to obtain reliable information about users and forest governance as well as about the ecological
conditions of sampled forests. A long-term collaborative research network
– the International Forestry Resources and Institutions (IFRI) research
program – was established with centers now located in Bolivia, Colombia,
Guatemala, India, Kenya, Mexico, Nepal, Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda,
and the United States, with new centers being established in Ethiopia and
China (see Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000; Poteete and Ostrom 2004;
Wollenberg et al. 2007). IFRI is unique among efforts to study forests as it
is the only interdisciplinary long-term monitoring and research program
studying forests in multiple countries owned by governments, private
organizations, and communities.
Forests are a particularly important form of common-pool resource given
427

their role in climate change-related emissions and carbon sequestration
(Canadell and Raupach 2008), the biodiversity they contain, and their contribution to rural livelihoods in developing countries. A “favorite” policy recommendation for protecting forests and biodiversity is government-owned
protected areas (Terborgh 1999). In an effort to examine whether government ownership of protected areas is a necessary condition for improving
forest density, Hayes (2006) used IFRI data to compare the rating of forest
density (on a five-point scale) assigned to a forest by the forester or ecologist
who had supervised the forest mensuration of trees, shrubs, and groundcover in a random sample of forest plots.9 Of the 163 forests included in the
analysis, 76 were government-owned forests legally designated as protected forests
and 87 were public, private, or communally owned forested lands used for
a diversity of purposes. No statistical difference existed between the forest
density in officially designated protected areas versus other forested areas.
Gibson, Williams, and Ostrom (2005) examined the monitoring behavior of 178 forest user groups and found a strong correlation between the
level of monitoring and a forester’s assessment of forest density even when
controlling for whether users were formally organized, whether the users
were heavily dependent on a forest, and the level of social capital within a
group.
Chhatre and Agrawal (2008) have now examined the changes in the
condition of 152 forests under diverse governance arrangements as affected
by the size of the forest, collective action around forests related to improvement activities, size of the user group, and the dependence of local users on
a forest. They found that “forests with a higher probability of regeneration
are likely to be small to medium in size with low levels of subsistence dependence, low commercial value, high levels of local enforcement, and strong
collective action for improving the quality of the forest” (ibid.: 1327). In a
second major analysis, Chhatre and Agrawal (2009) focus on factors that
affect tradeoffs and synergies between the level of carbon storage in forests
and their contributions to livelihoods. They find that larger forests are more
effective in enhancing both carbon and livelihoods outcomes, particularly
when local communities also have high levels of rule-making autonomy.
Recent studies by Coleman (2009) and Coleman and Steed (2009) also find
that a major variable affecting forest conditions is the investment by local users in monitoring. Further, when local users are given harvesting rights, they
are more likely to monitor illegal uses themselves. Other focused studies also
stress the relationship between local monitoring and better forest conditions
(Ghate and Nagendra 2005; E. Ostrom and Nagendra 2006; Banana and
Gombya-Ssembajjwe 2000; Webb and Shivakoti 2008).

9	Extensive forest mensuration is conducted at every IFRI site at the same time that information is obtained
about forest users, their activities and organization, and about governance arrangements. Comparing
forest measures across ecological zones is misleading since the average diameter at breast height in a forest
is strongly affected by precipitation, soils, elevation, and other factors that vary dramatically across
ecological zones. Thus, we ask the forester or ecologist who has just supervised the collection of forest data
to rate the forest on a five-point scale from very sparse to very abundant.

428

The legal designation of a forest as a protected area is not by itself related to
forest density. Detailed field studies of monitoring and enforcement as they
are conducted on the ground, however, illustrate the challenge of achieving
high levels of forest regrowth without active involvement of local forest users
(see Batistella, Robeson, and Moran 2003; Agrawal 2005; Andersson, Gibson,
and Lehoucq 2006; Tucker 2008). Our research shows that forests under
different property regimes – government, private, communal – sometimes meet enhanced social goals such as biodiversity protection, carbon
storage, or improved livelihoods. At other times, these property regimes fail to
provide such goals. Indeed, when governments adopt top-down
decentralization policies leaving local officials and users in the dark, stable
forests may become subject to deforestation (Banana et al., 2007). Thus, it is
not the general type of forest governance that is crucial in explaining forest
conditions; rather, it is how a particular governance arrangement fits the
local ecology, how specific rules are developed and adapted over time, and
whether users consider the system to be legitimate and equitable (for a more
detailed overview of the IFRI research program, see Poteete, Janssen, and
Ostrom 2010: chap. 5).
7. Current Theoretical Developments
Given the half century of our own extensive empirical research and that of
many distinguished scholars (e.g., Baland and Platteau 2005; Berkes 2007;
Berkes, Colding, and Folke 2003; Clark 2006; Marshall 2008; Schelling 1960,
1978, 1984), where are we now? What have we learned? We now know that
the earlier theories of rational, but helpless, individuals who are trapped in
social dilemmas are not supported by a large number of studies using diverse
methods (Faysse 2005; Poteete, Janssen, and Ostrom 2010). On the other
hand, we cannot be overly optimistic and presume that dilemmas will always
be solved by those involved. Many groups have struggled and failed (Dietz,
Ostrom, and Stern 2003). Further, simple policy prescriptions to turn over
resources to a government, to privatize, or more recently to decentralize,
may also fail (Berkes 2007; Brock and Carpenter 2007; Meinzen-Dick 2007).
We thus face the tough task of further developing our theories to help
understand and predict when those involved in a common-pool resource
dilemma will be able to self-organize and how various aspects of the broad
context they face affect their strategies, the short-term success of their
efforts, and the long-term robustness of their initial achievements. We need
to develop a better theoretical understanding of human behavior as well as of
the impact of the diverse contexts that humans face.
A. Developing a More General Theory of the Individual
As discussed earlier in section 3, efforts to explain phenomena in the social
world are organized at three levels of generality. Frameworks such as the
IAD that have been used to organize diverse efforts to study common-pool
resources are meta-theoretical devices that help provide a general language
429

for describing relationships at multiple levels and scales. Theories are efforts to build understanding by making core assumptions about specific
working parts of frequently encountered phenomena and predicting general
outcomes. Models are very specific working examples of a theory – and
they are frequently confused with being theories themselves. As Alchian
(1950) pointed out long ago, what is called “rational choice theory” is not
a broad theory of human behavior but rather a useful model to predict
behavior in a particular situation – a highly competitive market for private
goods. Predictions derived from the rational choice model are empirically
supported in open markets for private goods and other competitive environments (Holt 2007; Smith and Walker 1993; Satz and Ferejohn 1994). Thus,
it is a useful model to retain for predicting outcomes in competitive settings
related to excludable and divisible outcomes.
While it is not possible yet to point to a single theory of human behavior
that has been successfully formulated and tested in a variety of settings,
scholars are currently positing and testing assumptions that are likely to be at
the core of future developments (Smith 2003, 2010). These relate to (1) the
capability of boundedly rational individuals to learn fuller and more reliable
information in repeated situations when reliable feedback is present, (2)
the use of heuristics in making daily decisions, and (3) the preferences that
individuals have related to benefits for self as well as norms and preferences
related to benefits for others (see Poteete, Janssen, and Ostrom 2010: chap.
9; E. Ostrom 1998).
The assumption that individuals have complete information about all
actions available to them, the likely strategies that others will adopt, and the
probabilities of specific consequences that will result from their own choices,
must be rejected in any but the very simplest of repeated settings. When
boundedly rational individuals do interact over time, it is reasonable to
assume that they learn more accurate information about the actions they can
take and the likely actions of other individuals (Selten 1990; Simon 1955,
1999). Some highly complex common-pool resource environments, however,
approach mathematical chaos (J. Wilson et al., 1994) in which resource users
cannot gain complete information about all likely combinations of future
events.
In many situations, individuals use rules of thumb – heuristics – that they
have learned over time that work relatively well in a particular setting. Fishers
end up “fishing for knowledge” (J. Wilson 1990) where using heuristics over
time enables them to recognize diverse clues of environmental processes
that they need to take into account when making their own decisions. When
individuals do interact repeatedly, it is possible to learn heuristics that
approach “best-response” strategies and achieve close to local optima
(Gigerenzer and Selten 2001). In eras of rapid change or sudden shocks,
however, heuristics may not enable individuals to achieve high payoffs.
Individuals also learn norms – internal valuations that are negative or
positive related to specific actions such as lying or being brave in particular
situations (Crawford and Ostrom 2005). The strength of an internal commit430

ment (Sen 1977) may be represented in the size of the internal weight that
an individual assigns to actions and outcomes in a particular setting. Among
individual norms are those related to valuing outcomes achieved by others
(Cox and Deck 2005; Cox, Sadiraj, and Sadiraj 2008; Andreoni 1989; Bolton
and Ockenfels 2000). Fehr and Schmidt (1999) propose that individuals
dislike unequal outcomes of interactions and thus have an internal norm
of “inequity aversion.” Axelrod (1986) posits that individuals who adopt
meta norms related to whether others follow the norms that have evolved
in a group, increase the probability that norms will be followed. Leibbrandt,
Gneezy, and List (2010) show that individuals who regularly work in teams
are more likely to adopt norms and trust each other more than individuals
working alone. Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992) posit that many
individuals adopt norms of fairness and justice. Not all individuals have the
same norms or perceptions of a situation (Ones and Putterman 2007), and
they may differ substantially in whether they consider a way of sharing costs
to be fair (Eckel and Grossman 1996).
Simply assuming that humans adopt norms, however, is not sufficient to
predict behavior in a social dilemma, especially in very large groups with no
arrangements for communication. Even with strong preferences to follow
norms, “observed behavior may vary by context because the perception of
the ‘right thing’ would change” (de Oliveira, Croson, and Eckel 2009: 19).
Various aspects of the context in which individuals interact affect how individuals learn about the situation they are in and about the others with whom
they are interacting. Individual differences do make a difference, but the
context of interactions also affects behavior over time (Walker and Ostrom
2009). Biologists recognize that an organism’s appearance and behavior are
affected by the environment in which it develops.
For example, some plants produce large, thin leaves (which enhance
photosynthetic photon harvest) in low light, and narrow, thicker leaves
(which conserve water) in high light; certain insects develop wings
only if they live in crowded conditions (and hence are likely to run
out of adequate food in their current location). Such environmentally
contingent development is so commonplace that it can be regarded as
a universal property of living things. (Pfennig and Ledón-Rettig 2009:
268)
Social scientists also need to recognize that individual behavior is strongly
affected by the context in which interactions take place rather than being
simply a result of individual differences.
B. The Central Role of Trust in Coping with Dilemmas
Even though Arrow (1974) long ago pointed to the crucial role of
trust among participants as the most efficient mechanism to enhance
transactional outcomes, collective-action theory has paid more attention to
payoff functions than to how individuals build trust where others are recip431

rocators of costly cooperative efforts. Empirical studies, however, confirm the
important role of trust in overcoming social dilemmas (Rothstein 2005). As
illustrated in Figure 5, the updated theoretical assumptions of learning and
norm-adopting individuals can be used as the foundation for understanding
how individuals may gain increased levels of trust in others, leading to more
cooperation and higher benefits with feedback mechanisms that reinforce
positive or negative learning. It is not only that individuals adopt norms but
also that the structure of the situation generates sufficient information about
the likely behavior of others to be trustworthy reciprocators who will bear
their share of the costs of overcoming a dilemma. Thus, in some contexts,
one can move beyond the presumption that rational individuals are helpless
in overcoming social dilemma situations.

Figure 5. Microsituational and broader contexts of social dilemmas affect levels of trust
and cooperation. Source: Poteete, Janssen, and Ostrom, 2010: 227. © Princeton University
Press 2010. Republished by permission of Princeton University Press.

C. The Microsituational Level of Analysis
Asserting that context makes a difference in building or destroying trust
and reciprocity is not a sufficient theoretical answer to how and why
individuals sometimes solve and sometimes fail to solve dilemmas. Individuals
interacting in a dilemma situation face two contexts: (1) a microcontext
related to the specific attributes of an action situation in which individuals
are directly interacting and (2) the broader context of the social-ecological
system in which groups of individuals make decisions. A major advantage of
studies conducted in an experimental lab or in field experiments is that the
researcher designs the microsetting in which the experiment is conducted.
Thus, empirical results are growing (and are summarized in Poteete, Janssen,
and Ostrom 2010) to establish that the following attributes of microsituations
affect the level of cooperation that participants achieve in social dilemma settings (including both public goods and common-pool resource dilemmas).

432

1.	Communication is feasible with the full set of participants. When
		 face-to-face communication is possible, participants use facial
		 expressions, physical actions, and the way that words are expressed to
		 judge the trustworthiness of the others involved.
2.	Reputations of participants are known. Knowing the past history of
		 other participants, who may not be personally known prior to inter
		 action, increases the likelihood of cooperation.
3.	High marginal per capita return (MPCR). When MPCR is high, each
		 participant can know that their own contributions make a bigger
		 difference than with low MPCR and that others are more likely to
		 recognize this relationship.
4.	Entry or exit capabilities. If participants can exit a situation at low
		 cost, this gives them an opportunity not to be a sucker and others can
		 recognize that cooperators may leave (and enter other situations) if
		 their cooperation is not reciprocated.
5.	Longer time horizon. Participants can anticipate that more could be
		 earned through cooperation over a long time period versus a short
		 time.
6.	Agreed-upon sanctioning capabilities. While external sanctions or
		 imposed sanctioning systems may reduce cooperation, when parti		 cipants themselves agree to a sanctioning system they frequently do
		 not need to use sanctions at a high volume and net benefits can be
		 improved substantially.
Other microsituational variables are being tested in experiments around
the world. The central core of the findings is that when individuals face a
social dilemma in a microsetting, they are more likely to cooperate when
situational variables increase the likelihood of gaining trust that others will
reciprocate.
D. The Broader Context in the Field
Individuals coping with common-pool resource dilemmas in the field are
also affected by a broader set of contextual variables related to the attributes
of the social-ecological system (SES) in which they are interacting. A group
of scholars in Europe and the U.S. are currently working on the further
development of a framework that links the IAD and its interactions and
outcomes at a micro level with a broader set of variables observed in the
field.10 As illustrated in Figure 6, one can think of individuals interacting in

10	Scholars at the Stockholm Environment Institute, the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,
	Delft University of Technology, the University of Zurich, the Nordland Research Institute of Bodø
University College, the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK), Humboldt University,
Marburg University, and the EU NeWATER project located at the University of Osnabrück have had several
meetings in Europe to begin plans for using a common framework (initially developed by E. Ostrom
2007) to study a variety of resource systems. Scholars at the Workshop in Bloomington and the Center for
the Study of Institutional Diversity at Arizona State University will also participate in this effort. A core
problem identified by these scholars is the lack of cumulation across studies on diverse natural resource
systems as well as humanly engineered resources.

433

an Action Situation generating Interactions and Outcomes that are affected
by and affect a Resource System, Resource Units, Governance System, and
Users who affect and are affected by Social, Economic, and Political Settings
and Related Ecosystems (see E. Ostrom 2007, 2009). Figure 6 provides an
overview of the highest tier of variables that exist in all field settings. The
highest tier can be unpacked several times when one is trying to analyze
specific questions related to SESs in the field, but there is not enough time or
space to undertake a thorough unpacking in this article.

Figure 6. Action situations embedded in broader social-ecological systems. Source: Adapted
from E. Ostrom, 2007: 15182.

Experimental researchers have reached a higher level of agreement about the
impact of microsituational variables on the incentives, levels of trust, and behavior of individuals in dilemma situations than exists among field researchers. Few SES variables have a fully independent impact on the action situations
that participants face and their likely behavior. The SES variables that are
most important differ depending on which interactions (such as monitoring,
conflict, lobbying, self-organization) or longer-term outcomes (such as
overharvesting, regeneration of biodiversity, resilience of an ecological
system to human and nature-induced disturbances) one wishes to predict. A
set of ten variables have been identified across many field studies as impacting
the likelihood of users self-organizing in order to overcome a common-pool
resource dilemma (E. Ostrom 2009; Basurto and Ostrom 2009). These include: the size, productivity,/and predictability of the resource system; the
extent of mobility of the resource units; the existence of collective-choice
rules that the users may adopt authoritatively in order to change their own
operational rules; and four attributes of users (the number, the existence
of leadership/entrepreneurship, knowledge about the SES, and the importance of the SES to the users). Linking the broader contextual variables and
microcontextual variables is one of the major tasks facing scientists who work
434

across disciplinary lines to understand how both social and ecological factors
affect human behavior.11
8. Complexity and Reform
The economic and social sciences have significantly moved ahead over the
past five decades since scholars posited two optimal organizational forms,
two types of goods, and one model of the individual. Extensive empirical
research documents the diversity of settings in which individuals solve
common-pool resource problems on their own, when these solutions are sustainable over long periods of time, and how larger institutional arrangements
enhance or detract from the capabilities of individuals at smaller scales to
solve problems efficiently and sustainably (see, for example, Agrawal and
Gibson 2001; Gibson et al. 2005; Schlager and Blomquist 2008). While there
is not yet a single well-developed theory that explains all of the diverse outcomes obtained in microsettings, such as the experimental lab, or broader
contextual settings of fisheries, irrigation systems, forests, lakes, and other
common-pool resources, considerable agreement does exist. Nor do we have
a single normative theory of justice that can unambiguously be applied to all
settings (Sen 2009).
Building trust in one another and developing institutional rules that are
well matched to the ecological systems being used are of central importance
for solving social dilemmas. The surprising but repeated finding that users
of resources that are in relatively good condition – or even improving – do
invest in various ways of monitoring one another relates to the core problem
of building trust.
Unfortunately, policy analysts, public officials, and scholars who still
apply simple mathematical models to the analysis of field settings have
not yet absorbed the central lessons articulated here. All too often a single
policy prescription – such as Individual Transferable Quotas (ITQs) – is
recommended for all resources of a particular type, such as all fisheries.
While several ITQ systems are working successfully, the time and effort
needed to tailor the broad theoretical concept of an ITQ system into an
operational system in a particular location involves multiple years of hard
work by the fishers involved as well as the government officials (see Clark
2006; Yandle 2007; Yandle and Dewees 2003; Eggertsson 1990).
The most important lesson for public policy analysis derived from the
intellectual journey I have outlined here is that humans have a more
complex motivational structure and more capability to solve social dilemmas
than posited in earlier rational-choice theory. Designing institutions to force
(or nudge) entirely self-interested individuals to achieve better outcomes has
been the major goal posited by policy analysts for governments to accomplish
for much of the past half century. Extensive empirical research leads me to
argue that instead, a core goal of public policy should be to facilitate the
11	See Stewart (2009) for an important study that links size of group, acceptance of norms of cooperation, and
support of property rights in twenty-five mining camps in the American Southwest.

435

development of institutions that bring out the best in humans. We need to
ask how diverse polycentric institutions help or hinder the innovativeness,
learning, adapting, trustworthiness, levels of cooperation of participants, and
the achievement of more effective, equitable, and sustainable outcomes at
multiple scales (Toonen 2010).
To explain the world of interactions and outcomes occurring at multiple
levels, we also have to be willing to deal with complexity instead of rejecting
it. Some mathematical models are very useful for explaining outcomes in
particular settings. We should continue to use simple models where they
capture enough of the core underlying structure and incentives that they
usefully predict outcomes. When the world we are trying to explain and
improve, however, is not well described by a simple model, we must continue
to improve our frameworks and theories so as to be able to understand
complexity and not simply reject it.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Vincent Ostrom and my many colleagues at the Workshop
who have worked with me throughout the years to develop the research
program that is briefly discussed herein. I appreciate the helpful suggestions
given me by Arun Agrawal, Andreas Leibbrandt, Mike McGinnis, Jimmy
Walker, Tom Wisdom, and by the Applied Theory Working Group and
the Experimental Reading Group, and the excellent editing skills of Patty
Lezotte. Essential support received over the years from the Ford Foundation,
the MacArthur Foundation, and the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1.	Acheson, James M. and Roy Gardner (2005), “Spatial Strategies and Territoriality in
the Maine Lobster Industry,” Rationality and Society, 17(3), 309–341.
2.	Agrawal, Arun (2005), Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of
Environmental Subjects, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
3.	Agrawal, Arun and Clark Gibson, eds. (2001), Communities and the Environment:
Ethnicity, Gender, and the State in Community-Based Conservation, New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
4.	Alchian, Armen A. (1950), “Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic Theory,” Journal of
Political Economy, 58(3), 211–221.
5.	Alchian, Armen A. and Harold Demsetz (1973), “The Property Rights Paradigm,”
Journal of Economic History, 33(1), 16–27.
6.	Allport, Floyd H. (1962), “A Structuronomic Conception of Behavior: Individual and
Collective,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 64, 3–30.
7.
Anderson, Terry L. and Peter J. Hill (1990), “The Race for Property Rights,” Journal of
Law and Economics, 33, 117–197.
8.	Anderson, William and Edward W. Weidner (1950), American City Government, New
York: Henry Holt.
9.	Andersson, Krister, Clark Gibson, and Fabrice Lehoucq (2006), “Municipal Politics
and Forest Governance: Comparative Analysis of Decentralization in Bolivia and
Guatemala,” World Development, 34(3), 576–595.

436

10.	Andersson, Krister and Elinor Ostrom (2008), “Analyzing Decentralized Resource
Regimes from a Polycentric Perspective,” Policy Perspective, 41(1), 71–93.
11.	Andreoni, James (1989), “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(6), 1447–1458.
12.	Aoki, Masahiko (2001), Toward a Comparative Institutional Analysis, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
13.	Arrow, Kenneth J. (1974), The Limits of Organization, New York: W. W. Norton.
14.	Axelrod, Robert (1986), “An Evolutionary Approach to Norms,” American Political
Science Review, 80(4), 1095–1111.
15. Bain, Joe S. (1959), Industrial Organization, New York: Wiley.
16. Baland, Jean-Marie and Jean-Philippe Platteau (2005), Halting Degradation of Natural
Resources: Is There a Role for Rural Communities?, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
17. Balliet, Daniel (2010), “Communication and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A
Meta-Analytic Review,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 54(1), 39–57.
18. Banana, Abwoli Y. and William Gombya-Ssembajjwe (2000), “Successful Forest
Management: The Importance of Security of Tenure and Rule Enforcement in
Ugandan Forests,” in Clark C. Gibson, Margaret A. McKean, and Elinor Ostrom
(eds.), People and Forests: Communities, Institutions, and Governance, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 87–98.
19. Banana, Abwoli, Nathan Vogt, Joseph Bahati, and William Gombya-Ssembajjwe
(2007), “Decentralized Governance and Ecological Health: Why Local Institutions
Fail to Moderate Deforestation in Mpigi District of Uganda,” Scientific Research and
Essays, 2(10), 434–445.
20. Bardhan, Pranab K. (2000), “Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of
48 Irrigation Communities in South India,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
48(4), 847–865.
21. Basurto, Xavier and Elinor Ostrom (2009), “Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons,”
Economia delle fonti di energia e dell’ambiente, 52(1), 35–60.
22. Batistella, Mateus, Scott Robeson, and Emilio F. Moran (2003), “Settlement
Design, Forest Fragmentation, and Landscape Change in Rondônia, Amazônia,”
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 69(7), 805–812.
23. Bell, Frederick W. (1972), “Technological Externalities and Common Property
Resources: An Empirical Study of the U.S. Lobster Industry,” Journal of Political
Economy, 80, 148–158.
24. Benjamin, Paul, Wai Fung Lam, Elinor Ostrom, and Ganesh Shivakoti (1994),
Institutions, Incentives, and Irrigation in Nepal, Decentralization: Finance &
Management Project Report, Burlington, VT: Associates in Rural Development.
25. Berkes, Fikret (2007), “Community-Based Conservation in a Globalized World,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(39), 15188–15193.
26. Berkes, Fikret, Johan Colding, and Carl Folke (2003), Navigating Social-Ecological
Systems: Building Resilience for Complexity and Change, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
27. Blomquist, William, Edella Schlager, Shui Yan Tang, and Elinor Ostrom (1994),
“Regularities from the Field and Possible Explanations,” in Elinor Ostrom, Roy
Gardner, and James Walker (eds.), Rules, Games, and Common-Pool Resources, Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 301–319.
28. Bolton, Gary E. and Axel Ockenfels (2000), “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity,
and Competition,” American Economic Review, 90, 166–193.
29. Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson (1985), Culture and the Evolutionary Process,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
30. Brock, William A. and Stephen R. Carpenter (2007), “Panaceas and Diversification
of Environmental Policy,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(39),
15206–15211.
31. Bromley, Daniel W. (1986), “Closing Comments at the Conference on Common
Property Resource Management,” in National Research Council, Proceedings of

437

the Conference on Common Property Resource Management, Washington, DC: National
Academies Press, 591–598.
32. Brunckhorst, David J. (2000), Bioregional Planning: Resource Management beyond the New
Millennium, Amsterdam: Harwood Academic.
33. Buchanan, James (1965), “An Economic Theory of Clubs,” Economica, 32(125),
1–14.
34.	Canadell, Josep G. and Michael R. Raupach (2008), “Managing Forests for Climate
Change Mitigation,” Science, 320(5882), 1456–1457.
35.	Cardenas, Juan-Camilo (2000), “How Do Groups Solve Local Commons Dilemmas?
Lessons from Experimental Economics in the Field,” Environment, Development and
Sustainability, 2, 305–322.
36.	Cardenas, Juan-Camilo, John K. Stranlund, and Cleve E. Willis (2000), “Local
Environmental Control and Institutional Crowding-Out,” World Development, 28(10),
1719–1733.
37.	Casari, Marco and Charles R. Plott (2003), “Decentralized Management of Common
Property Resources: Experiments with a Centuries-Old Institution,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 51, 217–247.
38.	Caves, Richard (1964), American Industry: Structure, Conduct, Performance, 3d ed.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
39.	Chhatre, Ashwini and Arun Agrawal (2008), “Forest Commons and Local
Enforcement,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(36), 13286–13291.
40.	Chhatre, Ashwini and Arun Agrawal (2009), “Tradeoffs and Synergies between
Carbon Storage and Livelihood Benefits from Forest Commons,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(42), 17667–17670.
41.	Ciriacy-Wantrup, Siegfried V. and Richard C. Bishop (1975), “‘Common Property’ as
a Concept in Natural Resource Policy,” Natural Resources Journal, 15(4), 713–727.
42.	Clark, Colin W. (2006), The Worldwide Crisis in Fisheries: Economic Models and Human
Behavior, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
43.	Coleman, Eric (2009), “Institutional Factors Affecting Ecological Outcomes in Forest
Management,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 28(1), 122–146.
44.	Coleman, Eric and Brian Steed (2009), “Monitoring and Sanctioning in the
Commons: An Application to Forestry,” Ecological Economics, 68(7), 2106–2113.
45.	Commons, John R. ([1924] 1968), Legal Foundations of Capitalism, Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
46.	Coward, E. Walter (1980), Irrigation and Agricultural Development in Asia, Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
47.	Cox, James and Cary Deck (2005), “On the Nature of Reciprocal Motives,” Economic
Inquiry, 43(3), 623–635.
48.	Cox, James, Klarita Sadiraj, and Vjollca Sadiraj (2008), “Implications of Trust, Fear,
and Reciprocity for Modeling Economic Behavior,” Experimental Economics, 11(1),
1–24.
49.	Cox, Michael, Gwen Arnold, and Sergio Villamayor-Tomás (2009), “A Review
and Reassessment of Design Principles for Community-Based Natural Resource
Management,” submitted to Ecology and Society.
50.	Crawford, Sue E. S. and Elinor Ostrom (2005), “A Grammar of Institutions,” in Elinor
Ostrom, Understanding Institutional Diversity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 137–174. Originally published in American Political Science Review, 89(3) (1995),
582–600.
51.	Degnbol, P. and Bonnie J. McCay (2007), “Unintended and Perverse Consequences
of Ignoring Linkages in Fisheries Systems,” ICES Journal of Marine Science, 64(4),
793–797.
52. de Oliveira, Angela., Rachel Croson, and Catherine Eckel (2009), “Are Preferences
Stable across Domains? An Experimental Investigation of Social Preferences in the
Field,” CBEES Working Paper #2008–3, Dallas: University of Texas.

438

53.

Dietz, Tom, Elinor Ostrom, and Paul Stern (2003), “The Struggle to Govern the
Commons,” Science, 302(5652), 1907–1912.
54.	Dutta, Prajit K. (1990), Strategies and Games: Theories and Practice, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
55.	Eckel, Catherine and Philip J. Grossman (1996), “The Relative Price of Fairness:
Gender Difference in a Punishment Game,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 30, 143–158.
56.	Eggertsson, Thráinn (1990), Economic Behavior and Institutions, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
57.	Elster, Jon (1989), Solomonic Judgements: Studies in the Limitations of Rationality,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
58.	Faysse, Nicolas (2005), “Coping with the Tragedy of the Commons: Game Structure
and Design of Rules,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 19(2), 239–267.
59.	Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter (2002), “Altruistic Punishment in Humans,” Nature,
415, 137–140.
60.	Fehr, Ernst and Andreas Leibbrandt (2008), “Cooperativeness and Impatience in the
Tragedy of the Commons,” IZA Discussion Paper no. 3625, University of Zurich.
61.	Fehr, Ernst and Klaus Schmidt (1999), “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and
Cooperation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 817–868.
62.	Frey, Bruno S. and Felix Oberholzer-Gee (1997), “The Cost of Price Incentives: An
Empirical Analysis of Motivation Crowding-Out,” American Economic Review, 87(4),
746–755.
63.	Friesema, H. Paul (1966), “The Metropolis and the Maze of Local Government,”
Urban Affairs Review 2, 68–90.
64.	Frohlich, Norman and Joe A. Oppenheimer (1992), Choosing Justice: An Experimental
Approach to Ethical Theory, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
65. Gardner, Roy, Andrew Herr, Elinor Ostrom, and James A. Walker (2000), “The Power
and Limitations of Proportional Cutbacks in Common-Pool Resources,” Journal of
Development Economics, 62, 515–533.
66. Ghate, Rucha and Harini Nagendra (2005), “Role of Monitoring in Institutional
Performance: Forest Management in Maharashtra, India,” Conservation and Society,
3(2), 509–532.
67. Gibson, Clark, Krister Andersson, Elinor Ostrom, and Sujai Shivakumar (2005),
The Samaritan’s Dilemma: The Political Economy of Development Aid, New York: Oxford
University Press.
68. Gibson, Clark, Margaret McKean, and Elinor Ostrom, eds. (2000), People and Forests:
Communities, Institutions, and Governance, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
69. Gibson, Clark, John Williams, and Elinor Ostrom (2005), “Local Enforcement and
Better Forests,” World Development, 33(2), 273–284.
70. Gigerenzer, Gerd and Reinhard Selten, eds. (2001), Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive
Toolbox, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
71. Goffman, Irving (1974), Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
72. Gordon, H. Scott (1954), “The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource:
The Fishery,” Journal of Political Economy, 62, 124–142.
73. Gulick, Luther (1957), “Metropolitan Organization,” Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science, 314, 57–65.
74.	Hardin, Garrett (1968), “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science, 162, 1243–1248.
75.	Hayes, Tanya (2006), “Parks, People, and Forest Protection: An Institutional
Assessment of the Effectiveness of Protected Areas,” World Development, 34(12), 2064–
2075.
76.	Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, and
Herbert Gintis, eds. (2004), Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and
Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

439

77.	Henrich, Joseph, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Jean Ensminger, Clark Barrett,
Alexander Bolyanatz, Juan-Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako,
Natalie Henrich, et al. (2006), “Costly Punishment across Human Societies,” Science,
312, 1767–1770.
78.	Hobbes, Thomas ([1651] 1960), Leviathan or the Matter, Forme and Power of a
Commonwealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil, Ed. Michael Oakeshott, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
79.	Holt, Charles A. (2007), Markets, Games, and Strategic Behavior, Boston, MA: Addison
Wesley.
80.	Isaac, R. Mark, Kenneth McCue, and Charles R. Plott (1985), “Public Goods Provision
in an Experimental Environment,” Journal of Public Economics, 26(1), 51–74.
81.	Isaac, R. Mark and James Walker (1988), “Communication and Free-Riding Behavior:
The Voluntary Contribution Mechanism,” Economic Inquiry, 26(4), 585–608.
82.	Isaac, R. Mark, James Walker, and Susan Thomas (1984), “Divergent Evidence on
Free Riding: An Experimental Examination of Some Possible Explanations,” Public
Choice, 43(2), 113–149.
83.	Isaac, R. Mark, James Walker, and Arlington Williams (1994), “Group Size and
the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods: Experimental Evidence Utilizing Large
Groups,” Journal of Public Economics, 54(1), 1–36.
84. Jager, Wander and Marco A. Janssen (2002), “Using Artificial Agents to Understand
Laboratory Experiments of Common-Pool Resources with Real Agents,” in Marco A.
Janssen (ed.), Complexity and Ecosystem Management: The Theory and Practice of MultiAgent Systems, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 75–102.
85. Janssen, Marco A. (2008), “Evolution of Cooperation in a One-Shot Prisoner’s
Dilemma Based on Recognition of Trustworthy and Untrustworthy Agents,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 65, 458–471.
86. Joshi, Neeraj N., Elinor Ostrom, Ganesh P. Shivakoti, and Wai Fung Lam (2000),
“Institutional Opportunities and Constraints in the Performance of Farmer-Managed
Irrigation Systems in Nepal,” Asia-Pacific Journal of Rural Development, 10(2), 67–92.
87.	Kiser, Larry L. and Elinor Ostrom (1982), “The Three Worlds of Action: A
Metatheoretical Synthesis of Institutional Approaches,” in Elinor Ostrom (ed.),
Strategies of Political Inquiry, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 179–222.
88.	Koestler, Arthur (1973), “The Tree and the Candle,” in William Gray and Nicholas
D. Rizzo (eds.), Unity through Diversity, part I, New York: Gordon and Breach Science
Publishers, 287–314.
89.	Lam, Wai Fung (1998), Governing Irrigation Systems in Nepal: Institutions, Infrastructure,
and Collective Action, Oakland, CA: ICS Press.
90.	Leibbrandt, Andreas, Uri Gneezy, and John List (2010), “Ode to the Sea: The SocioEcological Underpinnings of Social Norms,” unpublished manuscript.
91. Marshall, Graham R. (2008), “Nesting, Subsidiarity, and Community-Based
Environmental Governance beyond the Local Level,” International Journal of the
Commons, 2(1), 75–97.
92. Marwell, Gerald and Ruth E. Ames (1979), “Experiments on the Provision of Public
Goods I: Resources, Interest, Group Size, and the Free Rider Problem,” American
Journal of Sociology, 84, 1335–1360.
93. McCay, Bonnie J. and James M. Acheson (1987), The Question of the Commons: The
Culture and Ecology of Communal Resources, Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
94. McGinnis, Michael, ed. (1999a), Polycentric Governance and Development: Readings from
the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
95. McGinnis, Michael, ed. (1999b), Polycentricity and Local Public Economies: Readings from
the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
96. McGinnis, Michael, ed. (2000), Polycentric Games and Institutions: Readings from the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

440

97.

Meinzen-Dick, Ruth (2007), “Beyond Panaceas in Water Institutions,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 15200–15206.
98.	Netting, Robert McC. (1972), “Of Men and Meadows: Strategies of Alpine Land Use,”
Anthropological Quarterly, 45, 132–144.
99.	North, Douglass C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
100.	North, Douglass C. (2005), Understanding the Process of Institutional Change, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
101.	NRC (National Research Council) (1986), Proceedings of the Conference on Common
Property Resource Management, Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
102.	NRC (National Research Council) (2002), The Drama of the Commons, Committee
on the Human Dimensions of Global Change, Elinor Ostrom, Thomas Dietz, Nives
Dolšak, Paul Stern, Susan Stonich, and Elke Weber (eds.), Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
103.	Oakerson, Ronald J. (1986), “A Model for the Analysis of Common Property
Problems,” in National Research Council, Proceedings of the Conference on Common
Property Resource Management, Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 13–30.
104.	Ones, Umut and Louis Putterman (2007), “The Ecology of Collective Action: A
Public Goods and Sanctions Experiment with Controlled Group Formation,” Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 62, 495–521.
105.	Orbell, John M., Alphons van de Kragt, and Robyn M. Dawes (1988), “Explaining
Discussion-Induced Cooperation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(5),
811–819.
106.	Ostrom, Elinor (1965), “Public Entrepreneurship: A Case Study in Ground Water
Basin Management,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
107.	Ostrom, Elinor (1986), “An Agenda for the Study of Institutions,” Public Choice, 48(1),
3–25.
108.	Ostrom, Elinor (1990), Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action, New York: Cambridge University Press.
109.	Ostrom, Elinor (1998), “A Behavioral Approach to the Rational Choice Theory of
Collective Action,” American Political Science Review, 92(1), 1–22.
110.	Ostrom, Elinor (1999), “Coping with Tragedies of the Commons,” Annual Review of
Political Science, 2, 493–535.
111.	Ostrom, Elinor (2005), Understanding Institutional Diversity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
112.	Ostrom, Elinor (2007), “A Diagnostic Approach for Going beyond Panaceas,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(39), 15181–15187.
113.	Ostrom, Elinor (2008), “Developing a Method for Analyzing Institutional Change,”
in Sandra Batie and Nicholas Mercuro (eds.), Alternative Institutional Structures:
Evolution and Impact, New York: Routledge, 48–76.
114.	Ostrom, Elinor (2009), “A General Framework for Analyzing the Sustainability of
Social-Ecological Systems,” Science, 325(5939), 419–422.
115.	Ostrom, Elinor, Arun Agrawal, William Blomquist, Edella Schlager, and S. Y. Tang
(1989), CPR Coding Manual, Bloomington: Indiana University, Workshop in Political
Theory and Policy Analysis.
116.	Ostrom, Elinor and Xavier Basurto (Forthcoming), “Crafting Analytical Tools to
Study Institutional Change,” Journal of Institutional Economics.
117.	Ostrom, Elinor and Roy Gardner (1993), “Coping with Asymmetries in the Commons:
Self-Governing Irrigation Systems Can Work,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4),
93–112.
118.	Ostrom, Elinor, Roy Gardner, and James Walker (1994), Rules, Games, and CommonPool Resources, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
119.	Ostrom, Elinor and Harini Nagendra (2006), “Insights on Linking Forests, Trees, and
People from the Air, on the Ground, and in the Laboratory,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103(51): 19224–19231.

441

120.	Ostrom, Elinor and Roger B. Parks (1999), “Neither Gargantua nor the Land of
Lilliputs: Conjectures on Mixed Systems of Metropolitan Organization,” in Michael
McGinnis (ed.), Polycentricity and Local Public Economies: Readings from the Workshop in
Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 284–305.
121.	Ostrom, Elinor, Roger B. Parks, and Gordon P. Whitaker (1978), Patterns of
Metropolitan Policing, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
122.	Ostrom, Elinor, Larry Schroeder, and Susan Wynne (1993), Institutional Incentives
and Sustainable Development: Infrastructure Policies in Perspective, Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
123.	Ostrom, Elinor, and James Walker (1991), “Communication in a Commons:
Cooperation without External Enforcement,” in Thomas R. Palfrey (ed.), Laboratory
Research in Political Economy, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 287–322.
124.	Ostrom, Elinor, James Walker, and Roy Gardner (1992), “Covenants with and without a Sword: Self-Governance is Possible,” American Political Science Review, 86(2),
404–417.
125.	Ostrom, Vincent (1962), “The Political Economy of Water Development,” The
American Economic Review, 52(2), 450–458.
126.	Ostrom, Vincent (1975), “Language, Theory and Empirical Research in Policy
Analysis,” Policy Studies Journal, 3, 274–281.
127.	Ostrom, Vincent (2008), The Intellectual Crisis in American Public Administration, 3rd ed,
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
128.	Ostrom, Vincent and Elinor Ostrom (1965), “A Behavioral Approach to the Study of
Intergovernmental Relations,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 359, 137–146.
129.	Ostrom, Vincent and Elinor Ostrom (1977), “Public Goods and Public Choices,” in
E. S. Savas (ed.), Alternatives for Delivering Public Services: Toward Improved Performance,
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 7–49.
130.	Ostrom, Vincent, Charles M. Tiebout, and Robert Warren (1961), “The Organization
of Government in Metropolitan Areas: A Theoretical Inquiry,” American Political
Science Review, 55(4), 831–842.
131. Paavola, Jouni and W. Neil Adger (2005), “Institutional Ecological Economics,”
Ecological Economics, 53(3), 353–368.
132. Pagdee, Adcharaporn, Yeon-Su Kim, and P. J. Daugherty (2006), “What Makes
Community Forest Management Successful: A Meta-Study from Community Forests
throughout the World,” Society and Natural Resources, 19(1), 33–52.
133. Pfennig, David W. and Cris Ledón-Rettig (2009), “The Flexible Organism,” Science,
325, 268–269.
134. Popper, Karl R. (1961), The Poverty of Historicism, New York: Harper & Row.
135. Posner, Richard (1975), “Economic Analysis of Law,” in Bruce Ackerman (ed.),
Economic Foundation of Property Law, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
136. Poteete, Amy, Marco Janssen, and Elinor Ostrom (2010), Working Together: Collective
Action, the Commons, and Multiple Methods in Practice, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
137. Poteete, Amy and Elinor Ostrom (2004), “In Pursuit of Comparable Concepts and
Data about Collective Action,” Agricultural Systems, 82(3), 215–232.
138.	Reeson, Andrew F. and John G. Tisdell (2008), “Institutions, Motivations and Public
Goods: An Experimental Test of Motivational Crowding,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 68(1), 273–281.
139.	Rothstein, Bo (2005), Social Traps and the Problem of Trust: Theories of Institutional
Design, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
140.	Rudel, Thomas K. (2008), “Meta-Analyses of Case Studies: A Method for Studying
Regional and Global Environmental Change,” Global Environmental Change, 18(1),
18–25.
141.	Sally, David (1995), “Conservation and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A MetaAnalysis of Experiments from 1958 to 1992,” Rationality and Society, 7, 58–92.

442

142.	Samuelson, Paul (1954), “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 36, 387–389.
143.	Satz, Debra and John Ferejohn (1994), “Rational Choice and Social Theory,” Journal
of Philosophy, 91(2), 71–87.
144.	Schank, Roger C. and Robert P. Abelson (1977), Scripts, Plans, Goals, and
Understanding: An Inquiry in Human Knowledge Structures, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
145.	Schelling, Thomas C. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
146.	Schelling, Thomas C. (1978), Micromotives and Macrobehavior, New York: W. W.
Norton.
147.	Schelling, Thomas C. (1984), Choice and Consequence: Perspectives of an Errant Economist,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
148.	Schlager, Edella (1990), “Model Specification and Policy Analysis: The Governance of
Coastal Fisheries,” Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University.
149.	Schlager, Edella (1994), “Fishers’ Institutional Responses to Common-Pool Resource
Dilemmas,” in Elinor Ostrom, Roy Gardner, and James Walker (eds.), Rules, Games,
and Common-Pool Resources, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 247–265.
150.	Schlager, Edella and William Blomquist (2008), Embracing Watershed Politics, Boulder:
University Press of Colorado.
151.	Schlager, Edella and Elinor Ostrom (1992), “Property-Rights Regimes and Natural
Resources: A Conceptual Analysis,” Land Economics, 68(3), 249–262.
152.	Scott, Anthony D. (1955), “The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership,” Journal of
Political Economy, 63, 116–124.
153.	Selten, Reinhard (1990), “Bounded Rationality,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Politics, 146, 649–658.
154.	Sen, Amartya K. (1977), “Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioral Foundations of
Economic Theory,” Philosophy and Public Affairs, 6(4), 317–344.
155.	Sen, Amartya K. (2009), The Idea of Justice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
156.	Shivakoti, Ganesh and Elinor Ostrom, eds. (2002), Improving Irrigation Governance and
Management in Nepal, Oakland, CA: ICS Press.
157.	Simon, Herbert A. (1955), “A Behavioural Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 69, 99–188.
158.	Simon, Herbert A. (1981), The Sciences of the Artificial, 2d ed, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
159.	Simon, Herbert A. (1995), “Near Decomposability and Complexity: How a Mind
Resides in a Brain,” in Harold J. Morowitz and Jerome L. Singer (eds.), The Mind, the
Brain, and Complex Adaptive Systems, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 25–44.
160.	Simon, Herbert A. (1999), “The Potlatch between Political Science and Economics,”
in James Alt, Margaret Levi, and Elinor Ostrom (eds.), Competition and Cooperation:
Conversations with Nobelists about Economics and Political Science, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 112–119.
161.	Smith, Vernon L. (2003), “Constructivist and Ecological Rationality in Economics,”
American Economic Review, 93(3), 465–508.
162.	Smith, Vernon L. (2010), “Theory and Experiment: What are the Questions?,” Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 73, 3–15.
163.	Smith, Vernon L. and James Walker (1993), “Rewards, Experience and Decision
Costs in First Price Auctions,” Economic Inquiry, 31(2), 237–245.
164.	Stewart, James I. (2009), “Cooperation when N is Large: Evidence from the Mining
Camps of the American West,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 69(3),
213–235.
165.	Sugden, Richard (1986), The Economics of Rights, Co-operation, and Welfare, Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
166.	Tang, Shui Yan (1992), Institutions and Collective Action: Self-Governance in Irrigation,
San Francisco, CA: ICS Press.

443

167.	Tang, Shui Yan (1994), “Institutions and Performance in Irrigation Systems,” in
Elinor Ostrom, Roy Gardner, and James Walker (eds.), Rules, Games, and Common-Pool
Resources, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 225–245.
168.	Terborgh, J. (1999), Requiem for Nature, Washington, DC: Island Press.
169.	Toonen, Theo (2010), “Resilience in Public Administration: The Work of Elinor
and Vincent Ostrom from a Public Administration Perspective,” Public Administration
Review, 70(2) (March/April): 193–202.
170.	Trawick, Paul B. (2001), “Successfully Governing the Commons: Principles of Social
Organization in an Andean Irrigation System,” Human Ecology, 29(1), 1–25.
171.	Tucker, Catherine M. (2008), Changing Forests: Collective Action, Common Property, and
Coffee in Honduras, New York: Springer.
172. Uphoff, Norman T., with Priti Ramamurthy and Roy Steiner (1991), Managing
Irrigation: Analyzing and Improving the Performance of Bureaucracies, New Delhi: Sage.
173. Walker, James and Elinor Ostrom (2009), “Trust and Reciprocity as Foundations for
Cooperation,” in Karen Cook, Margaret Levi, and Russell Hardin (eds.), Whom Can
We Trust?: How Groups, Networks, and Institutions Make Trust Possible, New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 91–124.
174. Warren, Robert O. (1966), Government of Metropolitan Regions: A Reappraisal of
Fractionated Political Organization, Davis: University of California, Institute of
Governmental Affairs.
175. Webb, Edward and Ganesh P. Shivakoti, eds. (2008), Decentralization, Forests and Rural
Communities: Policy Outcomes in South and Southeast Asia, New Delhi: Sage India.
176. Weissing, Franz and Elinor Ostrom (1993), “Irrigation Institutions and the Games
Irrigators Play: Rule Enforcement on Government- and Farmer-Managed Systems,”
in Fritz W. Scharpf (ed.), Games in Hierarchies and Networks: Analytical and Empirical
Approaches to the Study of Governance Institutions, Frankfurt: Campus Verlag; Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 387–428.
177. Weschler, Louis F. (1968), Water Resources Management: The Orange County Experience,
California Government Series no. 14, Davis: University of California, Institute of
Governmental Affairs.
178. Williamson, Oliver E. (1975), Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications,
New York: Free Press.
179. Williamson, Oliver E. (1986), “The Economics of Governance: Framework and
Implications,” in R. Langlois (ed.), Economics as a Process, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
180. Wilson, James A. (1990), “Fishing for Knowledge,” Land Economics, 66, 12–29.
181. Wilson, James A., James M. Acheson, Mark Metcalfe, and Peter Kleban (1994),
“Chaos, Complexity, and Community Management of Fisheries,” Marine Policy, 18,
291–305.
182. Wilson, Woodrow (1885), Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics,
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
183. Wollenberg, Eva, Leticia Merino, Arun Agrawal, and Elinor Ostrom (2007),
“Fourteen Years of Monitoring Community-Managed Forests: Learning from IFRI’s
Experience,” International Forestry Review, 9(2), 670–684.
184.	Yamagishi, Toshio (1986), “The Provision of a Sanctioning System as a Public Good,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(1), 110–116.
185.	Yandle, Tracy (2007), “Understanding the Consequence of Property Rights
Mismatches: A Case Study of New Zealand’s Marine Resources,” Ecology and Society,
12(2), http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art27/.
186.	Yandle, Tracy and Christopher Dewees (2003), “Privatizing the Commons . . . Twelve
Years Later: Fischers’ Experiences with New Zealand’s Market-Based Fisheries
Management,” in Nives Dolšak and Elinor Ostrom (eds.), The Commons in the New
Millennium: Challenges and Adaptations, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 101–128.
Portrait photo of Professor Ostrom by photographer Ulla Montan.

444
