Chalcis, then part of the Macedonia (ancient kingdom)Macedonian Empire
  Platonic Academy
  Ancient Greek philosophy
  Western philosophy
  Peripatetic school
  Alexander the Great, Theophrastus, Aristoxenus
  
 Logic
 PhysisNatural philosophy
 Metaphysics
 Ethics
 Politics
 Rhetoric
 AestheticsPoetics

  Aristotelianism

  

 Organon
 Physics (Aristotle)Physics
 Metaphysics (Aristotle)Metaphysics
 Nicomachean Ethics
 Politics (Aristotle)Politics
 Rhetoric (Aristotle)Rhetoric
 Poetics (Aristotle)Poetics

  
  el
}}

Aristotle }} (;}} 384–322&nbsp;BC) was an Ancient Greek philosophyancient Greek philosopher and polymath. His writings span the natural sciences, philosophy, linguistics, economics, politics, psychology, and the arts. As the founder of the Peripatetic school of philosophy in the Lyceum (classical)Lyceum in Athens, he began the wider AristotelianismAristotelian tradition that followed, which set the groundwork for the development of modern science.

Little is known about Aristotle's life. He was born in the city of Stagira (ancient city)Stagira in Chalkidiki (northern Greecenorthern Greece) during the Classical GreeceClassical period. His father, Nicomachus (father of Aristotle)Nicomachus, died when Aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian. At around eighteen years old, he joined Plato's Platonic AcademyAcademy in Athens and remained there until the age of thirty seven (). Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip II of Macedon, tutored his son Alexander the Great beginning in 343 BC. He established a library in the Lyceum, which helped him to produce many of his hundreds of books on papyrus scrolls.

Though Aristotle wrote many treatises and dialogues for publication, only around a third of Works of Aristotlehis original output has survived, none of it intended for publication. Aristotle provided a complex synthesis of the various philosophies existing prior to him. His teachings and methods of inquiry have had a significant impact across the world, and remain a subject of contemporary philosophical discussion.

Aristotle's views profoundly shaped History of scienceMiddle Agesmedieval scholarship. The influence of Aristotelian physicshis physical science extended from late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages into the Renaissance, and was not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics were developed. He influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophies (800–1400)Judeo-Islamic philosophies during the Middle Ages, as well as Christian theology, especially the Neoplatonism of the Early Church and the Scholasticismscholastic tradition of the Catholic Church. Aristotle was revered among medieval Muslim scholars as "The First Teacher", and among medieval Christians like Thomas Aquinas as simply "The Philosopher". He has been referred to as the first scientist. His works contain the earliest known systematic study of logic, and were studied by medieval scholars such as Peter Abelard and Jean Buridan. His influence on logic continued well into the 19th century. In addition, Aristotelian ethicshis ethics, although always influential, has gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics.

 Life 

In general, the details of Aristotle's life are not well-established. The biographies written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points..  writes that most information about Aristotle's life derives from Diogenes Laertius' Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, which in turn borrows material from earlier, now mostly lost, sources.  covers ancient biographies of Aristotle.}} Aristotle was born in 384&nbsp;BC}} in Stagira (ancient city)Stagira, Chalcidice,; ; ;  about 55&nbsp;km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki.;  He was the son of Nicomachus (father of Aristotle)Nicomachus, the personal physician of Amyntas III of MacedonKing Amyntas of Macedon,; ; ; ; ;  and Phaestis, a woman with origins from Chalcis, Euboea.; ; ;  Nicomachus was said to have belonged to the medical guild of Asclepiadae and was likely responsible for Aristotle's early interest in biology and medicine.; ; ;  Ancient tradition held that Aristotle's family descended from the legendary physician Asclepius and his son Machaon (mythology)Machaon.;  Both of Aristotle's parents died when he was still at a young age and Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian.; ;  Although little information about Aristotle's childhood has survived, he probably spent some time in the Macedonia (ancient kingdom)Macedonian capital Pella, making his first connections with the Argead dynastyMacedonian monarchy.; ; 

, Macedonia, Greece]]

At the age of seventeen or eighteen, Aristotle moved to Classical AthensAthens to continue his education at Plato's Academy.;  He became distinguished as a researcher and lecturer, earning for himself the nickname "mind of the school" by his tutor Plato. In Athens, he probably experienced the Eleusinian Mysteries as he wrote when describing the sights one viewed at the Mysteries, "to experience is to learn" (). Aristotle remained in Athens for nearly twenty years before leaving in 348/47&nbsp;BC after Plato's death.;  The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus, although it is possible that the anti-Macedonian sentiments in Athens could have also influenced his decision. Aristotle left with Xenocrates to Assos in Asia Minor, where he was invited by his former fellow student Hermias of Atarneus; he stayed there for a few years, leaving around the time of Hermias' death. write that Hermias died in 345&nbsp;BC;  places Hermias' death in 342&nbsp;BC, the same year as Aristotle's trip back to Macedon, while  mentions that Hermias got arrested in 341&nbsp;BC.}} While at Assos, Aristotle and his colleague Theophrastus did extensive research in botany and marine biology, which they later continued at the near-by island of Lesbos.; ;  During this time, Aristotle married Pythias, Hermias's adoptive daughter and niece, and had a daughter whom they also named Pythias.

]]

In 343/42&nbsp;BC, Aristotle was invited to Pella by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his thirteen-year-old son Alexander the GreatAlexander;; ; ; ; ;  a choice perhaps influenced by the relationship of Aristotle's family with the Macedonian dynasty.; ; ;  Aristotle taught Alexander at the private school of Mieza (Macedonia)Mieza, in the gardens of the Nymphs, the royal estate near Pella.; ; ;  Alexander's education probably included a number of subjects, such as ethics and politics,;  as well as standard literary texts, like Euripides and Homer.;  It is likely that during Aristotle's time in the Macedonian court, other prominent nobles, like Ptolemy I SoterPtolemy and Cassander, would have occasionally attended his lectures.; ;  Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and his own attitude towards Achaemenid EmpirePersia was strongly ethnocentric. In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians".;  Alexander's education under the guardianship of Aristotle likely lasted for only a few years, as at around the age of sixteen he returned to Pella and was appointed regent of Macedon by his father Philip.;  During this time, Aristotle gifted Alexander an annotated copy of the Iliad, which is said to have become one of Alexander's most prized possessions.; ;  Scholars speculate that two of Aristotle's now lost works, On kingship and On behalf of the Colonies, were composed by the philosopher for the young prince.;  provides the alternative translations On Monarchy and Colonists Aristotle returned to Athens for the second and final time a year after Philip II's assassination in 336&nbsp;BC.

As a metic, Aristotle could not own property in Athens and thus rented a building known as the Lyceum (classical)Lyceum (named after the sacred Grove (nature)grove of Apollo Lykeios), in which he established his own school.; ;  The building included a Gymnasium (ancient Greece)gymnasium and a colonnade (), from which the school acquired the name Peripatetic schoolPeripatetic.;  Aristotle conducted courses and research at the school for the next twelve years. He often lectured small groups of distinguished students and, along with some of them, such as Theophrastus, Eudemus of RhodesEudemus, and Aristoxenus, Aristotle built a large library which included manuscripts, maps, and museum objects.; ;  While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira. They had a son whom Aristotle named after his father, Nicomachus (son of Aristotle)Nicomachus.;  This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his philosophical works.;  He wrote many dialogues, of which only fragments have survived. Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students. His most important treatises include Physics (Aristotle)Physics, Metaphysics (Aristotle)Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, Politics (Aristotle)Politics, On the Soul and Poetics (Aristotle)Poetics. Aristotle studied and made significant contributions to "logic, metaphysics, mathematics, physics, biology, botany, ethics, politics, agriculture, medicine, dance, and theatre."

 of Aristotle; an Imperial Roman (1st or 2nd century AD) copy of a lost bronze sculpture made by Lysippos]]

While Alexander deeply admired Aristotle, near the end of his life, the two men became estranged having diverging opinions over issues, like the optimal administration of city-states, the treatment of conquered populations, such as the Persians, and philosophical questions, like the definition of braveness. A widespread speculation in antiquity suggested that Aristotle played a role in Alexander's death, but the only evidence of this is an Hagnothemisunlikely claim made some six years after the death. Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled. In 322&nbsp;BC, Demophilus and Eurymedon the Hierophant reportedly denounced Aristotle for impiety, prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, Euboea, at which occasion he was said to have stated "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy"; ;  – a reference to Athens's Trial of Socratestrial and execution of Socrates. He died in Chalcis, Euboea of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and left a Will (law)will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife. Aristotle left his works to Theophrastus, his successor as the head of the Lyceum, who in turn passed them down to Neleus of Scepsis in Asia Minor. There, the papers remained hidden for protection until they were purchased by the collector Apellicon. In the meantime, many copies of Aristotle's major works had already begun to circulate and be used in the Lyceum of Athens, Alexandria, and later in Rome.; 

 Theoretical philosophy 

 Logic 

With the Prior Analytics, Aristotle is credited with the earliest systematic study of logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th-century advances in mathematical logic. Kant even stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that with Aristotle, logic reached its completion.

 Organon 

's 1509 fresco, The School of Athens. Aristotle holds his Nicomachean Ethics and gestures to the earth, representing his view in immanent realism, whilst Plato gestures to the heavens, indicating his Theory of Forms, and holds his Timaeus (dialogue)Timaeus.]]

Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into a set of six books called the Organon around 40 BC by Andronicus of Rhodes or others among his followers. The books are:

 Categories (Aristotle)Categories
 On Interpretation
 Prior Analytics
 Posterior Analytics
 Topics (Aristotle)Topics
 On Sophistical Refutations

The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation, to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms and demonstration (in the Analytics) and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu: the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning. The Rhetoric is not conventionally included, but it states that it relies on the Topics.

 Syllogism 

{"wikitable floatright"
"wikitable"
mv,

incorrect in modern physics.

Natural motion depends on the element concerned: the aether naturally moves in a circle around the heavens,}} while the 4 Empedoclean elements move vertically up (like fire, as is observed) or down (like earth) towards their natural resting places.}}

'' he states that objects fall at a speed proportional to their weight and inversely proportional to the density of the fluid they are immersed in. This is a correct approximation for objects in Earth's gravitational field moving in air or water.]]

In the Physics (215a25), Aristotle effectively states a quantitative law, that the speed, v, of a falling body is proportional (say, with constant c) to its weight, W, and inversely proportional to the density,}} ρ, of the fluid in which it is falling:

:: v=c\frac{W}{\rho}

Aristotle implies that in a vacuum the speed of fall would become infinite, and concludes from this apparent absurdity that a vacuum is not possible. Opinions have varied on whether Aristotle intended to state quantitative laws. Henri Carteron held the "extreme view" that Aristotle's concept of force was basically qualitative, but other authors reject this.

Archimedes corrected Aristotle's theory that bodies move towards their natural resting places; metal boats can float if they Archimedes' principledisplace enough water; floating depends in Archimedes' scheme on the mass and volume of the object, not, as Aristotle thought, its elementary composition.

Aristotle's writings on motion remained influential until the early modern period. John Philoponus (in late antiquity) and Galileo (in the early modern period) are said to have shown by experiment that Aristotle's claim that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect. A contrary opinion is given by Carlo Rovelli, who argues that Aristotle's physics of motion is correct within its domain of validity, that of objects in the Earth's gravitational field immersed in a fluid such as air. In this system, heavy bodies in steady fall indeed travel faster than light ones (whether friction is ignored, or not), and they do fall more slowly in a denser medium.}}

Isaac Newton's "forced" motion corresponds to Aristotle's "violent" motion with its external agent, but Aristotle's assumption that the agent's effect stops immediately it stops acting (e.g., the ball leaves the thrower's hand) has awkward consequences: he has to suppose that surrounding fluid helps to push the ball along to make it continue to rise even though the hand is no longer acting on it, resulting in the Medieval theory of impetus.

 Four causes 

: in the case of a table, the wood used (material cause), its design (formal cause), the tools and techniques used (efficient cause), and its decorative or practical purpose (final cause).]]

Aristotle distinguished between four different "causes"(, aitia) or explanations for why an object exists or changes:
 The material cause describes the material out of which something is composed. Thus the material cause of a wooden table is the wood it is made of.
 The formal cause is its form, i.e., the arrangement of that matter, the design of the table independent of the specific material it is made of.
 The efficient cause is "the primary source", the modern definition of "cause" as either the agent or agency of particular events or states of affairs. In the case of two dominoes, when the first is knocked over it causes the second to fall. In the case of an animal, this agency is a combination of developmental biologyhow it develops from the egg, and physiologyhow its body functions.
 The final cause (telos) is its purpose, the reason why it exists or is done, or function that something is supposed to serve. In the case of living things, it implies adaptation to a particular way of life.

 Optics 

Aristotle was aware of Pythagorean optics.Burnyeat, Myles F. "[https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/science-in-context/article/abs/archytas-and-optics/BDBF3868CEF7004C16547836D66A4F24 Archytas and optics]". Science in Context 18.1 (2005): pp. 35-53. He used optics in his Meteorology, treating it as a science. He viewed optics as stating the laws of sight, thus combining what is now treated as physics and biology.Cantor, Geoffrey N. "Physical optics". Companion to the History of Modern Science. Routledge, 2006. pp. 627–638. The process of seeing involved the movement of a visible form from the thing seen through the air (or other medium) to the eye, where the form comes to rest. Aristotle does not analyse the nature of this movement; he does not anticipate geometrical optics.Matthen, Mohan. "[https://philpapers.org/archive/MATITE-3.docx Is the eye like what it sees? A critique of Aristotle on sensing by assimilation]". Vivarium 57.3-4 (2019): pp. 268–292.

 Chance and spontaneity 

According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause such as simple necessity. Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of Accident (philosophy)accidental things, "from what is spontaneous". There is also more a specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that only applies to people's moral choices.

 Astronomy 

In astronomy, Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out partly correctly that if "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them." He also wrote descriptions of comets, including the Great Comet of 371 BC.

 Geology and natural sciences 

 changed before a volcanic eruption.]]

Aristotle was one of the first people to record any geological observations. He stated that Uniformitarianismgeological change was too slow to be observed in one person's lifetime.
The geologist Charles Lyell noted that Aristotle described such change, including "lakes that had dried up" and "deserts that had become watered by rivers", giving as examples the growth of the Nile delta since the time of Homer, and "the upheaving of one of the Aeolian islands, previous to a volcanic eruption."

Meteorologica lends its name to the modern study of meteorology, but its modern usage diverges from the content of Aristotle's ancient treatise on meteors. The ancient Greeks did use the term for a range of atmospheric phenomena, but also for earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Aristotle proposed that the cause of earthquakes was a gas or vapour (anathymiaseis) that was trapped inside the earth and trying to escape, following other Greek authors Anaxagoras, Empedocles and Democritus.

Aristotle also made many observations about the hydrologic cycle. For example, he made some of the earliest observations about desalination: he observed early – and correctly – that when seawater is heated, freshwater evaporates and that the oceans are then replenished by the cycle of rainfall and river runoff ("I have proved by experiment that salt water evaporated forms fresh and the vapour does not when it condenses condense into sea water again.")

 Biology 

 of the octopus (bottom left).]]

 Empirical research 

Aristotle was the first person to study biology systematically, and biology forms a large part of his writings. He spent two years observing and describing the zoology of Lesbos and the surrounding seas, including in particular the Pyrrha lagoon in the centre of Lesbos. His data in History of Animals, Generation of Animals, Movement of Animals, and Parts of Animals are from his own observations, statements by knowledgeable people such as beekeepers and fishermen, and accounts by travellers. His apparent emphasis on animals rather than plants is a historical accident: his works on botany have been lost, but two books on plants by his pupil Theophrastus have survived.

Aristotle reports on sea life from observation on Lesbos and the catches of fishermen. He describes the catfish, electric ray, and frogfish, as well as cephalopods such as the octopus and paper nautilus. His description of the hectocotyl arm of cephalopods, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until the 19th century. He gives accurate descriptions of the four-chambered stomachs of ruminants, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark.

He notes that an animal's structure is well matched to function so the heron has a long neck, long legs, and a sharp spear-like beak, whereas ducks have short legs and webbed feet. Charles DarwinDarwin, too, noted such differences, but unlike Aristotle used the data to come to the theory of evolution. Aristotle's writings can seem to imply evolution, but Aristotle saw mutations or Hybridisation (biology)hybridizations as rare accidents, distinct from natural causes. He was thus critical of Empedocles's theory of a "survival of the fittest" origin of living things and their organs, and ridiculed the idea that accidents could lead to orderly results. In modern terms, he nowhere says that different species can have a common ancestor, that one kind can speciationchange into another, or that kinds can become extinct.

 Scientific style 

 decreases with body mass, whereas gestation period increases.]]

Aristotle did not do experiments in the modern sense. He made observations, or at most investigative procedures like dissection. In Generation of Animals, he opens a fertilized hen's egg to see the embryo's heart beating inside.

Instead, he systematically gathered data, discovering patterns common to whole groups of animals, and inferring possible causal explanations from these. This style is common in modern biology when large amounts of data become available in a new field, such as genomics. This sets out testable hypotheses and constructs a narrative explanation of what is observed. In this sense, Aristotle's biology is scientific.

From his data, Aristotle inferred biological rulesrules relating the life-history features of live-bearing tetrapods (terrestrial placental mammals) that he studied. He correctly predicted that brood size decreases with body mass; that Life expectancylifespan increases with gestation period and with body mass; and that fecundity decreases with lifespan.

 Classification of living things 

 (fetus pictured) of Mustelus canisa dogfish was attached by a cord to a kind of placenta (the yolk sac), like a higher animal; this formed an exception to the linear scale from highest to lowest.]]

Aristotle distinguished about 500 animal species, arranging them in a nonreligious graded scala naturaescale of perfection, with man at the top. The highest gave viviparitylive birth to hot and wet creatures, the lowest laid cold, dry mineral-like eggs. He grouped what a zoologist would call vertebrates as "animals with blood", and invertebrates as "animals without blood". Those with blood were divided into live-bearing (mammals), and egg-laying (birds, reptiles, fish). Those without blood were insects, crustacea and hard-shelled molluscs. He recognised that animals did not exactly fit onto a scale, and noted exceptions, such as that sharks had a placenta. To a biologist, the explanation is convergent evolution. Philosophers of science have concluded that Aristotle was not interested in taxonomy, but zoologists think otherwise.

{"wikitable"
"wikitable floatright" align=right style="font-size: 80%;"
vayp8jxcPr0C&pg=PA41 The impact of Aristotelianism on modern philosophy]. CUA Press. p. 41. 
 "the father of psychology": Margot Esther Borden, Psychology in the Light of the East, p. 4
 "the father of realism": Russell L. Hamm, Philosophy and Education: Alternatives in Theory and Practice, p. 58
 "the father of criticism": Nagendra Prasad, Personal Bias in Literary Criticism: Johnson, Matthew Arnold, T. S. Eliot, p. 70. Henry Home, Lord KamesLord Henry Home Kames, Elements of Criticism, p. 237.
 "the father of meteorology":
 "the father of individualism": Allan Gotthelf, Gregory Salmieri, A Companion to Ayn Rand, p. 325.
 "the father of teleology": Malcolm Owen Slavin, Daniel H. Kriegman, The Adaptive Design of the Human Psyche: Psychoanalysis, Evolutionary Biology, and the Therapeutic Process, p. 292.}}

What follows is an overview of the transmission and influence of his texts and ideas into the modern era.

 Ancient 

 Hellenistic period 

 to a 1644 version of Theophrastus's Historia Plantarum (Theophrastus)Historia Plantarum, originally written ]]
The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school. Aristotle's students included Aristoxenus, Dicaearchus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Eudemos of Rhodes, Harpalus, Hephaestion, Mnason of Phocis, Nicomachus (son of Aristotle)Nicomachus, and Theophrastus.

Aristotle's pupil and successor, Theophrastus, wrote the Historia Plantarum (Theophrastus)History of Plants, a pioneering work in botany. Some of his technical terms remain in use, such as carpel from carpos, fruit, and pericarp, from pericarpion, seed chamber. Theophrastus was much less concerned with formal causes than Aristotle was, instead pragmatically describing how plants functioned.

Under the Ptolemaic KingdomPtolemies, the first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon, corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not.

 Early Roman empire 

In antiquity, Aristotle's writings were divisible into two groups; the "exoteric" works, intended for the public, and the "esoteric" treatises, for use within the Lyceum (classical)Lyceum school. However, all of the works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are the technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school, which were compiled in the 1st century BC by Andronicus of Rhodes out of a series of smaller, separate works into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.

The primary way that ancient philosophers in the Roman empire engaged with Aristotle's technical work was via philosophical commentary; interpretation and explication of the text of Aristotle along with their own synthesis and views on the topics discussed by Aristotle. The peripatetic commentary tradition began with Boethus of Sidon (Peripatetic)Boethus of Sidon in the 1st century BC and reached its peak at the end of the 2nd century AD with Alexander of Aphrodisias, who was appointed to the official Imperial chair of Aristotelian philosophy established by Marcus Aurelius, many of whose commentaries still survive.

 Late antiquity 

In the 3rd century, Neoplatonism emerged as the dominant philosophical school. The Neoplatonists saw all subsequent philosophical systems after Plato, including Aristotle's, as developments on Plato's philosophy, and sought to explain how Plato and Aristotle were in agreement, even on subjects where they appeared to disagree, and included Aristotle's logical and physical works in their school curriculum as introductory works that needed to be mastered before the study of Plato himself. This study program began with the Categories, which the Neoplatonist philosopher Porphyry of Tyre wrote an introduction to, called Isagoge, which went on to influence subsequent philosophy in late antiquity and the medieval period. Later Neoplatonists in Athens and Alexandria including Syrianus, Ammonius Hermiae, Olympiodorus the Younger and Simplicius of Cilicia wrote further commentaries on Aristotle from a Platonist perspective which are still extant, with Simplicius compiling many of the lost works of his predecessors into massive commentaries that survey the entire Neoplatonic tradition.

With the rise of Christianity and closure of the pagan schools by the order of Justinian in 529, the study of Aristotle and other philosophers in the remainder of the Byzantine period was primarily from a Christian perspective. The first Byzantine Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were Philoponus, who was a student of Ammonius, and Elias and David, students of Olympiodorus, along with Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century, who brought the study of Plato and Aristotle from Alexandria to Constantinople. John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought. Philoponus questioned Aristotle's teaching of physics, noting its flaws and introducing the theory of impetus to explain his observations.

 Medieval 

 Medieval Byzantine empire 

After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius of NicaeaEustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappeared in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena. Byzantine philosophers also filled in the gaps in the commentaries that had survived down to their time; Alexander of Aphrodisias' commentary on the Metaphysics, of which only the first five books survived, was completed by Michael of Ephesus, who also wrote a commentary on the Sophistical Refutations, the only work of the Organon not to have a commentary, and Michael of Ephesus and Eustratius compiled a number of fragmentary commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics which they supplemented with their own interpretations. Michael of Ephesus wrote commentaries on the works of Aristotle's animal biology and the Politics, completing the series of commentaries on Aristotle's extant works.

 Medieval Islamic world 

'', .]]

Aristotle's works underwent a revival in the Abbasid Caliphate. Translated into Arabic, Aristotle's logic, ethics, and natural philosophy inspired early Islamic scholars. Aristotle is considered the most influential figure in the history of Arabic philosophy and was revered in early Islamic theology. Most surviving works of Aristotle, as well as some of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists, and scholars. Through commentaries and critical engagements, figures like Al-Kindi, Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and Averroes breathed new life into Aristotle's ideas. They harmonized his logic with Islamic theology, employed his scientific methodology to explore the natural world, and reinterpreted his ethics within the framework of Islamic morality. Islamic thinkers embraced Aristotle's rigorous methods while challenging his conclusions where they diverged from their religious beliefs, which later influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers. Medieval Muslim scholars described Aristotle as the "First Teacher". The title was later used by Western philosophers (as in Dante's poem) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy.

 Medieval Judaism 

Moses Maimonides (considered to be the foremost intellectual figure of medieval Judaism) adopted Aristotelianism from the Islamic scholars and based his Guide for the Perplexed on it; the work became the basis of Jewish scholastic philosophy. Maimonides also considered Aristotle to be the greatest philosopher that ever lived, and styled him as the "chief of the philosophers".Levi ben Gershom, The Wars of the Lord: Book one, Immortality of the soul, p. 35.Leon Simon, Aspects Of The Hebrew Genius: A Volume Of Essays On Jewish Literature And Thought (1910), p. 127.Herbert A. Davidson, Herbert A. excelsior%3A55f6bfc22f02768d5dcdc92005228933 The Philosophy of Dante]", p. 4 Dante acknowledges Aristotle's influence explicitly in the poem, when Virgil justifies the Inferno's structure by citing the Nicomachean Ethics.Inferno, Canto XI, lines 70–115, Mandelbaum translation. Dante refers to him as "he / Who is acknowledged Master of those who know".Inferno, Canto IV, lines 115-16 trans., 131 original, Robert Pinksky translation (1994); note to line, p.384

 Modern era 

 Early Modern science 

's '''', 1628, showed that the circulation of the bloodblood circulated, contrary to classical thinking.]]

In the early modern period, scientists such as William Harvey in England and Galileo Galilei in Italy reacted against the theories of Aristotle and other classical era thinkers like Galen, establishing new theories based to some degree on observation and experiment. Harvey demonstrated the circulation of the blood, establishing that the heart functioned as a pump rather than being the seat of the soul and the controller of the body's heat, as Aristotle thought. Galileo used more doubtful arguments to displace Aristotle's physics, proposing that bodies all fall at the same speed whatever their weight.

 18th and 19th-century science 

The English mathematician George Boole fully accepted Aristotle's logic, but decided "to go under, over, and beyond" it with his system of Boolean algebraalgebraic logic in his 1854 book The Laws of Thought. This gives logic a mathematical foundation with equations, enables it to solve equations as well as check Validity (logic)validity, and allows it to handle a wider class of problems by expanding propositions of any number of terms, not just two.

Charles Darwin regarded Aristotle as the most important contributor to the subject of biology. In an 1882 letter he wrote that "Linnaeus and Cuvier have been my two gods, though in very different ways, but they were mere schoolboys to old Aristotle". Also, in later editions of the book "On the Origin of Species', Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle; the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles.

 Present science 

The philosopher Bertrand Russell claimed that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine". Russell called Aristotle's ethics "repulsive", and labelled his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy". Russell stated that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers what an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.

The Dutch historian of science Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis writes that Aristotle and his predecessors showed the difficulty of science by "proceed[ing] so readily to frame a theory of such a general character" on limited evidence from their senses. In 1985, the biologist Peter Medawar could still state in "pure seventeenth century" tones that Aristotle had assembled "a strange and generally speaking rather tiresome farrago of hearsay, imperfect observation, wishful thinking and credulity amounting to downright gullibility".

Zoologists have frequently mocked Aristotle for errors and unverified secondhand reports. However, modern observation has confirmed several of his more surprising claims. Aristotle's work remains largely unknown to modern scientists, though zoologists sometimes mention him as the father of biology or in particular of marine biology. Practising zoologists are unlikely to adhere to Aristotle's chain of being, but its influence is still perceptible in the use of the terms "lower" and "upper" to designate taxa such as groups of plants. The evolutionary biologist Armand Marie Leroi has reconstructed Aristotle's biology, while Tinbergen's four questionsNiko Tinbergen's four questions, based on Aristotle's four causes, are used to analyse animal behaviour; they examine function (biology)function, phylogeny, mechanism (biology)mechanism, and ontogeny. The concept of Homology (biology)homology began with Aristotle; the evo-devoevolutionary developmental biologist Lewis I. Held commented that he would be interested in the concept of deep homology. In systematics too, recent studies consider that Aristotle made important contributions to taxonomy and biological nomenclature.

 Depictions in art 

 Paintings 

Aristotle has been depicted by major artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder, Justus van Gent, Raphael, Paolo Veronese, Jusepe de Ribera, Rembrandt, and Francesco Hayez over the centuries. Among the best-known depictions is Raphael's fresco The School of Athens, in the Apostolic PalaceVatican's Apostolic Palace, where the figures of Plato and Aristotle are central to the image, at the architectural vanishing point, reflecting their importance. Rembrandt's Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, too, is a celebrated work, showing the knowing philosopher and the blind Homer from an earlier age: as the art critic Jonathan Jones (journalist)Jonathan Jones writes, "this painting will remain one of the greatest and most mysterious in the world, ensnaring us in its musty, glowing, pitch-black, terrible knowledge of time."

File:Philosophenmosaik köln Aristoteles (cropped).jpg"packed" heights="170px">
File:P1070330 Louvre Aristote Ma80bis rwk.JPGhttp://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/ecatalogue/2008/important-old-master-paintings-including-european-works-of-art-n08404/lot.78.html Sotheby's 23 March 2018 2008 CITEREFLucas Cranach the Elder }}
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Further reading 

The secondary literature on Aristotle is vast. The following is only a small selection.

 J. L. AckrillAckrill, J. L. (1997). Essays on Plato and Aristotle, Oxford University Press.
 
 
 
  These translations are available in several places online; see External links.
 Bakalis, Nikolaos. (2005). Handbook of Greek Philosophy: From Thales to the Stoics Analysis and Fragments, Trafford Publishing, .
 
 Bolotin, David (1998). An Approach to Aristotle's Physics: With Particular Attention to the Role of His Manner of Writing. Albany: SUNY Press. A contribution to our understanding of how to read Aristotle's scientific works.
 Myles BurnyeatBurnyeat, Myles F. et al. (1979). Notes on Book Zeta of Aristotle's Metaphysics. Oxford: Sub-faculty of Philosophy.
 
 
 Code, Alan (1995). Potentiality in Aristotle's Science and Metaphysics, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 76.
 
 
 De Groot, Jean (2014). Aristotle's Empiricism: Experience and Mechanics in the 4th century BC, Parmenides Publishing, .
 Frede, Michael (1987). Essays in Ancient Philosophy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 
 Eugene GendlinGendlin, Eugene T. (2012). [http://www.focusing.org/aristotle/ Line by Line Commentary on Aristotle's De Anima] , Volume 1: Books I & II; Volume 2: Book III. The Focusing Institute.
 Mary Louise GillGill, Mary Louise (1989). Aristotle on Substance: The Paradox of Unity. Princeton University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 Alberto JoriJori, Alberto (2003). Aristotele, Bruno Mondadori (Prize 2003 of the "International Academy of the History of Science"), .
 
 Knight, Kelvin (2007). Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics and Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre, Polity Press.
 Lewis, Frank A. (1991). Substance and Predication in Aristotle. Cambridge University Press.
 Lord, Carnes (1984). Introduction to The Politics, by Aristotle. Chicago University Press.
 Loux, Michael J. (1991). Primary Ousia: An Essay on Aristotle's Metaphysics Ζ and Η. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 Maso, Stefano (Ed.), Natali, Carlo (Ed.), Seel, Gerhard (Ed.) (2012) Reading Aristotle: Physics VII. 3: What is Alteration? Proceedings of the International ESAP-HYELE Conference, Parmenides Publishing. .
 
  [Reprinted in J. Barnes, M. Schofield, and R. R. K. Sorabji, eds.(1975). Articles on Aristotle Vol 1. Science. London: Duckworth 14–34.]
 
 
 
 
 
 Scaltsas, T. (1994). Substances and Universals in Aristotle's Metaphysics. Cornell University Press.
 Strauss, Leo (1964). "On Aristotle's Politics", in The City and Man, Rand McNally.
 
 
 

 External links 

 

 
 
 At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
 
 At the [http://classics.mit.edu/Browse/index.html Internet Classics Archive]
 From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
 
 
 
 Objects related to [https://urus.uw.edu.pl/person/1258 Aristotle] in the [https://urus.uw.edu.pl/ Urus : Techniques and Reception of Graphic Art in Central and Eastern Europe (15th–18th centuries)] database

Collections of works
 
 At [http://classics.mit.edu/Browse/index-Aristotle.html Massachusetts Institute of Technology]
 
 
 
 
 
 [https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/perscoll?.submit=Change&collection=Any&type=text&lang=Any&lookup=Aristotle Perseus Project] at Tufts University 
 At the [https://web.archive.org/web/20071017211048/http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotle/ University of Adelaide]
 [http://remacle.org/bloodwolf/philosophes/Aristote/table.htm P. Remacle] 
 The 11-volume 1837 Bekker edition of Aristotle's Works in Greek ([http://isnature.org/Files/Aristotle/ PDF] [https://web.archive.org/web/20050816192647/http://grid.ceth.rutgers.edu/ancient/greek/aristotle_greek/ DJVU])

}}