Christendom
 Jesus
 Christianity in the 1st century1st century AD
 Jerusalem during the Second Temple PeriodJerusalem, Judaea (Roman province)Judaea,Roman Empire
 Split of Christianity and JudaismJudaism Church History. }}
 
  Christianity by country2.3&nbsp;billion  (List of Christian synonymsreferred to as Christians)
}}

Christianity is an Abrahamic monotheistic religion based on the Bible and the teachings of Jesus. The Gospels state that Jesus in ChristianityJesus is the Son of God (Christianity)Son of God and Resurrection of Jesusrose from the dead after Crucifixion of Jesushis crucifixion, whose coming as the MessiahChristianitymessiah (Christ (title)Christ) was Old Testament messianic prophecies quoted in the New Testamentprophesied in the Old Testament and chronicled in the New Testament. It is the Major religious groupsworld's largest and most widespread religion with over 2.3&nbsp;billion followers, comprising around 28.8% of the world population. Its adherents, known as Christians, are estimated to make up a majority of the population in Christianity by country120 countries and territories.

Christianity remains Christian cultureculturally diverse in its Western ChristianityWestern and Eastern ChristianityEastern branches, and doctrinally diverse concerning Justification (theology)justification and the nature of salvation, ecclesiology, ordination, and Christology. Most List of Christian denominationsChristian denominations, however, generally hold in common the belief that Jesus is God the Son—the Logos (Christianity)Logos Incarnation (Christianity)incarnated—who Ministry of Jesusministered, Passion of Jesussuffered, and Crucifixion of Jesusdied on a cross, but Resurrection of Jesusrose from the dead for the Salvation in Christianitysalvation of humankind; this message is called the gospel, meaning the "good news". The four canonical gospels of Gospel of MatthewMatthew, Gospel of MarkMark, Gospel of LukeLuke and Gospel of JohnJohn describe the life of Jesus and teachings as preserved in the early Christian tradition, with the Old Testament as the gospels' respected background.

Christianity Christianity in the 1st centurybegan in the 1st century, after the death of Jesus, as a Second Temple JudaismJudaic sect with Hellenistic JudaismHellenistic influence in the Roman EmpireRoman province of Judaea (Roman province)Judaea. The disciple (Christianity)disciples of Jesus Spread of Christianityspread their faith around the Eastern Mediterranean area, despite Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empiresignificant persecution. The inclusion of Gentiles led Christianity to slowly Split of Christianity and Judaismseparate from Judaism in the 2nd century. Emperor Constantine I decriminalized Christianity in the Roman Empire in 313 with the Edict of Milan. In 325, Constantine convened the First Council of NicaeaCouncil of Nicaea, where the Nicene Creed was adopted, and where Early Christianity was consolidated into what would become the state religion by around 380. The Church of the East and Oriental Orthodoxy both split over differences in Christology during the 5th century, while the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church separated in the East–West Schism in 1054. Protestantism split into numerous denominations from the Catholic Church during the Reformation era (16th century). Following the Age of Discovery (15th–17th century), Christianity expanded globally via Christian missionmissionary work, evangelism, immigration, and trade. Christianity played Role of Christianity in Western societya prominent role in the Christian ethicsdevelopment of Western cultureWestern civilization, particularly in Europe from Christianity in late antiquitylate antiquity and the Christianity in the Middle AgesMiddle Ages.

The three main Christian denominationbranches of Christianity are Catholic ChurchCatholicism (1.3 billion people), Protestantism (800 million),}} and Eastern Orthodoxy (300 million), while other prominent branches include Oriental Orthodox ChurchesOriental Orthodoxy (60 million) and Restorationism (35 million).}} Smaller church communities number in the thousands. In Christianity, efforts toward unity (ecumenism) are underway.{{cite web Briggs Kenneth A. Protestants and Catholics Get a Common Catechism https://www.nytimes.com/1975/03/17/archives/protestants-and-catholics-get-a-common-catechism-protestants-and.html The New York Times 8 July 2025 17 March 1975 Forty Lutheran, Reformed and Roman Catholic theologians worked over a five‐year period to produce the statement {The Common Catechism}.}} In the Western worldWest, Christianity remains the dominant religion even with a Decline of Christianity in the Western worlddecline in adherence, with about 70% of that population identifying as Christian. Christian population growthChristianity is growing in Africa and Asia, the world's most populous continents. Many Christians are still persecution of Christianspersecuted in some regions of the world, particularly where they are a minority, such as in the Middle East, North Africa, East Asia, and South Asia.

 Etymology 

Early Jewish Christians referred to themselves as being of 'The Way' (), an expression possibly coming from Isaiah 40:3, "prepare the way of the Lord".,  and . Some English translations of the BibleEnglish translations of the New Testament capitalize 'the Way' (e.g. the New King James Version and the English Standard Version), indicating that this was how 'the new religion seemed then to be designated' Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentaryhttps://biblehub.com/commentaries/jfb//acts/19.htm Bible Hub8 October 2015}} whereas others treat the phrase as indicative—'the way',Jubilee Bible 2000 'that way'American King James Version or 'the way of the Lord'.Douai-Rheims Bible The Syriac languageSyriac version reads, "the way of God" and the Vulgate Latin version, "the way of the Lord". Gill, J., Gill's Exposition of the Bible, commentary on Acts 19:238 October 201525 October 2015https://web.archive.org/web/20151025104001/http://biblehub.com/commentaries/gill/acts/19.htmlive}}}} According to Acts 11:26, the term "Christian" (, ), meaning "followers of Christ" and referring to Jesus' Disciple (Christianity)disciples, was first used in the city of Early centers of ChristianityAntiochAntioch by the non-Jewish inhabitants there. The earliest recorded use of the term "Christianity/Christianism" (, ) was by Ignatius of Antioch around 100&nbsp;Anno DominiAD. The name Jesus comes from  (), probably from  ().

 History 

 Early Christianity 

 Apostolic Age 

 on Mount Zion in Jerusalem, claimed to be the location of the Last Supper and Pentecost]]

Christianity originated as a Jewish religious movementsSects in the Second Temple periodJewish movement in Judaea (Roman province)Judaea during the 1st century AD, within the context of late Second Temple Judaism. The earliest followers of Jesus were Jews who understood his life, death and expected return through familiar Jewish eschatologyJewish apocalyptic and Messiah in Judaismmessianic frameworks. They remained embedded in JudaismJewish religious life and did not initially conceive of themselves as departing from Israel or founding a new faith. Following their conviction that Jesus had been Resurrection of Jesusraised from the dead, they established a community in Jerusalem that awaited Jesus's Second Comingreturn and eschatological renewal, seeking to spread this message throughout Israel and the Jewish diaspora. The timing of the end in early Christian expectation is also debated.}} Early Jewish Christianity maintained a high Christology alongside monotheism. This early community was led by the three Pillars of the Church, namely James the Just, Saint PeterPeter, and John the ApostleJohn. What eventually became of this earliest Jewish ChristianityChrist-following community remains unclear; they were possibly displaced, relocated, or killed when the Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)Romans destroyed Jerusalem in 70 AD.

Meanwhile, as the message about Jesus spread beyond Judea and Galilee into the broader Greco-Roman world, it increasingly attracted Gentile adherents, especially among "God-fearers": non-Jews who were attracted to Judaism and participated in Synagoguesynagogal worship without fully Conversion to Judaismconverting. This created a challenge for the movement's Jewish principles of faithJewish religious outlook, which insisted on close observance of the Jewish commandments. Against this backdrop, Paul the Apostle, a Jew of the PhariseesPharisaic school who had initially persecuted the Jesus movement, became one of its most influential missionaries following his conversion, focusing on spreading the message to non-Jews in the Eastern Mediterranean. Paul argued that Gentiles could participate in the promises of Israel through exclusive devotion to the God in JudaismGod of Israel, Pistis Christoufaith in Christ, baptism, and Participation in Christparticipation in his death and resurrection, without full adherence to the Torah, including Circumcision controversy in early Christianitycircumcision. This had a formative effect on the emerging ChristiansChristian identity as Split of Christianity and Judaismseparate from Judaism. Over time, such developments contributed to the gradual differentiation between the Jesus movement and other Jewish communities, a process that resulted in the emergence of Christianity as a separate religion.Wylen, Stephen M., The Jews in the Time of Jesus: An Introduction, Paulist Press (1995), , pp. 190–192; Dunn, James D.G., Jews and Christians: The Parting of the Ways, A.D. 70 to 135, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing (1999), , pp. 33–34.; Boatwright, Mary Taliaferro & Gargola, Daniel J & Talbert, Richard John Alexander, The Romans: From Village to Empire, Oxford University Press (2004), , p. 426.

 Ante-Nicene period 

, an early-3rd-century collection of Pauline epistles]]
This formative period was followed by the early bishops, whom Christians consider the apostolic successionsuccessors of Christ's apostles. From the year 150, Christian teachers began to produce theological and apologetic works aimed at defending the faith. These authors are known as the Church Fathers, and the study of them is called patristics. Notable early Fathers include Ignatius of Antioch, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria and Origen.

During this period, there was no unified Christian movement but rather Diversity in early Christian theologymultiple competing sects, which held radically different beliefs. Christian authors began using the Greek term hairesis, meaning "school of thought", to describe rival communities, which gave rise to the concept of Heresy in Christianityheresy. In the second and third centuries, figures like Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Clement of Alexandria, often retrospectively referred to as "Proto-orthodox Christianityproto-orthodox", insisting that there was one original apostolic teaching and that all rivals had deviated from it. Meanwhile, Valentinus (Gnostic)Valentinus, an Alexandrian teacher, developed a GnosticismGnostic theology in which Christ brought saving knowledge (gnosis) that enabled believers to be redeemed from the material world. Marcion of SinopeMarcion, from Sinop, TurkeySinope, drew a distinction between high, purely good god, father of Christ, and the lower, merely "just" god of Israel, who demanded Korbansacrifice and Be fruitful and multiplyprocreation. Marcion is also known to have assembled a collection of Christian texts, including his own Gospel of Marciongospel, and in doing so created one of the earliest known Christian scriptural canons. Justin Martyr, from NablusNeapolis, disagreed with both, arguing the God of the Jewish scriptures was Christ himself before his incarnation. A gradual splitting off of Gentile Christianity left Jewish Christians continuing to follow the Law of Moses, including practices such as circumcision. By the fifth century, they and the Jewish–Christian gospels would be largely suppressed by the dominant sects in both Judaism and Christianity.

Christianity occupied an unstable position within the Roman world. In antiquity, what moderns call "religion" was closely associated with ancestral traditions and embedded within other aspects of ethnic identity. It is possible that Gentile Christians, having rejected their native gods, were perceived by their pagan neighbors as disrupting the relationship between the divine and the community, on which civic welfare depended. Early examples of persecution of Christians include the Acts of the Apostles, which portrays Saint Stephen as being killed by a mob in Jerusalem, while Paul writes that he himself had persecuted Christians prior to his vision of Christ. Additionally, Tacitus wrote that Emperor Nero blamed Christians for the Great Fire of Rome in 64 AD. In the following centuries, Church Fathers recorded accusations that Christians were responsible for droughts, famines, and plagues. Nevertheless, before the mid-3rd century, persecutions were often reactive, sporadic and local. This changed in 249, when the emperor Decius, who ruled the empire following a long period of instability, ordered all residents of the empire (except Jews) to perform a Sacrifice in ancient Roman religionsacrifice to the Roman mythologyRoman gods. Jews had long been excused on the basis of ancestral custom in ways that Christians, lacking any such established tradition, were not. The Diocletianic Persecution beginning in 303 was particularly severe; Christians were accused of attracting demons that disrupted traditional cult practices and threatened public order, and were subjected to confiscations, destruction of buildings, expulsions, imprisonment, and demands for sacrifice. The situation changed under Constantine the GreatConstantine (r. 306–337), who granted imperial support to Christianity, though under his rule and that of his successors, forms deemed heretical were suppressed.

 Spread in the Roman Empire 

, located atop Mount Alfaf in northern Iraq, is recognized as one of the oldest Christian monasteries in existence.]]

Christianity spread to Aramaic-speaking peoples along the Mediterranean coast and also to the inland parts of the Roman Empire and beyond that into the Parthian Empire and the later Sasanian Empire, including Mesopotamia, which was dominated at different times and to varying extents by these empires.Michael Whitby, et al. eds. Christian Persecution, Martyrdom and Orthodoxy (2006) [https://www.questia.com/read/115080283?title=Christian%20Persecution%2c%20Martyrdom%2c%20and%20Orthodoxy online edition]  The presence of Christianity in Africa began in the middle of the 1st century in Egypt and by the end of the 2nd century in the region around Carthage. Mark the Evangelist is claimed to have started the Church of Alexandria in about 43 AD; various later churches claim this as their own legacy, including the Coptic Orthodox Church.Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of Church History (Eusebius)Ecclesiastical History in the 4th century, states that St. Mark came to Egypt in the first or third year of the reign of Emperor Claudius, i.e. 41 or 43 AD. "Two Thousand years of Coptic Christianity" Otto F.A. Meinardus p. 28. Important Africans who influenced the early development of Christianity include Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Origen of Alexandria, Cyprian, Athanasius, and Augustine of Hippo.

 monastery in the shadow of Mount Ararat; Armenia was the first state to adopt Christianity as the state religion in the early 4th century AD.]]
Tiridates III of ArmeniaKing Tiridates III made Christianity the state religion in Armenia in the early 4th century, making Armenia the first officially Christian state. It was not an entirely new religion in Armenia, having penetrated into the country from at least the third century, but it may have been present even earlier.

Constantine the GreatConstantine I was exposed to Christianity in his youth, and throughout his life his support for the religion grew, culminating in baptism on his deathbed. During his reign, state-sanctioned persecution of Christians was ended with the Edict of SerdicaEdict of Toleration in 311 and the Edict of Milan in 313. At that point, Christianity was still a minority belief, comprising perhaps only 5% of the Roman population. Influenced by his adviser Mardonius (philosopher)Mardonius, Constantine's nephew Julian (emperor)Julian unsuccessfully tried to suppress Christianity. On 27 February 380, Theodosius I, Gratian, and Valentinian II issued the Edict of Thessalonica establishing Nicene Christianity as the State church of the Roman Empire.[https://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/theodcodeXVI.html Theodosian Code XVI.i.2] , in: Bettenson. Documents of the Christian Church. p. 31. As soon as it became connected to the state, Christianity grew wealthy; the Church solicited donations from the rich and could now own land.

Constantine was also instrumental in the convocation of the First Council of Nicaea in 325, which sought to address Arianism and formulated the Nicene Creed, which is still used by in Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, and many other Protestant churches. Nicaea was the first of a series of ecumenical councils, which formally defined critical elements of the theology of the Church, notably concerning Christology.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, pp. 37ff. The Church of the East did not accept the third and following ecumenical councils and is still separate today by its successors (Assyrian Church of the East). Gao and Sawatsky refer to Robert S. EllwoodEllwood, Robert S., The Encyclopedia of World Religions, New York: Infobase Publishing (2008) as their source for this taxonomy.

In terms of prosperity and cultural life, the Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Christian civilization,. and Constantinople remained the leading city of the Christian world in size, wealth, and culture.. Greek scholars in the RenaissanceThere was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy, as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular Greek.. Byzantine art and literature held a preeminent place in Europe, and the cultural impact of Byzantine art on the West during this period was enormous and of long-lasting significance.. The later rise of Islam in North Africa reduced the size and numbers of Christian congregations, leaving in large numbers only the Coptic Orthodox ChurchCoptic Church in Egypt, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church in the Horn of Africa and the Christianity in SudanNubian Church in the Sudan (Nobatia, Makuria and Alodia).

 Middle Ages 

 Early Middle Ages 

With the decline and Fall of the Western Roman Empirefall of the Roman Empire in the West, the papacy became a political player, first visible in Pope Leo IPope Leo's diplomatic dealings with Attila the HunHuns and Vandals. The church also entered into a long period of missionary activity and expansion among the various tribes. While ArianismArianists instituted the death penalty for practicing pagans (see the Massacre of Verden, for example), Catholicism also spread among the Hungarians, the Germanic peoplesGermanic, the CeltsCeltic, the Baltic peoplesBaltic and some Slavic peoples.

Around 500, Christianity was thoroughly integrated into Byzantine and Ostrogothic KingdomKingdom of Italy culture and Benedict of Nursia set out Rule of Saint Benedicthis Monastic Rule, establishing a system of regulations for the foundation and running of monasteries. Monasticism became a powerful force throughout Europe, and gave rise to many early centers of learning, most famously in Ireland, Scotland, and Gaul, contributing to the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century.

 by AD 600 after its Spread of Christianityspread to Africa and Europe from the Middle East]]
In the 7th century, Muslim conquest of SyriaMuslims conquered Syria (including Jerusalem), North Africa, and Spain, converting some of the Christian population to Islam, including some of the Christianity in pre-Islamic ArabiaChristian populations in pre-Islamic Arabia, and placing the rest under a separate Dhimmilegal status.Cl. Cahen in Encyclopedia of Islam – Jizya Part of the Muslims' success was due to the exhaustion of the Byzantine Empire in its decades long conflict with Persia. Beginning in the 8th century, with the rise of Carolingian leaders, the Papacy sought greater political support in the Frankish Kingdom.

The Middle Ages brought about major changes within the church.Religions in Global Society. p. 146, Peter Beyer, 2006Cambridge University Historical Series, An Essay on Western Civilization in Its Economic Aspects, p. 40: Hebraism, like Hellenism, has been an all-important factor in the development of Western Civilization; Judaism, as the precursor of Christianity, has indirectly had had much to do with shaping the ideals and morality of western nations since the christian era.Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p. 2: "That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and of America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic and Protestant."Fred Reinhard Dallmayr, Dialogue Among Civilizations: Some Exemplary Voices (2004), p. 22: Western civilization is also sometimes described as "Christian" or "Judaeo- Christian" civilization. Pope Gregory the Great dramatically reformed the Ecclesiastical polityecclesiastical structure and administration. In the early 8th century, iconoclasm became a divisive issue, when it was sponsored by the ByzantiumByzantine emperors. The Second Council of NicaeaSecond Ecumenical Council of Nicaea (787) finally pronounced in favor of icons. In the early 10th century, Western Christian monasticism was further rejuvenated through the leadership of the great Benedictine monastery of Cluny AbbeyCluny.

 High and Late Middle Ages 

 mosaic at the Hagia SophiaDeësis mosaicHagia Sophia in Constantinople]]
 at the Council of Clermont, where he preached the First Crusade. Illustration by Jean Colombe from the Passages d'outremer, .]]
In the West, from the 11th century onward, some older cathedral schools Medieval universitybecame universities (see, for example, University of Oxford, University of Paris and University of Bologna). Previously, higher education had been the domain of Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools (Scholae monasticae), led by monks and nuns. Evidence of such schools dates back to the 6th century&nbsp;AD.Riché, Pierre (1978): "Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: From the Sixth through the Eighth Century", Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, , pp.&nbsp;126–127, 282–298 These new universities expanded the curriculum to include academic programs for clerics, lawyers, civil servants, and physicians.Rudy, The Universities of Europe, 1100–1914, p. 40 The university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the History of ChristianityMedieval Christian setting.Verger, Jacques. "The Universities and Scholasticism", in The New Cambridge Medieval History: Volume V c. 1198–c. 1300. Cambridge University Press, 2007, 257.Rüegg, Walter: "Foreword. The University as a European Institution", in: A History of the University in Europe. Vol. 1: Universities in the Middle Ages, Cambridge University Press, 1992, , pp. xix–xx

Accompanying the rise of the "new towns" throughout Europe, mendicant orders were founded, bringing the Consecrated life (Catholic Church)consecrated religious life out of the monastery and into the new urban setting. The two principal mendicant movements were the Franciscans and the Dominican OrderDominicans, founded by Francis of Assisi and Saint DominicDominic, respectively. Both orders made significant contributions to the development of the great universities of Europe. Another new order was the Cistercians, whose large, isolated monasteries spearheaded the settlement of former wilderness areas. In this period, church building and ecclesiastical architecture reached new heights, culminating in the orders of Romanesque architectureRomanesque and Gothic architecture and the building of the great European cathedrals.

Christian nationalism emerged during this era in which Christians felt the desire to recover lands in which Christianity had historically flourished. From 1095 under the pontificate of Urban II, the First Crusade was launched. These were a series of military campaigns in the Holy Land and elsewhere, initiated in response to pleas from the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I for aid against Turkish peopleTurkish expansion. The Crusades ultimately failed to stifle Islamic aggression and even contributed to Christian enmity with the sacking of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade.Riley-Smith. The Oxford History of the Crusades.

The Christian Church experienced internal conflict between the 7th and 13th centuries that resulted in a East-West Schismschism between the Latin Church of Western Christianity branch, the now-Catholic Church, and an Eastern ChristianityEastern, largely Greek, branch (the Eastern Orthodox Church). The two sides disagreed on a number of administrative, liturgical and doctrinal issues, most prominently Eastern Orthodox opposition to papal supremacy.Duffy, Saints and Sinners (1997), p. 91 The Second Council of Lyon (1274) and the Council of Florence (1439) attempted to reunite the churches, but in both cases, the Eastern Orthodox refused to implement the decisions, and the two principal churches remain in schism to the present day. However, the Catholic Church has achieved union with various Eastern Catholic Churchessmaller eastern churches.

In the thirteenth century, a new emphasis on Jesus' suffering, exemplified by the Franciscans' preaching, had the consequence of turning worshippers' attention towards Jews, on whom Jewish deicideChristians had placed the blame for Jesus' death. Christianity's limited tolerance of Jews was not new—Augustine of Hippo said that Jews should not be allowed to enjoy the citizenship that Christians took for granted—but the growing antipathy towards Jews was a factor that led to Edict of Expulsionthe expulsion of Jews from England in 1290, the first of many such expulsions in Europe.

Beginning around 1184, following the crusade against CatharsCathar heresy, various institutions, broadly referred to as the Inquisition, were established with the aim of suppressing heresy and securing religious and doctrinal unity within Christianity through religious conversionconversion and prosecution.

 Modern era 

 Reformation and response 

 initiated the Reformation with his Ninety-five Theses in 1517.]]

The 15th-century Renaissance brought about a renewed interest in ancient and classical learning. During the Reformation, Martin Luther posted the Ninety-five Theses 1517 against the sale of indulgences.Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. pp. 39, 55–61. Printed copies soon spread throughout Europe. In 1521 the Edict of Worms condemned and excommunicated Luther and his followers, resulting in the schism of the Western ChristianityWestern Christendom into several branches.Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. p. 7.

Other reformers like Huldrych ZwingliZwingli, Johannes OecolampadiusOecolampadius, John CalvinCalvin, John KnoxKnox, and Jacobus ArminiusArminius further criticized Catholic teaching and worship. These challenges developed into the movement called Protestantism, which repudiated the papal primacyprimacy of the pope, the role of tradition, the Catholic sacramentsseven sacraments, and other doctrines and practices. The English ReformationReformation in England began in 1534, when King Henry VIII had himself Act of Supremacydeclared head of the Church of England. Beginning in 1536, the monasteries throughout England, Wales and Ireland were Dissolution of the monasteriesdissolved.Schama. A History of Britain. pp. 306–310.

Thomas Müntzer, Andreas Karlstadt and other theologians perceived both the Catholic Church and the confessions of the Magisterial Reformation as corrupted. Their activity brought about the Radical Reformation, which gave birth to various AnabaptismAnabaptist denominations.

's 1498–99 Michelangelo's PietàPietà in St. Peter's Basilica; the Catholic Church was among the patronages of the Renaissance.National Geographic, 254.Jensen, De Lamar (1992), Renaissance Europe, ]]
Partly in response to the Protestant Reformation, the Catholic Church engaged in a substantial process of reform and renewal, known as the Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reform. The Council of Trent clarified and reasserted Catholic doctrine. During the following centuries, competition between Catholicism and Protestantism became deeply entangled with political struggles among European states.Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. pp. 109–120.

Meanwhile, the discovery of America by Christopher Columbus in 1492 brought about a new wave of missionary activity. Partly from missionary zeal, but under the impetus of Colonialismcolonial expansion by the European powers, Christianity spread to the Americas, Oceania, East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.

Throughout Europe, the division caused by the Reformation led to outbreaks of religious violence and the establishment of separate state churches in Europe. Lutheranism spread into the northern, central, and eastern parts of present-day Germany, Livonia, and Scandinavia. Anglicanism was established in England in 1534. Calvinism and its varieties, such as Presbyterianism, were introduced in Scotland, the Netherlands, Hungary, Switzerland, and France. Arminianism gained followers in the Netherlands and Frisia. Ultimately, these differences led to the outbreak of religious warconflicts in which religion played a key factor. The Thirty Years' War, the English Civil War, and the French Wars of Religion are prominent examples. These events intensified the Christian debate on persecution and toleration.A general overview about the English discussion is given in Coffey, Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England 1558–1689.

In the revival of neoplatonism Renaissance humanismRenaissance humanists did not reject Christianity; quite the contrary, many of the greatest works of the Renaissance were devoted to it, and the Catholic Church patronized many works of Renaissance art.Open University, [https://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/renaissance2/religion.htm Looking at the Renaissance: Religious Context in the Renaissance]  (Retrieved 10 May 2007) Much, if not most, of the new art was commissioned by or in dedication to the Church. Some scholars and historians attribute Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution.Some scholars and historians attribute Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution:

 
 
 
 
 Lindberg, David. (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science. University of Chicago Press. p. 204. Many well-known historical figures who influenced Western science considered themselves Christian such as Nicolaus Copernicus,Pro forma candidate to Prince-Bishop of Warmia, cf. Dobrzycki, Jerzy, and Leszek Hajdukiewicz, "Kopernik, Mikołaj", Polski słownik biograficzny (Polish Biographical Dictionary), vol. XIV, Wrocław, Polish Academy of Sciences, 1969, p. 11. Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler,"Because he would not accept the Formula of Concord without some reservations, he was excommunicated from the Lutheran communion. Because he remained faithful to his Lutheranism throughout his life, he experienced constant suspicion from Catholics." John L. Treloar, "Biography of Kepler shows man of rare integrity. Astronomer saw science and spirituality as one." National Catholic Reporter, 8 October 2004, p. 2a. A review of James A. Connor Kepler's Witch: An Astronomer's Discovery of Cosmic Order amid Religious War, Political Intrigue and Heresy Trial of His Mother, Harper San Francisco. Isaac NewtonRichard S. Westfall – Indiana University  and Robert Boyle.

 Post-Enlightenment 

 in a 19th-century Kakure Kirishitan Ukiyo-eJapanese woodcut]]
In the era known as the Great Divergence, when in the West, the Age of Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolution brought about great societal changes, Christianity was confronted with various forms of skepticism and with certain modern Ideologypolitical ideologies, such as versions of socialism and liberalism. Events ranged from mere anti-clericalism to violent outbursts against Christianity, such as the dechristianisation of France during the French Revolutiondechristianization of France during the French Revolution,Mortimer Chambers, The Western Experience (vol. 2) chapter 21. the Spanish Civil War, and certain MarxismMarxist movements, especially Russian Revolution (1917)the Russian Revolution and the persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union under state atheism.Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival, by Christopher Marsh, p. 47. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011.Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History, by Dilip Hiro. Penguin, 2009.Geoffrey Blainey 2011). A Short History of Christianity; Viking; p. 494

Especially pressing in Europe was the formation of nation states after the Napoleonic era. In all European countries, different Christian denominations found themselves in competition to greater or lesser extents with each other and with the state. Variables were the relative sizes of the denominations and the religious, political, and ideological orientation of the states. Urs Altermatt of the University of Fribourg, looking specifically at Catholicism in Europe, identifies four models for the European nations. In traditionally Catholic-majority countries such as Belgium, Spain, and Austria, to some extent, religious and national communities are more or less identical. Cultural symbiosis and separation are found in Poland, the Republic of Ireland, and Switzerland, all countries with competing denominations. Competition is found in Germany, the Netherlands, and again Switzerland, all countries with minority Catholic populations, which to a greater or lesser extent identified with the nation. Finally, separation between religion (again, specifically Catholicism) and the state is found to a great degree in France and Italy, countries where the state actively opposed itself to the authority of the Catholic Church.

The combined factors of the formation of nation states and ultramontanism, especially in Germany and the Netherlands, but also in England to a much lesser extent, often forced Catholic churches, organizations, and believers to choose between the national demands of the state and the authority of the Church, specifically the papacy. This conflict came to a head in the First Vatican Council, and in Germany would lead directly to the Kulturkampf.The Oxford Handbook of Modern German History Helmut Walser Smith, p. 360, OUP Oxford, 2011

 of new pastors in Cameroon, 2014]]
Christian commitment in Europe dropped as modernity and secularism came into their own, particularly in the Czech Republic and Estonia, while religious commitments in America have been generally high in comparison to Europe. Changes in worldwide Christianity over the last century have been significant, since 1900, Christianity has spread rapidly in the Global South and Third World countries. The late 20th century has shown the shift of Christian adherence to the Third World and the Southern Hemisphere in general, with the West no longer the chief standard bearer of Christianity. Approximately 7 to 10% of Arabs are Arab Christians and Arabic-speaking ChristiansChristians, most prevalent in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon.

 Beliefs 

While Christians worldwide share basic convictions, there are differences of interpretations and opinions of the Bible and sacred traditions on which Christianity is based.Olson, The Mosaic of Christian Belief. Christianity encompasses various movements of Christian theology, the main ones being conservative Christian fundamentalismfundamentalist or Moderate Christianitymoderate, Liberal Christianityliberal and Progressive Christianityprogressive.Jennifer McBride, The Church for the World: A Theology of Public Witness, Oxford University Press USA, USA, 2014, p. 49

 Creeds 

}}
 icon depicting Constantine the GreatEmperor Constantine and the Fathers of the First Council of Nicaea (325) as holding the Niceno–Constantinopolitan Creed of 381]]

Concise doctrinal statements or confessions of religious beliefs are known as creeds. They began as baptismal formulae and were later expanded during the ChristologyChristological controversies of the 4th and 5th centuries to become statements of faith. "Jesus is Lord" is the earliest creed of Christianity and continues to be used, as with the World Council of Churches.

The Apostles' Creed is the most widely accepted statement of the articles of Christian faith. It is used by a number of List of Christian denominationsChristian denominations for both liturgyliturgical and catechesiscatechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical churches of Western Christian tradition, including the Latin Church of the Catholic Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, and Western Rite Orthodoxy. It is also used by PresbyterianismPresbyterians, MethodismMethodists, and Congregational churchCongregationalists.

This particular creed was developed between the 2nd and 9th centuries. Its central doctrines are those of the Trinity and God in ChristianityGod the Creator deityCreator. Each of the doctrines found in this creed can be traced to statements current in the Apostolic Ageapostolic period. The creed was apparently used as a summary of Christian doctrine for baptismal candidates in the churches of Rome.Pelikan/Hotchkiss, Creeds and Confessions of Faith in the Christian Tradition. Its points include:

 Belief in God the Father, Jesus Christ as the God the SonSon of God, and the Holy Spirit (Christianity)Holy Spirit
 The crucifixion of Jesusdeath, Harrowing of Helldescent into hell, resurrection of Jesusresurrection and Ascension of Jesusascension of Christ
 The holiness of the Christian ChurchChurch and the communion of saints
 Christ's second coming, the Last JudgmentDay of Judgement and Salvation in Christianitysalvation of the faithful

The Nicene Creed was formulated, largely in response to Arianism, at the Councils of First Council of NicaeaNicaea and First Council of ConstantinopleConstantinople in 325 and 381 respectively,Encyclopedia of Religion, "Arianism". and ratified as the universal creed of Christendom by the First Council of Ephesus in 431.Catholic Encyclopedia, [https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/05491a.htm "Council of Ephesus"] .

The Chalcedonian Definition, or Creed of Chalcedon, developed at the Council of Chalcedon in 451,Christian History Institute, . though rejected by the Oriental Orthodox, taught Christ "to be acknowledged in two natures, inconfusedly, unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably": one divine and one human, and that both natures, while perfect in themselves, are nevertheless also Hypostatic unionperfectly united into one person.Pope Leo I, [https://www.dailycatholic.org/history/4ecumen2.htm Letter to Flavian] 

The Athanasian Creed, received in the Western Church as having the same status as the Nicene and Chalcedonian, says: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the Persons nor dividing the ConsubstantialitySubstance".Catholic Encyclopedia, "[https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/02033b.htm Athanasian Creed] ".

Most Christians (Catholic ChurchCatholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Protestant alike) accept the use of creeds and subscribe to at least one of the creeds mentioned above.

Certain Evangelical Protestants, though not all of them, reject creeds as definitive statements of faith, even while agreeing with some or all of the substance of the creeds. Also rejecting creeds are groups with roots in the Restoration Movement, such as the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada, and the Churches of Christ.White, Howard A. ''.Ron Rhodes, The Complete Guide to Christian Denominations'', Harvest House Publishers, 2005, 

 Jesus 

]]

The central tenet of Christianity is the belief in Jesus as the Son of God (Christianity)Son of God and the Messiah (Christ). Christians believe that Jesus, as the Messiah, was anointinganointed by God as savior of humanity and hold that Jesus' coming was the fulfillment of Christian messianic propheciesmessianic prophecies of the Old Testament. The Christian concept of messiah differs significantly from Messiah in Judaismthe contemporary Jewish concept. The core Christian belief is that through belief in and acceptance of Death and Resurrection of Jesusthe death and resurrection of Jesus, original sinsinful humans can be reconciled to God, and thereby are offered salvation and the promise of Immortalityeternal life.Metzger/Coogan, Oxford Companion to the Bible, pp. 513, 649.

While there have been many Christian theologytheological disputes over the Christologynature of Jesus over the earliest centuries of Christian history, generally, Christians believe that Jesus is Incarnation (Christianity)God incarnate and "Hypostatic uniontrue God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human). Jesus, having become Incarnation (Christianity)fully human, suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal man, but did not Christian views on sinsin. As fully God, he rose to life again. According to the New Testament, he Resurrection of Jesusrose from the dead,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,  Ascension of Jesusascended to heaven, is seated at the right hand of the Father,s:Nicene Creed and will ultimately Second Comingreturn to fulfill the rest of the Messianic prophecy, including the resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment, and the final establishment of the Kingdom of God (Christianity)Kingdom of God.

According to the canonical gospels of Gospel of MatthewMatthew and Gospel of LukeLuke, Jesus was Incarnation (Christianity)conceived by the Holy Spirit (Christianity)Holy Spirit and Nativity of Jesusborn from Mary, mother of Jesusthe Virgin Mary. Little of Jesus' childhood is recorded in the canonical gospels, although infancy gospels were popular in antiquity. In comparison, his adulthood, especially the week before his death, is well documented in the gospels contained within the New Testament, because that part of his life is believed to be most important. The biblical accounts of Ministry of JesusJesus' ministry include: Baptism of Jesushis baptism, Miracles of Jesusmiracles, preaching, teaching, and deeds.

 Death and resurrection 

'', representing the death of Jesus on the Christian CrossCross, painting by Diego Velázquez, ]]
Christians consider the resurrection of Jesus to be the cornerstone of their faith (see 1 Corinthians 15). Among Christian beliefs, the death and resurrection of Jesus are two core events on which much of Christian doctrine and theology is based. According to the New Testament, Jesus was Crucifixioncrucified, died a physical death, was buried within a tomb, and rose from the dead three days later.  

The Overview of resurrection appearances in the Gospels and PaulNew Testament mentions several Resurrection of JesusBiblical accountspost-resurrection appearances of Jesus on different occasions to his twelve apostles and disciple (Christianity)disciples, including "more than five hundred brethren at once", before Jesus' Ascension of Jesusascension to heaven. Jesus' death and resurrection are commemorated by Christians in all worship services, with special emphasis during Holy Week, which includes Good Friday and Easter Sunday.

The death and resurrection of Jesus are usually considered the most important events in Christian theology, partly because they demonstrate that Jesus has power over life and death and therefore has the authority and power to give people Eternal life (Christianity)eternal life., , , , , , and 

Christian churches accept and teach the New Testament account of the resurrection of Jesus with very few exceptions.This is drawn from a number of sources, especially the early Creeds, the Catechism of the Catholic Church, certain theological works, and various Confessions drafted during the Reformation including the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, works contained in the Book of Concord. Some modern scholars use the belief of Jesus' followers in the resurrection as a point of departure for establishing the continuity of the historical Jesus and the proclamation of the early church.Fuller, The Foundations of New Testament Christology, p. 11. Some Liberal Christianityliberal Christians do not accept a literal bodily resurrection,A Jesus Seminar conclusion held that "in the view of the Seminar, he did not rise bodily from the dead; the resurrection is based instead on vision hypothesisvisionary experiences of Saint PeterPeter, Paul the ApostlePaul, and Mary MagdaleneMary."Funk. The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?. seeing the story as richly symbolic and spiritually nourishing mythologymyth. Arguments over death and resurrection claims occur at many religious debates and interfaith dialogues.Lorenzen. Resurrection, Discipleship, Justice: Affirming the Resurrection Jesus Christ Today, p. 13. Paul the Apostle, an early Christian convert and missionary, wrote, "If Christ was not raised, then all our preaching is useless, and your trust in God is useless".Ball/Johnsson (ed.). The Essential Jesus.

 Salvation 

}}
'' by Lucas Cranach the Elder (1529); Moses and Elijah point the sinner to Jesus for salvation.]]
Paul the Apostle, like Jews and Roman pagans of his time, believed that sacrifice can bring about new kinship ties, purity, and eternal life. For Paul, the necessary sacrifice was the death of Jesus: Gentiles who are "Christ's" are, like Israel, descendants of Abraham and "heirs according to the promise"Wright, N.T. What Saint Paul Really Said: Was Paul of Tarsus the Real Founder of Christianity? (Oxford, 1997), p. 121. The God who raised Jesus from the dead would also give new life to the "mortal bodies" of Gentile Christians, who had become with Israel, the "children of God", and were therefore no longer "in the flesh".

Modern Christian churches tend to be much more concerned with how humanity can be eternal salvationsaved from a universal condition of sin and death than the question of how both Jews and Gentiles can be in God's family. According to Eastern Orthodox theology, based upon their understanding of the atonement as put forward by Irenaeus' Recapitulation (Irenaeus)recapitulation theory, Jesus' death is a Ransom theory of atonementransom. This restores the relation with God, who is loving and reaches out to humanity, and offers the possibility of Theosis (Eastern Orthodox theology)theosis c.q. Divinization (Christian)divinization, becoming the kind of humans God wants humanity to be. The Catholic church also holds to a form of ransom theory but also teaches that Jesus' death Satisfaction theory of atonementsatisfies the debt to the Father incurred by the sins of humanity. The Catholic Church further affirms that salvation does not occur without faithfulness on the part of Christians; converts must live in accordance with principles of love and ordinarily must be baptized. In Protestant theology, Jesus' death is regarded as a Penal substitutionsubstitutionary penalty carried by Jesus, for the debt that has to be paid by humankind when it broke God's moral law.L. W. Grensted, [https://books.google.com/books?id=PUW8AAAAIAAJ A Short History of the Doctrine of the Atonement] (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1920), p. 191: 'Before the Reformation only a few hints of a Penal theory can be found.'

Christians differ in their views on the extent to which individuals' salvation is pre-ordained by God. Reformed theology places distinctive emphasis on grace by teaching that individuals are total depravitycompletely incapable of self-redemption, but that irresistible gracesanctifying grace is irresistible.Westminster Confession, [https://www.spurgeon.org/~phil/creeds/wcf.htmchap10 Chapter X] ;Spurgeon, [https://www.spurgeon.org/calvinis.htm A Defense of Calvinism] . In contrast Catholics, Orthodox Christians, and ArminianismArminian Protestants believe that the exercise of free will is necessary to have faith in Jesus.

 Trinity 

 is the belief that God in ChristianityGod is one God in three persons: the God the FatherFather, the God the SonSon (Jesus), and the Holy Spirit (Christianity)Holy Spirit.Definition of the Fourth Lateran Council quoted in .]]
Trinity refers to the teaching that the one GodChristianity's status as monotheistic is affirmed in, among other sources, the Catholic Encyclopedia (article "[https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/10499a.htm Monotheism] "); William F. Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity; H. Richard Niebuhr; Kirsch, God Against the Gods; Woodhead, An Introduction to Christianity; Columbia EncyclopediaThe Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia [https://www.infoplease.com/ce6/society/A0833762.html Monotheism] ; The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, ; New Dictionary of Theology, [https://www.ntwrightpage.com/Wright_NDCT_Paul.htm Paul] , pp. 496–499; Meconi. "Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity". pp. 111ff. comprises three distinct, eternally co-existing persons: the God the FatherFather, the Son (incarnate in Jesus Christ) and the Holy Spirit in ChristianityHoly Spirit. Together, these three persons are sometimes called the Godhead (Christianity)Godhead,Kelly. Early Christian Doctrines. pp. 87–90.Alexander. New Dictionary of Biblical Theology. pp. 514ff.McGrath. Historical Theology. p. 61. although there is no single term in use in Scripture to denote the unified Godhead.Metzger/Coogan. Oxford Companion to the Bible. p. 782. In the words of the Athanasian Creed, an early statement of Christian belief, "the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God".Kelly. The Athanasian Creed. They are distinct from another: the Father has no source, the Son is begotten of the Father, and the Spirit proceeds from the Father. Though distinct, the three persons cannot be divided from one another in being or in operation. While some Christians also believe that God appeared as the Father in the Old Testament, it is agreed that he appeared as the Son in the New Testament and will still continue to manifest as the Holy Spirit in the present. But still, God still existed as three persons in each of these times. However, traditionally there is a belief that it was the Son who appeared in the Old Testament because, for example, when the TrinityArtTrinity is depicted in art, the Son typically has the distinctive appearance, a cruciform halo identifying Christ, and in depictions of the Garden of Eden, this looks forward to an Incarnation yet to occur. In some Early Christian artEarly Christian sarcophagi, the Logos is distinguished with a beard, "which allows him to appear ancient, even pre-existent".Heidi J. Hornik and Mikeal Carl Parsons, [https://books.google.com/books?id=BmWpMKaDBVUC&pg=PA34 Interpreting Christian Art: Reflections on Christian art], Mercer University Press, 2003, , pp. 32–35.

The Trinity is an essential doctrine of mainstream Christianity. From earlier than the times of the Nicene Creed (325) Christianity advocatedExamples of ante-Nicene statements:
}}

}} the triune Holy Mysterymystery-nature of God in ChristianityGod as a normative profession of faith. According to Roger E. Olson and Christopher Hall, through prayer, meditation, study and practice, the Christian community concluded "that God must exist as both a unity and trinity", codifying this in ecumenical council at the end of the 4th century.Fowler. World Religions: An Introduction for Students. p. 58.

According to this doctrine, God is not divided in the sense that each person has a third of the whole; rather, each person is considered to be fully God (see Perichoresis). The distinction lies in their relations, the Father being unbegotten; the Son being begotten of the Father; and the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and (in Western Christian theology) Filioquefrom the Son. Regardless of this apparent difference, the three "persons" are each eternityeternal and omnipotent. Other Christian religions including Unitarian Universalism, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Mormonism, do not share those views on the Trinity.

The Greek word trias. is trinitas though Latin also borrowed Greek trias verbatim.}} is first seen in this sense in the works of Theophilus of Antioch; his text reads: "of the Trinity, of God, and of His Word, and of His Wisdom". The term may have been in use before this time; its Latin equivalent, trinitas, appears afterwards with an explicit reference to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, in Tertullian.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. p. 50.. In the following century, the word was in general use. It is found in many passages of Origen.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 53.

 Trinitarianism 

Trinitarianism denotes Christians who believe in the concept of the Trinity. Almost all Christian denominations and churches hold Trinitarian beliefs. Although the words "Trinity" and "Triune" do not appear in the Bible, beginning in the 3rd century theologians developed the term and concept to facilitate apprehension (understanding)apprehension of the New Testament teachings of God as being Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Since that time, Christian theologians have been careful to emphasize that Trinity does not imply that there are three gods (the antitrinitarian heresy of Tritheism), nor that each hypostasis of the Trinity is one-third of an infinite God (partialism), nor that the Son and the Holy Spirit are beings created by and subordinate to the Father (Arianism). Rather, the Trinity is defined as one God in three persons.Jürgen MoltmannMoltmann, Jürgen. The Trinity and the Kingdom: The Doctrine of God. Tr. from German. Fortress Press, 1993. 

 Nontrinitarianism 

Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to theology that rejects the doctrine of the Trinity. Various nontrinitarian views, such as adoptionism or modalism, existed in early Christianity, leading to disputes about Christology.Harnack, [https://www.ccel.org/ccel/harnack/dogma1.ii.iii.iii.html History of Dogma] . Nontrinitarianism reappeared in the Gnosticism of the Cathars between the 11th and 13th centuries, among groups with UnitarianismUnitarian theology in the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century,Pocket Dictionary of Church History Nathan P. Feldmeth p. 135 "Unitarianism. Unitarians emerged from Protestant Christian beginnings in the sixteenth century with a central focus on the unity of God and subsequent denial of the doctrine of the Trinity" in the 18th-century Age of EnlightenmentEnlightenment, among RestorationismRestorationist groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century, and most recently, in Oneness PentecostalismOneness Pentecostal churches.

 Eschatology 

The end of things, whether the end of an individual life, the end of the age, or the end of the world, broadly speaking, is Christian eschatology; the study of the destiny of humans as it is revealed in the Bible. The major issues in Christian eschatology are the Great TribulationTribulation, death and the afterlife, (mainly for Evangelical ChristianityEvangelical groups) Millennialismthe Millennium and the following Rapture, the Second Coming of Jesus, Resurrection of the Dead, Heaven, (for Christian liturgyliturgical branches) Purgatory, and Hell, the Last Judgment, the end of the world, and the New Heavens and New Earth.

Christians believe that the second coming of Christ will occur at the eschatologyend of time, after a period of severe persecution (the Great Tribulation). All who have died will be Resurrection of the deadresurrected bodily from the dead for the Last Judgment. Jesus will fully establish the Kingdom of God in fulfillment of Bible prophecyscriptural prophecies.Thomas Aquinas, [https://www.newadvent.org/summa/5.htm Summa Theologicum, Supplementum Tertiae Partis]  questions 69 through 99

 Death and afterlife 

Most Christians believe that human beings experience divine judgment and are rewarded either with eternal life or helleternal damnation. This includes the Last Judgmentgeneral judgement at the resurrection of the dead as well as the belief (held by Catholics,Catholic Encyclopedia, "[https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08550a.htm Particular Judgment] ".Ott, Grundriß der Dogmatik, p. 566. OrthodoxDavid Moser, [https://www.orthodox.net/articles/about-prayer-for-the-dead.html What the Orthodox believe concerning prayer for the dead] .Ken Collins, [https://www.kencollins.com/question-45.htm What Happens to Me When I Die?] . and most Protestants) in a particular judgmentjudgment particular to the individual soul after physical death.

In the Catholic branch of Christianity, those who die in a state of grace, i.e., without any mortal sin separating them from God, but are still imperfectly purified from the effects of sin, undergo purification through the intermediate state of purgatory to achieve the holiness necessary for entrance into God's presence. Those who have attained this goal are called saints (Latin sanctus, "holy").Catholic Encyclopedia, "[https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/04171a.htm The Communion of Saints]".

Some Christian groups, such as Seventh-day Adventists, hold to Christian mortalismmortalism, the belief that the human soul is not naturally immortal, and is unconscious during the intermediate state between bodily death and resurrection. These Christians also hold to Annihilationism, the belief that subsequent to the final judgement, the wicked will cease to exist rather than suffer everlasting torment. Jehovah's Witnesses hold to a similar view."The death that Adam brought into the world is spiritual as well as physical, and only those who gain entrance into the Kingdom of God will exist eternally. However, this division will not occur until Armageddon, when all people will be resurrected and given a chance to gain eternal life. In the meantime, "the dead are conscious of nothing." What is God's Purpose for the Earth?" Official Site of Jehovah's Witnesses. Watchtower, 15 July 2002.

 Practices 

 at a Catholic parish church in Woodside, QueensWoodside, New York City, U.S.]]
 and Conservative Anabaptist women, for modesty, wear cape dresses and Christian head coveringhead coverings, the latter of which is taught as a Ordinance (Christianity)church ordinance.]]
Depending on the specific Christian denominationdenomination of Christianity, practices may include baptism, the Eucharist (Holy Communion or the Lord's Supper), Christian prayerprayer (including the Lord's Prayer), Confession (religion)confession, confirmation, Christian burialburial rites, Christian views on marriagemarriage rites and the religious education of children. Most denominations have OrdinationChristianityordained ClergyChristianityclergy who lead regular wikt:communalcommunal worship services.

Rite (Christianity)Christian rites, rituals, and ceremonies are not celebrated in one single sacred language. Many ritualistic Christian churches make a distinction between sacred language, liturgical language and vernacular language. The three important languages in the Early Christianityearly Christian era were: Latin languageLatin, Greek languageGreek and Syriac languageSyriac.

 Communal worship 

Church serviceServices of worship typically follow a pattern or form known as Christian liturgyliturgy.}} Justin Martyr described 2nd-century Christian liturgy in his First Apology () to Emperor Antoninus Pius, and his description remains relevant to the basic structure of Christian liturgical worship:
 §LXVII}}

Thus, as Justin described, Christians assemble for communal worship typically on Sunday, the Lord's Day, though other liturgical practices often occur outside this setting. Scripture readings are drawn from the Old and New Testaments, but especially the gospels. Instruction is given based on these readings, in the form of a sermon or homily. There are a variety of Church (congregation)congregational prayers, including thanksgiving, confession, and intercession, which occur throughout the service and take a variety of forms including recited, responsive, silent, or sung. Psalms, HymnChristian hymnodyhymns, Contemporary worship musicworship songs, and other church music may be sung. Services can be varied for special events like significant Calendar of saintsfeast days.For example, 
 in the Santa Maria delle Grazie, MilanSanta Maria delle Grazie Church in Milan, Italy, a late 1490s mural painting by Leonardo da Vinci, depicting the Last Supper of Jesus and his Apostles in the New Testamenttwelve apostles, depicts the Last Supperfinal meal of Jesus before Crucifixion of Jesushis crucifixion and death.]]

Nearly all forms of worship incorporate the Eucharist, which consists of bread and wine (or a substitute). It is reenacted in accordance with Jesus' instruction at the Last Supper that his followers do in remembrance of him as when he gave his disciples Sacramental breadbread, saying, "This is my body", and gave them sacramental winewine saying, "This is my blood".Ignazio Silone, Bread and Wine (1937). In the Early Christianityearly church, Christians and those yet to complete initiation would separate for the Eucharistic part of the service. Some denominations such as Confessional LutheranismConfessional Lutheran churches continue to practice 'closed communion'., stating "Therefore, our Congregation and our Denomination practices what is called 'close or closed Communion', meaning that before you take Communion at our Churches, we ask you to take a Communion Class first to properly learn what Communion is all about.", by Archive.org They offer communion to those who are already united in that denomination or sometimes individual church. Catholics further restrict participation to their members who are not in a state of mortal sin. Many other churches, such as the Anglican Communion and the MethodismMethodist Churches (such as the Free Methodist Church and United Methodist Church), practice 'open communion' since they view communion as a means to unity, rather than an end, and invite all believing Christians to participate.

 Sacraments or ordinances 

In Christian belief and practice, a sacrament is a Ritualrite, instituted by Christ, that confers divine gracegrace, constituting a Sacred Mysteriessacred mystery. The term is derived from the Latin word sacramentum, which was used to translate the Greek word for mystery. Views concerning both which rites are sacramental, and what it means for an act to be a sacrament, vary among Christian denominations and traditions.Cross/Livingstone. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. pp. 1435ff.

The most conventional functional definition of a sacrament is that it is an outward sign, instituted by Christ, that conveys an inward, spiritual grace through Christ. The two most widely accepted sacraments are Baptism and the Eucharist; however, the majority of Christians also recognize five additional sacraments: Confirmation (Christian sacrament)Confirmation (Chrismation in the Eastern tradition), Holy Orders (or ordination), Penance (or Confession (religion)Confession), Anointing of the Sick, and Matrimony (see Christian views on marriage).

Taken together, these are the Sacraments of the Catholic ChurchSeven Sacraments as recognized by churches in the High Church tradition—notably Sacraments of the Catholic ChurchCatholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Independent Catholic ChurchesIndependent Catholic, Old Catholic, some LutheranismLutherans and Anglican sacramentsAnglicans. Most other denominations and traditions typically affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, while some Protestant groups, such as the Quakers, reject sacramental theology. Certain denominations of Christianity, such as Anabaptists, use the term "ordinance (Christianity)ordinances" to refer to rites instituted by Jesus for Christians to observe. Seven ordinances have been taught in many Conservative Mennonite Anabaptist churches, which include "baptism, communion, footwashing, marriage, anointing with oil, the holy kiss, and the prayer covering". 
 
In addition to this, the Church of the East has two additional sacraments in place of the traditional sacraments of Matrimony and the Anointing of the Sick. These include Holy Leaven (Melka) and the sign of the cross.Holy Apostolic Catholic Assyrian Church of the East, Archdiocese of Australia, New Zealand and Lebanon. The Schwarzenau Brethren Anabaptist churches, such as the Dunkard Brethren Church, observe the agape feast (lovefeast), a Rite (Christianity)rite also observed by Moravian Church and Methodist Churches.

 Liturgical calendar 

Catholics, Eastern Christians, Lutherans, Anglicans and other traditional Protestant communities frame worship around the liturgical year. The liturgical cycle divides the year into a series of seasons, each with their theological emphases, and modes of prayer, which can be signified by different ways of decorating churches, colors of paraments and vestments for clergy, scriptural readings, themes for preaching and even different traditions and practices often observed personally or in the home.

Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, and Eastern Christians use analogous calendars based on the cycle of their respective Christian riterites. Calendars set aside holy days, such as Solemnitysolemnities which commemorate an event in the life of Jesus, Mary, or the saints, and periods of fasting, such as Lent and other pious events such as memoria, or lesser festivals commemorating saints. Christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often retain certain celebrations, such as Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost: these are the celebrations of Christ's birth, resurrection, and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Church, respectively. A few denominations such as QuakersQuaker Christians make no use of a liturgical calendar.Hickman. Handbook of the Christian Year.

 Symbols 

 symbol, created by combining the Greek letters ΙΧΘΥΣ into a wheel, Ephesus, Asia Minor]]
Most Christian denominations have not generally practiced Aniconism in Christianityaniconism, the avoidance or prohibition of devotional images, even if early Jewish Christians, invoking the Ten CommandmentsDecalogue's prohibition of idolatry, avoided figures in their symbols.

The Christian crosscross, today one of the most widely recognized symbols, was used by Christians from the earliest times.Minucius Felix speaks of the cross of Jesus in its familiar form, likening it to objects with a crossbeam or to a man with arms outstretched in prayer ([https://www.ccel.org/fathers2/ANF-04/anf04-34.htmP5713_906729 Octavius of Minucius Felix] , chapter XXIX). Tertullian, in his book De Corona, tells how it was already a tradition for Christians to trace the sign of the cross on their foreheads."At every forward step and movement, at every going in and out, when we put on our clothes and shoes, when we bathe, when we sit at table, when we light the lamps, on couch, on seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life, we trace upon the forehead the sign." (Tertullian, [https://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf03.iv.vi.iii.html De Corona, chapter 3]) Although the cross was known to the early Christians, the crucifix did not appear in use until the 5th century.Dilasser. The Symbols of the Church.

Among the earliest Christian symbols, that of the fish or Ichthys seems to have ranked first in importance, as seen on monumental sources such as tombs from the first decades of the 2nd century. Its popularity seemingly arose from the Greek word ichthys (fish) forming an acrostic for the Greek phrase Iesous Christos Theou Yios Soter (Ἰησοῦς Χριστός, Θεοῦ Υἱός, Σωτήρ), (Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior), a concise summary of Christian faith.

Other major Christian symbols include the Chi-Rhochi-rho monogram, the Dove of peacedove and olive branch (symbolic of the Holy Spirit), the sacrificial lamb (representing Christ's sacrifice), the vine (symbolizing the connection of the Christian with Christ) and many others. These all derive from passages of the New Testament.

 Baptism 

Baptism is the ritual act, with the use of water, by which a person is admitted to membership of the Christian ChurchChurch. Beliefs on baptism vary among denominations. Differences occur firstly on whether the act has any spiritual significance. Some, such as the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, as well as Lutherans and Anglicans, hold to the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, which affirms that baptism creates or strengthens a person's faith, and is intimately linked to salvation. Baptists and Plymouth Brethren view baptism as a purely symbolic act, an external public declaration of the inward change which has taken place in the person, but not as spiritually efficacious. Secondly, there are differences of opinion on the methodology (or mode) of the act. These modes are: by Immersion baptismimmersion; if immersion is total, by submersion; by affusion (pouring); and by aspersion (sprinkling). Those who hold the first view may also adhere to the tradition of infant baptism;"Holy Baptism is the sacrament by which God adopts us as his children and makes us members of Christ's Body, the Church, and inheritors of the kingdom of God" ([https://anglicansonline.org/basics/catechism.htmlHoly%20Baptism Book of Common Prayer, 1979, Episcopal)] "Baptism is the sacrament of initiation and incorporation into the body of Christ" ([https://www.backriverumc.com/userFiles/1257/by_water_and_the_spirit.pdf By Water and The Spirit – The Official United Methodist Understanding of Baptism (PDF)] "As an initiatory rite into membership of the Family of God, baptismal candidates are symbolically purified or washed as their sins have been forgiven and washed away" (William H. Brackney, [https://www.baptisthistory.org/pamphlets/baptism.htm Doing Baptism Baptist StyleBeliever's Baptism] ) the Orthodox Churches all practice infant baptism and always baptize by total immersion repeated three times in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit."After the proclamation of faith, the baptismal water is prayed over and blessed as the sign of the goodness of God's creation. The person to be baptized is also prayed over and blessed with sanctified oil as the sign that his creation by God is holy and good. And then, after the solemn proclamation of "Alleluia" (God be praised), the person is immersed three times in the water in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit" ([https://www.oca.org/OCchapter.asp?SID=2&ID=51 Orthodox Church in America: Baptism).] "In the Orthodox Church we totally immerse, because such total immersion symbolizes death. What death? The death of the "old, sinful man". After Baptism we are freed from the dominion of sin, even though after Baptism we retain an inclination and tendency toward evil.", Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, article "[https://www.greekorthodox.org.au/general/faq/faqbaptism Baptism] ". The Lutheran Church and the Catholic Church also practice infant baptism, usually by affusion, and using the Trinitarian formula. Anabaptist Christians practice believer's baptism, in which an adult chooses to receive the ordinance after making a decision to follow Jesus. Anabaptist denominations such as the Mennonites, Amish and Hutterites use affusionpouring as the mode to administer believer's baptism, whereas Anabaptists of the Schwarzenau Brethren and River Brethren traditions baptize by immersion baptismimmersion.

 Prayer 

}}

In the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Jesus taught the Lord's Prayer, which has been seen as a model for Christian prayer. The injunction for Christians to pray the Lord's prayer thrice daily was given in the Didache and came to be recited by Christians at 9 am, 12 pm, and 3 pm.

In the second century Apostolic Tradition, Hippolytus of RomeHippolytus instructed Christians to pray at fixed prayer timesseven fixed prayer times: "on rising, at the lighting of the evening lamp, at bedtime, at midnight" and "the third, sixth and ninth hours of the day, being hours associated with Christ's Passion". Prayer positions, including kneeling, standing, and prostrations have been used for these seven fixed prayer times since the days of the early Church. BreviaryBreviaries such as the Shehimo and Agpeya are used by Oriental Orthodox Christians to pray these canonical hours while facing in the direction of prayereastward direction of prayer.

The Apostolic Tradition directed that the sign of the cross be used by Christians during the Minor exorcism in Christianityminor exorcism of baptism, during ablution in Christianityablutions before praying at fixed prayer times, and in times of temptation.

Intercessory prayer is prayer offered for the benefit of other people. There are many intercessory prayers recorded in the Bible, including prayers of the Apostle Peter on behalf of sick persons and by prophets of the Old Testament in favor of other people. In the Epistle of James, no distinction is made between the intercessory prayer offered by ordinary believers and the prominent Old Testament prophet Elijah. The effectiveness of prayer in Christianity derives from the power of God rather than the status of the one praying.

The ancient church, in both Eastern ChristianityEastern and Western Christianity, developed a tradition of asking for the intercession of saintsintercession of (deceased) saints, and this remains the practice of most Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Catholic ChurchCatholic, and some LutheranismLutheran and Anglican churches. Apart from certain sectors within the latter two denominations, other Churches of the Protestant Reformation, however, rejected prayer to the saints, largely on the basis of the sole mediatorship of Christ. The reformer Huldrych Zwingli admitted that he had offered prayers to the saints until his reading of the Bible convinced him that this was idolatry in Christianityidolatrous.Madeleine Gray, The Protestant Reformation, (Sussex Academic Press, 2003), p. 140.

According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church: "Prayer is the raising of one's mind and heart to God or the requesting of good things from God". The Book of Common Prayer in the Anglican tradition is a guide which provides a set order for services, containing set prayers, scripture readings, and hymns or sung Psalms. Frequently in Western Christianity, when praying, the hands are placed palms together and forward as in the feudal commendation ceremony. At other times the older orans posture may be used, with palms up and elbows in.

 Marriage 

Most Christian churches in the world only support marriage between a man and a woman.Stephen Hunt, Contemporary Christianity and LGBT Sexualities, Routledge, Abingdon-on-Thames, 2016, p. 40-41

Some Christian churches allow local churches to decide about blessing of same-sex unions in Christian churchesblessings of same-sex marriage.Jeffrey S. Siker, Homosexuality and Religion: An Encyclopedia, Greenwood Publishing Group, USA, 2007, p. 147

Some international networks of Affirming churches support blessing of same-sex unions in Christian churchesblessings of same-sex marriage, such the Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists,Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists, [https://awab.org/find-a-church/ Our Church Members] , awab.org, USA, accessed August 16, 2025 Ecumenical Catholic Church,Ecumenical Catholic Church, [https://ecumenicalcatholicchurch.org/en/doctrinas/ Doctrines] , ecumenicalcatholicchurch.org, Mexico, accessed August 16, 2025 Metropolitan Community Church,Metropolitan Community Church, [https://visitmccchurch.com/our-churches/ Our churches] , visitmccchurch.com, USA, accessed August 16, 2025 Reconciling Ministries Network (Methodist),Reconciling Ministries Network, [https://rmnetwork.org/find-a-reconciling-ministry/ Find a Reconciling Ministry] , rmnetwork.org, USA, accessed August 16, 2025 The Covenant Network (Pentecostal).Covenant Network, [https://www.thecovenantnetwork.com/locations Our churches] , thecovenantnetwork.com, USA, accessed August 16, 2025

 Scriptures 

 is the sacred book in Christianity.]]
Christianity, like other religions, has adherents whose beliefs and biblical interpretations vary. Christianity regards the biblical canon, the Old Testament and the New Testament, as the Biblical inspirationinspired word of God. The traditional view of inspiration is that God worked through human authors so that what they produced was what God wished to communicate. The Greek word referring to inspiration in  is theopneustos, which literally means "God-breathed".

Some believe that divine inspiration makes present Bibles Biblical inerrancyinerrant, while others claim inerrancy for the Bible in its original manuscripts, although none of those are extant.(§&nbsp;105–108)Second Helvetic Confession, Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy, [https://www.reformed.org/documents/icbi.html online text]  Another closely related view is biblical infallibility or limited inerrancy, which affirms that the Bible is free of error as a guide to salvation, but may include errors on matters such as history, geography, or science.

The canon of the Old Testament accepted by Protestant churches, which is only the Tanakh (the canon of the Hebrew Bible), is shorter than that accepted by the Orthodox and Catholic churches which also include the deuterocanonical books which appear in the Septuagint, the Orthodox canon being slightly larger than the Catholic; Protestants regard the latter as Biblical apocryphaapocryphal, important historical documents which help to inform the understanding of words, grammar, and syntax used in the historical period of their conception. Some versions of the Bible include a separate Apocrypha section between the Old Testament and the New Testament.Metzger/Coogan, Oxford Companion to the Bible. p. 39. The New Testament, originally written in Koine Greek, contains 27 books which are agreed upon by all major churches.

Some denominations have List of religious textsAdditional and alternative scripturesadditional canonical holy scriptures beyond the Bible, including the standard works of the Latter Day Saints movement and Divine Principle in the Unification Church.

 Catholic interpretation 

 viewed from the Tiber; the Vatican Hill in the back and Castel Sant'Angelo in Rome to the right. Both the basilica and the hill are part of the United Nations General Assembly observerssovereign state of Vatican City, the Holy See of the Catholic Church.]]

In antiquity, two schools of exegesis developed in School of AlexandriaAlexandria and School of AntiochAntioch. The Alexandrian interpretation, exemplified by Origen, tended to read Scripture allegoryallegorically, while the Antiochene interpretation adhered to the literal sense, holding that other meanings (called theoria) could only be accepted if based on the literal meaning.Kelly. Early Christian Doctrines. pp. 69–78.

Catholic theology distinguishes two senses of scripture: the literal and the spiritual.Catechism of the Catholic Church, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/catechism/p1s1c2a3.htmIII, The Holy Spirit, Interpreter of Scripture §&nbsp;115–118]. 

The literal sense of understanding scripture is the meaning conveyed by the words of Scripture. The spiritual sense is further subdivided into:
 The allegorical sense, which includes Typology (theology)typology. An example would be the Passage of the Red Seaparting of the Red Sea being understood as a "type" (sign) of baptism.
 The moral sense, which understands the scripture to contain some ethical teaching.
 The anagogeanagogical sense, which applies to eschatology, eternity and the Apocalypseconsummation of the world.

Regarding exegesis, following the rules of sound interpretation, Catholic theology holds:
 The injunction that all other senses of sacred scripture are based on the literalThomas Aquinas, [https://www.newadvent.org/summa/100110.htm "Whether in Holy Scripture a word may have several senses"] Catechism of the Catholic Church, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/catechism/p1s1c2a3.htmIII §&nbsp;116] 
 That the historicity of the Gospels must be absolutely and constantly heldSecond Vatican Council, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19651118_dei-verbum_en.html Dei Verbum (V.19)] .
 That scripture must be read within the "living Tradition of the whole Church"Catechism of the Catholic Church, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/catechism/p1s1c2a3.htmIII "The Holy Spirit, Interpreter of Scripture"].  and
 That "the task of interpretation has been entrusted to the bishops in communion with the successor of Peter, the Bishop of diocese of RomeRome".Catechism of the Catholic Church, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/catechism/p1s1c2a2.htmIII "The Interpretation of the Heritage of Faith" §&nbsp;85]. 

 Protestant interpretation 

 Qualities of Scripture 

Many Protestant Christians, such as Lutherans and the Reformed, believe in the doctrine of sola scriptura—that the Bible is a self-sufficient revelation, the final authority on all Christian doctrine, and Revelationrevealed all truth necessary for salvation; other Protestant Christians, such as Methodists and Anglicans, affirm the doctrine of prima scriptura which teaches that Scripture is the primary source for Christian doctrine, but that "tradition, experience, and reason" can nurture the Christian religion as long as they are in harmony with the Bible. Protestants characteristically believe that ordinary believers may reach an adequate understanding of Scripture because Scripture itself is clear in its meaning (or "perspicuous"). Martin Luther believed that without God's help, Scripture would be "enveloped in darkness". He advocated for "one definite and simple understanding of Scripture". John Calvin wrote, "all who refuse not to follow the Holy Spirit as their guide, find in the Scripture a clear light".John Calvin,[https://www.ccel.org/ccel/calvin/calcom45.vii.iv.iv.html  Commentaries on the Catholic Epistles 2 Peter 3:14–18]  Related to this is "efficacy", that Scripture is able to lead people to faith; and "sufficiency", that the Scriptures contain everything that one needs to know to obtain salvation and to live a Christian life.

 Original intended meaning of Scripture 

Protestants stress the meaning conveyed by the words of Scripture, the historical-grammatical method.Sproul. Knowing Scripture, pp. 45–61; Bahnsen, [https://www.cmfnow.com/articles/pt173.htm A Reformed Confession Regarding Hermeneutics (article 6)] . The historical-grammatical method or grammatico-historical method is an effort in Biblical hermeneutics to find the intended original meaning in the text. This original intended meaning of the text is drawn out through examination of the passage in light of the grammatical and syntactical aspects, the historical background, the literary genre, as well as theological (canonical) considerations. The historical-grammatical method distinguishes between the one original meaning and the significance of the text. The significance of the text includes the ensuing use of the text or application. The original passage is seen as having only a single meaning or sense. As Milton S. Terry said: "A fundamental principle in grammatico-historical exposition is that the words and sentences can have but one significance in one and the same connection. The moment we neglect this principle we drift out upon a sea of uncertainty and conjecture". (1890 edition page 103, [https://books.google.com/books?id=Fy9VAAAAMAAJ&q=%22fundamental+principle%22 view1], [https://books.google.com/books?id=Fy9VAAAAMAAJ&q=%22neglect+this+principle%22 view2]) Technically speaking, the grammatical-historical method of interpretation is distinct from the determination of the passage's significance in light of that interpretation. Taken together, both define the term (Biblical) hermeneutics.
Some Protestant interpreters make use of Typology (theology)typology.e.g., in his [https://biblehub.com/commentaries/mhcw/matthew/1.htm commentary on Matthew 1]  (§III.1). Matthew Henry interprets the twin sons of Judah, Phares and Zara, as an allegory of the Gentile and Jewish Christians. For a contemporary treatment, see Glenny, [https://www.biblicalstudies.org.uk/article_typology_glenny.html Typology: A Summary Of The Present Evangelical Discussion] .

 Demographics 

With around 2.3&nbsp;billion adherents according to a 2020 estimation by Pew Research Center,
 split into three main branches of Catholic, Protestant, and Eastern Orthodox, Christianity is the major religious groupsworld's largest religion. High birth rates and Conversion to Christianityconversions in the global South were cited as the reasons for the Christian population growth. For the last hundred years, the Christian share has stood at around 33% of the world population. This masks a major shift in the demographics of Christianity; large increases in the developing world have been accompanied by substantial declines in the developed world, mainly in Western Europe and North America.Werner Ustorf. "A missiological postscript", in McLeod and Ustorf (eds), The Decline of Christendom in (Western) Europe, 1750–2000, (Cambridge University Press, 2003) pp. 219–20. Based on the 2020 population estimate, Christians comprise 28.8% of the world's population. 46.8% of the Christian population is concentrated in 10 countries: United States (over 210 million), Brazil (over 160 million), Mexico (over 110 million), Philippines and Russia (each one over 100 million), Nigeria and DRCCongo (each one over 90 million), Ethiopia (over 70 million), South Africa (over 50 million) and Italy (over 40 million).

, the country with the largest Catholic population in the world]]
 in Russia; the Russian Orthodox Church has experienced a great revival since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a country that had a policy of state atheism.]]
 at City Church (Brazil)City Church in São José dos Campos, affiliated with the Brazilian Baptist Convention]]

Based on a 2015 Pew Research Center study, within the next four decades, Christianity will remain the largest religion; and by 2050, the Christian population is expected to exceed 3&nbsp;billion. According to some scholars, Christianity ranks at first place in net gains through religious conversion. As a percentage of Christians, the Catholic Church and Orthodoxy (both Eastern Orthodox ChurchEastern and Oriental OrthodoxyOriental) are declining in some parts of the world (though Catholicism is growing in Asia, in Africa, vibrant in Eastern Europe, etc.), while Protestants and other Christians are on the rise in the developing world.Hillerbrand, Hans J., [https://books.google.com/books?id=4tbFBQAAQBAJ&pg=PT3311 "Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set"], p. 1815, "Observers carefully comparing all these figures in the total context will have observed the even more startling finding that for the first time ever in the history of Protestantism, Wider Protestants will by 2050 have become almost exactly as numerous as Catholics – each with just over 1.5 billion followers, or 17 percent of the world, with Protestants growing considerably faster than Catholics each year." The so-called popular ProtestantismA flexible term, defined as all forms of Protestantism with the notable exception of the historical denominations deriving directly from the Protestant Reformation. is one of the fastest growing religious categories in the world.Some scholars suggest that Pentecostalism is the fastest growing religion in the world:
 
 
 
 
  Nevertheless, Catholicism will also continue to grow to 1.63&nbsp;billion by 2050, according to Todd Johnson of the Center for the Study of Global Christianity. Africa alone, by 2015, will be home to 230 million African Catholics.Barrett, 29. According to Pew Research Center, Africa is expected to be home to 1.1&nbsp;billion Christianity in AfricaAfrican Christians by 2050.

In 2010, 87% of the world's Christian population lived in countries where Christians are in the majority, while 13% of the world's Christian population lived in countries where Christians are in the minority. Christianity is the predominant religion in Europe, the Americas, Oceania, and Sub-Saharan Africa. There are also large Christian communities in other parts of the world, such as Central Asia, the Middle East and North Africa, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Indian subcontinent. In Asia, it is the dominant religion in Armenia, Cyprus, Georgia, East Timor, and the Philippines.[https://www.britannica.com/eb/table?tocId=9394911 Encyclopædia Britannica] table of religions, by region. Retrieved November 2007.  However, it is declining in some areas including the northern and western United States, some areas in Oceania (Australia and New Zealand), northern Europe (including Great Britain, Scandinavia and other places), France, Germany, Canada, and some parts of Asia (especially the Middle East, due to the Christian emigration,Barrett/Kurian.World Christian Encyclopedia, p. 139 (Britain), 281 (France), 299 (Germany). and Macau).

The total Christian population is not decreasing in Brazil and the southern United States, however, the percentage of the population identifying as Christian is in decline. Since the fall of communism, the proportion of Christians has been largely stable in Central Europe, except in the Czech Republic. On the other hand, Christianity is growing rapidly in both numbers and percentages in Eastern Europe, China, other Asian countries, Sub-Saharan Africa,The Next Christendom: The Rise of Global Christianity. New York: Oxford University Press. 2002. 270 pp. Latin America, North Africa (Maghreb), Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Muslim world, and Oceania.

Despite a decline in adherence in the Western worldWest, Christianity remains the dominant religion in the region, with about 70% of that population identifying as Christian. Christianity remains the largest religion in Western Europe, where 71% of Western Europeans identified themselves as Christian in 2018. A 2011 Pew Research Center survey found that 76% of Europeans, 73% in Oceania and about 86% in the Americas (90% in Latin America and 77% in North America) identified themselves as Christians. By 2020, 120 countries and territories in the world had Christianity by countryChristian majorities.

There are many charismatic movements that have become well established over large parts of the world, especially Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Since 1900, primarily due to conversion, Protestantism has spread rapidly in Africa, Asia, Oceania, and Latin America. From 1960 to 2000, the global growth of the number of reported Evangelical Protestants grew three times the world's population rate, and twice that of Islam. According to the historian Geoffrey Blainey from the University of Melbourne, since the 1960s there has been a substantial increase in the number of conversions from Islam to Christianity, mostly to the Evangelical and Pentecostal forms. Significant numbers of Muslim converts to Christianity can be found in Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Central Asia (including Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and other countries), Indonesia, Malaysia, the Middle East (including Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and other countries), North Africa (including Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia), Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Western World (including Albania, Belgium, France, Germany, Kosovo, the Netherlands, Russia, Scandinavia, United Kingdom, the United States, and other western countries). It is also reported that Christianity is popular among people of different backgrounds in Africa and Asia; according to a report by the Singapore Management University, more people in Southeast Asia are converting to Christianity, many of them young and having a university degree. According to scholar Juliette Koning and Heidi Dahles of  there is a "rapid expansion" of Christianity in Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Christianity in IndonesiaIndonesia, Christianity in MalaysiaMalaysia, and South Korea. According to scholar Terence Chong from the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, since the 1980s Christianity is expanding in China, Singapore, Indonesia, Christianity in JapanJapan, Malaysia, Taiwan, South Korea, and Vietnam.

In most countries in the developed world, church attendance among people who continue to identify themselves as Christians has been falling over the last few decades.Putnam, Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contemporary Society, p. 408. Some sources view this as part of a drift away from traditional membership institutions, while others link it to signs of a decline in belief in the importance of religion in general. Europe's Christian population, though in decline, still constitutes the largest geographical component of the religion. According to data from the 2012 European Social Survey, around a third of Christianity in EuropeEuropean Christians say they attend services once a month or more. Conversely, according to the World Values Survey, about more than two-thirds of Latin American Christians, and about 90% of Christianity in AfricaAfrican Christians (in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa and Zimbabwe) said they attended church regularly. According to a 2018 study by the Pew Research Center, Christians in Africa and Latin America and the United States have high levels of commitment to their faith.

Christian stateChristianity, in one form or another, is the sole state religion of the following nations: Argentina (Catholic), Costa Rica (Catholic), the Kingdom of Denmark (Lutheran), England (Anglican), Greece (Greek Orthodox), Iceland (Lutheran), Liechtenstein (Catholic), Malta (Catholic), Monaco (Catholic), Norway (Lutheran),[https://www.abcnyheter.no/nyheter/080410/losere-band-men-fortsatt-statskirke Løsere bånd, men fortsatt statskirke] , ABC Nyheter Samoa, Tonga (Methodist), Tuvalu (Reformed), and Vatican City (Catholic).

There are numerous other countries, such as Cyprus, which although do not have an established church, still give official recognition and support to a specific Christian denomination.

File:Christian World—Pew Research Center 2010.svg Catholic Church by countryCatholic
 48.6
 Protestantism by countryProtestant
 39.8
 Orthodox
 11.1
 Other
 0.5}}
Christianity can be taxonomically divided into three main groups: Catholic ChurchCatholicism, Protestantism, Eastern Orthodox ChurchEastern Orthodoxy while other groups include Oriental Orthodox ChurchesOriental Orthodoxy, Restorationism and Church of the East. A broader distinction that is sometimes drawn is between Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, which has its origins in the East–West Schism (Great Schism) of the 11th century. Recently, neither Western nor Eastern World Christianity has also stood out, for example, in African-initiated churches. However, there are other present and historical Christian groups that do not fit neatly into one of these primary categories.

There is a diversity of doctrines and Liturgyliturgical practices among groups calling themselves Christian. These groups may vary ecclesiologyecclesiologically in their views on a classification of Christian denominations.Sydney E. Ahlstrom, characterized denominationalism in America as "a virtual ecclesiology" that "first of all repudiates the insistences of the Catholic Church, the churches of the 'magisterial' Reformation, and of most sects that they alone are the true Church." ();
 ;
 Wendell Winkler, [https://www.thebible.net/introchurch/ch4.html Christ's Church is not a Denomination] ;
  The Nicene Creed (325), however, is typically accepted as authoritative by most Christians, including the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and major Protestant, such as Lutheran and Anglican denominations.

 Catholic Church 

, the leader of the Catholic Church since 2025]]
The Catholic Church consists of those particular Churches, headed by bishops, in communion with the pope, the bishop of Rome, as its highest authority in matters of faith, morality, and church governance.Second Vatican Council, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html Lumen Gentium] . Like Eastern Orthodoxy, the Catholic Church, through apostolic succession, traces its origins to the Christian community founded by Jesus Christ. Catholics maintain that the "Four Marks of the Churchone, holy, catholic, and apostolic church" founded by Jesus Subsistit insubsists fully in the Catholic Church, but also acknowledges other Christian churches and communitiesSecond Vatican Council, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html Lumen Gentium] , chapter 2, paragraph 15.Catechism of the Catholic Church, [https://www.vatican.va/archive/catechism/p123a9p3.htmIV paragraph 865].  and works towards ecumenismreconciliation among all Christians. The Catholic faith is detailed in the Catechism of the Catholic Church.

Of its Sacraments of the Catholic Churchseven sacraments, the Eucharist in the Catholic ChurchEucharist is the principal one, celebrated Catholic liturgyliturgically in the Mass in the Catholic ChurchMass. The church teaches that through ConsecrationEucharistconsecration by a Priesthood (Catholic Church)priest, the sacrificial Sacramental breadbread and Sacramental winewine Transubstantiationbecome the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Churchvenerated in the Catholic Church as Mother of God and Queen of Heaven, honoured in Mariology of the Catholic ChurchDogmatic teachingsdogmas and Marian devotionsdevotions. }} Its teaching includes Divine Mercy, sanctification through faith and evangelization of the Gospel as well as Catholic social teaching, which emphasizes voluntary support for the sick, the poor, and the afflicted through the Works of mercycorporal and spiritual works of mercy. The Catholic Church operates thousands of Catholic schools, Catholic higher educationuniversities, Catholic Church and health carehospitals, and orphanages around the world, and is the largest non-government provider of Catholic schooleducation and Healthcare and the Catholic Churchhealth care in the world. Among its other social services are numerous charitable and humanitarian organizations.

Canon law of the Catholic ChurchCanon law ()Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, pg. 771: "Jus canonicum" is the legal systemsystem of laws and canon lawlegal principles made and enforced by the Hierarchy of the Catholic Churchhierarchical authorities of the Catholic Church to regulate its external organisation and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the church.Della Rocca, Manual of Canon Law, p. 3. The canon law of the Latin Church was the first modern Western legal system, and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West.Edward N. Peters, [https://canonlaw.info/ CanonLaw.info Home Page], accessed 11 June 2013. while the distinctive traditions of Eastern Catholic canon law govern the 23 Eastern Catholic particular churches sui iuris.

As the world's oldest and largest continuously functioning international institution,Mark A. Noll. The New Shape of World Christianity (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2009), 191. it has played a prominent role in the history and development of Western cultureWestern civilization.Gerald O'CollinsO'Collins, p. v (preface). The 2,834 Episcopal seeseesAnnuario Pontificio (2012), p. 1142. are grouped into Sui iurisCatholic ecclesiastical use24 particular autonomous Churches (the largest of which being the Latin Church), each with its own distinct traditions regarding the liturgy and the administering of Sacraments of the Catholic Churchsacraments.Barry, One Faith, One Lord (2001), p. 71 With more than 1.1&nbsp;billion baptized members, the Catholic Church is the largest Christian Christian Churchchurch and represents 50.1% of all Christians as well as 16.7% of the world populationworld's population.Central Intelligence Agency, [https://web.archive.org/web/20260116020830/https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/world CIA World Factbook] (2007).Adherents.com, Zenit.org, "[https://www.zenit.org/article-18894?l=english Number of Catholics and Priests Rises] ", 12 February 2007. Catholics live all over the world through Catholic missionsmissions, diaspora, and Conversion to Christianityconversions.

 Eastern Orthodox Church 

 in Istanbul: It has been the seat of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople whose leader is regarded as the primus inter pares in the Eastern Orthodox Church.":4"> although ProtestantismProtestants collectively outnumber them, substantially. As one of the oldest surviving religious institutions in the world, the Eastern Orthodox Church has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern EuropeEastern and Southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, and the Near East. The majority of Eastern Orthodox Christians live mainly in Southeast EuropeSoutheast and Eastern Europe, Cyprus, Georgia (country)Georgia, and parts of the Caucasus region, Siberia, and the Russian Far East. Over half of Eastern Orthodox Christians follow the Russian Orthodox Church, while the vast majority live within Russia. There are also communities in the former Byzantine EmpireByzantine regions of Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean, and in the Middle East. Eastern Orthodox communities are also present in many other parts of the world, particularly North America, Western Europe, and Australia, formed through diaspora, Conversion to Christianityconversions, and missionary activity.

 Oriental Orthodox Churches 

 in Addis Ababa, the seat of the Ethiopian Orthodox; the largest of the Oriental Orthodox Churches]]
The Oriental Orthodox Churches (also called "Old Oriental" churches) are those eastern churches that recognize the first three ecumenical councils—First Council of NicaeaNicaea, First Council of ConstantinopleConstantinople, and First Council of EphesusEphesus—but reject the dogmatic definitions of the Council of Chalcedon and instead espouse a Miaphysite christology.

The Oriental Orthodox communion consists of six groups: Syriac Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox ChurchCoptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox, Eritrean Orthodox, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church (India), and Armenian Apostolic churches. These six churches, while being in communion with each other, are completely independent hierarchically. These churches are generally not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, with whom they are in dialogue for erecting a communion. Together, they have about 62 million members worldwide.

As some of the oldest religious institutions in the world, the Oriental Orthodox Churches have played a prominent role in the history and culture of Armenia, Egypt, Turkey, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Christian NubiaSudan, Iran, Azerbaijan, and parts of the Middle East and India. An Eastern Christian body of Autocephalyautocephalous Christian denominationchurches, its bishops are equal by virtue of episcopal ordination, and its doctrines can be summarized in that the churches recognize the validity of only the first three ecumenical councils.

Some followers of Oriental Orthodox Churches follow cultural practices that are reminiscent of Old Testament practices, like Religious restrictions on the consumption of porkabstaining from pork, circumcising male babies, and observing ritual purification.

 Church of the East 

, St. John the Arab, in the Assyrian tribesAssyrian village of AndacGeramon in Hakkari (historical region)Hakkari, southeastern Turkey.]]
The Church of the East, which was part of the Great Church, shared communion (Christian)communion with those in the Roman Empire until the Council of Ephesus Nestorian schismcondemned Nestorius in 431. Continuing as a dhimmi community under the Rashidun Caliphate after the Muslim conquest of Persia (633–654), the Church of the East played a major role in the history of Christianity in Asia. Between the 9th and 14th centuries, it represented the world's largest Christian denomination in terms of geographical extent. It established Dioceses of the Church of the East to 1318dioceses and communities stretching from the Mediterranean Sea and today's Iraq and Iran, to India (East Syriac ecclesiastical province)India (the Saint Thomas ChristiansSaint Thomas Syrian Christians of Kerala), the Christianity among the MongolsMongol kingdoms in Central Asia, and Church of the East in ChinaChina during the Tang dynasty (7th–9th centuries). In the 13th and 14th centuries, the church experienced a final period of expansion under the Mongol Empire, where influential Church of the East clergy sat in the Mongol court.

The Assyrian Church of the East, with an unbroken patriarchate established in the 17th century, is an independent Eastern Christian denomination which claims continuity from the Church of the East—in parallel to the Catholic patriarchate established in the 16th century that evolved into the Chaldean Catholic Church, an Eastern Catholic church in full communion with the Pope. It is an Eastern Christian Christian denominationchurch that follows the traditional christology and ecclesiology of the historical Church of the East. Largely Aniconism in Christianityaniconic and not in communion (Christianity)communion with any other church, it belongs to the eastern branch of Syriac Christianity, and uses the East Syriac Rite in its liturgy.
; an ancient Assyrian church located in the city of Urmia, Iran]]
Its main spoken language is Syriac languageSyriac, a dialect of Eastern Aramaic, and the majority of its adherents are ethnic Assyrian peopleAssyrians, mostly living in Iran, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, India (Chaldean Syrian Church), and in the Assyrian diaspora. It is officially headquartered in the city of Erbil in northern Iraqi Kurdistan, and its original area also spreads into south-eastern Turkey and north-western Iran, corresponding to ancient Assyria. Its hierarchy is composed of metropolitan bishops and diocesan bishops, while lower clergy consists of priests and deacons, who serve in dioceses (eparchies) and parishes throughout the Middle East, India, North America, Oceania, and Europe (including the Caucasus and Russia).

The Ancient Church of the East distinguished itself from the Assyrian Church of the East in 1964. It is one of the Assyrian peopleAssyrian churches that claim continuity with the historical Church of the East, one of the oldest Christian churches in Mesopotamia. It is officially headquartered in the city of Baghdad, Iraq. The majority of its adherents are ethnic Assyrian peopleAssyrians.

 Protestantism 

In 1521, the Edict of Worms condemned Martin Luther and officially banned citizens of the Holy Roman Empire from defending or propagating his ideas.Fahlbusch, Erwin, and Bromiley, Geoffrey William, The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 3. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 2003. p. 362. This split within the Roman Catholic church is now called the Reformation. Prominent Reformers included Martin Luther, Huldrych Zwingli, and John Calvin. The 1529 Protestation at Speyer against being excommunicated gave this party the name Protestantism. Luther's primary theological heirs are known as LutheranismLutherans. Zwingli and Calvin's heirs are far broader denominationally and are referred to as the CalvinismReformed tradition.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. pp. 251–259. The AnglicanismAnglican churches descended from the Church of England and organized in the Anglican Communion. Some Lutherans identify as Evangelical Catholics and some but not all Anglicans consider themselves both Protestant and Catholic.Sykes/Booty/Knight. The Study of Anglicanism, p. 219. Some Anglicans consider their church a Branch theorybranch of the "One Holy Catholic Church" alongside of the Catholic, Scandinavian Lutheran and Eastern Orthodox churches, a concept rejected by the Catholic Church, some Eastern Orthodox, and many evangelical Anglicans themselves, for more on this, see Gregory Hallam, [https://www.orthodoxresearchinstitute.org/articles/ecumenical/hallam_orthodoxy_ecumenism.htm Orthodoxy and Ecumenism].Gregory Mathewes-Green, "[https://www.westernorthodox.com/branch.html Whither the Branch Theory?]", Anglican Orthodox Pilgrim Vol. 2, No. 4.  Protestants have developed Protestant culturetheir own culture, with major contributions in education, the Merton thesishumanities and sciences, the political and social order, the Protestant work ethiceconomy and the arts, and many other fields.Karl Heussi, Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte, 11. Auflage (1956), Tübingen (Germany), pp. 317–319, 325–326.

Since the Anglican, Lutheran, and the Reformed branches of Protestantism originated for the most part in cooperation with the government, these movements are termed the "Magisterial Reformation". On the other hand, groups such as the AnabaptismAnabaptists, who often do not consider themselves to be Protestant, originated in the Radical Reformation, which though sometimes protected under Acts of Toleration, do not trace their history back to any state church. They are further distinguished by their rejection of infant baptism; they believe in baptism only of adult believers—credobaptism (Anabaptists include the Amish, Apostolic Christian ChurchApostolic, Bruderhof, Mennonites, Hutterites, River Brethren and Schwarzenau Brethren groups.)

The term Protestant also refers to any churches which formed later, with either the Magisterial or Radical traditions. In the 18th century, for example, Methodism grew out of Anglican minister John Wesley's Evangelical Revivalevangelical revival movement. Several Pentecostal and Nondenominational Christianitynon-denominational churches, which emphasize the cleansing power of the Holy Spirit in ChristianityHoly Spirit, in turn grew out of Methodism. Because Methodists, Pentecostals and other evangelicals stress "accepting Jesus as your personal Lord and Savior", which comes from Wesley's emphasis of the Born again (Christianity)New Birth, they often refer to themselves as being born again.

Protestantism is the second largest major group of Christians after Catholicism by number of followers, although the Eastern Orthodox Church is larger than any single Protestant denomination. Estimates vary, mainly over the question of which denominations to classify as Protestant. The total Protestant population has reached 1.17 billion in 2024, corresponding to nearly 44% of the world's Christians. The majority of Protestants are members of just a handful of denominational families, i.e. Adventism, Anabaptism (Amish, Apostolic Christian ChurchApostolic, Bruderhof CommunitiesBruderhof, Hutterites, Mennonites, River Brethren, and Schwarzenau Brethren), Anglicanism, Baptists, Lutheranism, Methodism, Moravian ChurchMoravianism/Hussites, Pentecostalism, Plymouth Brethren, QuakersQuakerism, CalvinismReformed Christianity (Congregational churchCongregationalists, Continental Reformed ProtestantismContinental Reformed, Reformed Anglicans, and PresbyterianismPresbyterians),This branch was first called Calvinism by LutheranismLutherans who opposed it, and many within the tradition would prefer to use the word Reformed. and WaldensiansWaldensianism are the main families of Protestantism. Nondenominational ChristianityNondenominational, Evangelicalismevangelical, Charismatic Movementcharismatic, Neo-charismatic churchesneo-charismatic, independent, and other churches are on the rise, and constitute a significant part of Protestant Christianity.[https://www.oikoumene.org/en/church-families/evangelical-churches World Council of Churches: Evangelical churches]: "Evangelical churches have grown exponentially in the second half of the 20th century and continue to show great vitality, especially in the global South. This resurgence may in part be explained by the phenomenal growth of Pentecostalism and the emergence of the charismatic movement, which are closely associated with evangelicalism. However, there can be no doubt that the evangelical tradition "per se" has become one of the major components of world Christianity. Evangelicals also constitute sizable minorities in the traditional Protestant and Anglican churches. In regions like Africa and Latin America, the boundaries between "evangelical" and "mainline" are rapidly changing and giving way to new ecclesial realities."

Some groups of individuals who hold basic Protestant tenets identify themselves as "Christians" or "born-again Christians". They typically distance themselves from the confessionalism (religion)confessionalism and creedalism of other Christian communitiesConfessionalism is a term employed by historians to refer to "the creation of fixed identities and systems of beliefs for separate churches which had previously been more fluid in their self-understanding, and which had not begun by seeking separate identities for themselves—they had wanted to be truly Catholic and reformed." (MacCulloch, The Reformation: A History, p. xxiv.) by calling themselves "Non-denominational Christianitynon-denominational" or "evangelical". Often founded by individual pastors, they have little affiliation with historic denominations.

 Restorationism 

 and Oliver Cowdery receiving the Aaronic priesthood (Latter Day Saints)Aaronic priesthood from John the Baptist. Latter Day Saint movementLatter Day Saints believe that the Christian priestPriesthood ceased to exist after the death of the apostles and therefore needed to be Restoration (Latter Day Saints)restored.]]
The Second Great Awakening, a period of religious revival that occurred in the United States during the early 1800s, saw the development of a number of unrelated churches. They generally saw themselves as Restorationismrestoring the original church of Jesus Christ rather than reforming one of the existing churches.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, pp. 91ff. A common belief held by Restorationists was that the other divisions of Christianity had introduced doctrinal defects into Christianity, which was known as the Great Apostasy. In Asia,  is a known Restorationist denomination that was established during the early 1900s. Other examples of Restorationist denominations include Catholic Apostolic ChurchIrvingianism and SwedenborgiansSwedenborgianism.

Some of the churches originating during this period are historically connected to early 19th-century camp meetings in the Midwest and upstate New York. One of the largest churches produced from the movement is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Total Church Membershipnewsroom.churchofjesuschrist.org3 November 2020}} American Millennialism and Adventism, which arose from Evangelical Protestantism, influenced the Jehovah's Witnesses movement and, as a reaction specifically to William Miller (preacher)William Miller, the Seventh-day Adventist ChurchSeventh-day Adventists. Others, including the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Evangelical Christian Church in Canada,Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People (2004)Melton's Encyclopedia of American Religions (2009) Churches of Christ, and the Christian churches and churches of Christ, have their roots in the contemporaneous Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement, which was centered in Kentucky and Tennessee. Other groups originating in this time period include the Christadelphians and the previously mentioned Latter Day Saints movement. While the churches originating in the Second Great Awakening have some superficial similarities, their doctrine and practices vary significantly.Manuscript History of the Church, LDS Church Archives, book A-1, p. 37; reproduced in Dean C. Jessee(comp.) (1989). The Papers of Joseph Smith: Autobiographical and Historical Writings(Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book) 1:302–303.

 Other 

 in Cluj-Napoca]]
Within Italy, Poland, Lithuania, Transylvania, Hungary, Romania, and the United Kingdom, UnitarianismUnitarian Churches emerged from the Reformed traditionReformed tradition in the 16th century;J. Gordon Melton, Encyclopedia of Protestantism, 2005, p. 543: "Unitarianism – The word unitarian [italics] means one who believes in the oneness of God; historically it refers to those in the Christian community who rejected the doctrine of the Trinity (one God expressed in three persons). Non-Trinitarian Protestant churches emerged in the 16th century in ITALY, POLAND, and TRANSYLVANIA." the Unitarian Church of Transylvania is an example of such a denomination that arose in this era. They adopted the Anabaptist doctrine of credobaptism.

Various smaller Independent Catholic communities, such as the Old Catholic Church, include the word Catholic (term)Catholic in their title, and arguably have more or less liturgical practices in common with the Catholic Church but are no longer in full communion with the Holy See.

Spiritual Christians, such as the Doukhobors and Molokans, broke from the Russian Orthodox Church and maintain close association with Mennonites and Quakers due to similar religious practices; all of these groups are furthermore collectively considered to be peace churches due to their belief in Christian pacifismpacifism.

Messianic Judaism (or the Messianic Movement) is the name of a Christian movement comprising a number of streams, whose members may consider themselves Jewish. The movement originated in the 1960s and 1970s, and it blends elements of religious Jewish practice with evangelical Christianity. Messianic Judaism affirms Christian creeds such as the messiahship and divinity of "Yeshua" (the Hebrew name of Jesus) and the Triune Nature of God, while also adhering to some Jewish dietary laws and customs.

Esoteric ChristianityEsoteric Christians, such as The Christian Community, regard Christianity as a Western esotericismmystery religionWestern Esotericism and the Science of Religion: Selected Papers Presented at the 17th Congress and profess the existence and possession of certain Western esotericismesoteric doctrines or practices,From the Greek ἐσωτερικός (esôterikos, "inner"). The term Western esotericismesotericism itself was coined in the 17th century. (Oxford English Dictionary Compact Edition, Volume 1, Oxford University Press, 1971, p. 894.)Wouter J. Hanegraaff, Antoine Faivre, Roelof van den Broek, Jean-Pierre Brach, Dictionary of Gnosis & Western Esotericism, Brill 2005. hidden from the public and accessible only to a narrow circle of "enlightened", "initiated", or highly educated people.

Nondenominational Christianity or non-denominational Christianity consists of Simple churchchurches which typically distance themselves from the confessionalism (religion)confessionalism or creedalism of other Christian communities by not formally aligning with a specific Christian denomination. Nondenominational Christianity first arose in the 18th century through the Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement, with followers organizing themselves as "Christians (Stone Movement)Christians" and "Disciples of Christ (Campbell Movement)Disciples of Christ", but many typically adhere to evangelical Christianity.

 Cultural influence 

The history of the Christendom spans about 1,700 years and includes a variety of socio-political developments, as well as advances in the Christian artarts, Architecture of cathedrals and great churchesarchitecture, Christian literatureliterature, Christianity and sciencescience, Christian philosophyphilosophy, and technology. Since the spread of Christianity from the Levant to Europe and North Africa during the early Roman Empire, Christendom has been divided in the pre-existing Greek East and Latin West. Consequently, different versions of the Christian cultures arose with their own rites and practices, centered around the cities of Rome (Western Christianity) and Archdiocese of CarthageCarthage, whose communities were called Western or Latin Christendom, and Constantinople (Eastern Christianity), Antioch (Syriac Christianity), Kerala (Saint Thomas ChristiansIndian Christianity) and Alexandria (Coptic Christianity), whose communities were called Eastern or Oriental Christendom.Encarta-encyclopedie Winkler Prins (1993–2002) s.v. "christendom. §&nbsp;1.3 Scheidingen". Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum.. The Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Eastern Christian civilization. From the 11th to 13th centuries, Latin Christendom rose to the central role of the Western world.

The Bible has had a profound influence on Western civilization and on cultures around the globe; it has contributed to the formation of Western law, Western artart, Western literaturetexts, and education. With a literary tradition spanning two millennia, the Bible is one of the most influential works ever written. From practices of Hygiene in Christianitypersonal hygiene to philosophy and ethics, the Bible has directly and indirectly influenced politics and law, war and peace, sexual morals, marriage and family life, toilet etiquette, letters and learning, the arts, economics, social justice, medical care and more.

Lists of ChristiansChristians have made a myriad of contributions to Progress (history)human progress in a broad and diverse range of fields, including philosophy, List of Christians in science and technologyscience and technology, Many well-known historical figures who influenced Western science considered themselves Christian such as Nicolaus Copernicus, Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, Isaac Newton, Robert Boyle, Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin and James Clerk Maxwell. Catholic Church and health caremedicine, List of Catholic Church artistsfine arts and architecture, Christianity and politicspolitics, List of Catholic authorsliteratures, Christian musicmusic,Suzel Ana Reily, Jonathan M. Dueck, The Oxford Handbook of Music and World Christianities, Oxford University Press, USA, 2016, p. 443 and business. According to 100 Years of Nobel Prizes a review of the Nobel Prizes award between 1901 and 2000 reveals that (65.4%) of Nobel Prizes Laureates, List of Christian Nobel laureateshave identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference.Baruch A. Shalev, 100 Years of Nobel Prizes (2003), Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, p. 57: between 1901 and 2000 reveals that 654 Laureates belong to 28 different religions. Most (65.4%) have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference. 

Outside the Western world, Christianity has had an influence on various cultures, such as in Africa, the Near East, Middle East, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Indian subcontinent. List of Christian scientists and scholars of the medieval Islamic worldEastern Christian scientists and scholars of the medieval Islamic world (particularly Syriac Orthodox ChurchJacobite and NestorianismNestorian Christians) contributed to the Islamic Golden AgeIslamic civilization during the reign of the UmayyadUmayyads and the Abbasids, by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac languageSyriac and afterwards, to Arabic languageArabic.Hill, Donald. Islamic Science and Engineering. 1993. Edinburgh Univ. Press. , p. 4 They also excelled in philosophy, science, theology, and medicine.Rémi Brague, [https://www.christiansofiraq.com/assyriancontributionstotheislamiccivilization.htm Assyrians contributions to the Islamic civilization] Britannica, [https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/409819/Nestorian Nestorian] Scholars and intellectuals agree Christians in the Middle East have made significant contributions to Islamic civilization since the introduction of Islam, and they have had a significant impact contributing the culture of the Mashriq, Turkey, and Iran.

 Influence on Western culture 

, an Italian Dominican OrderDominican friar and Catholic priestpriest, the foremost ScholasticismScholastic thinker, as well as one of the most influential philosophers and theologians in the Western tradition.]]

Western culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, and a large portion of the population of the Western Hemisphere can be described as practicing or nominal Christians. The notion of "Europe" and the "Western World" has been intimately connected with the concept of "Christianity and Christendom". Many historians even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.

Though Western culture contained several polytheistic religions during its early years under the Ancient GreeceGreek and Roman Empires, as the centralized Roman power waned, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in Western Europe. Until the Age of Enlightenment, Christian culture guided the course of philosophy, literature, art, music and science. Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy, Christian art, Christian music, Christian literature, and so on.

Christianity has had a significant impact on education, as the church created the bases of the Western system of education, and was the sponsor of Medieval universityfounding universities in the Western world, as the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the History of ChristianityMedieval Christian setting. Historically, Christianity has often been a patron of science and medicine; many List of Catholic cleric-scientistsCatholic clergy, List of Jesuit scientistsJesuits in particular, have been active in the sciences throughout history and have made significant contributions to the Christianity and sciencedevelopment of science. Some scholars state that Christianity contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution. Protestantism also has had an important influence on science. According to the Merton Thesis, there was a positive correlation between the rise of English Puritanism and German Pietism on the one hand, and early experimental science on the other. [https://books.google.com/books?id=2iieLX7nrEAC&dq=Merton+thesis&pg=PA320 Google Print, pp.&nbsp;320–321] [https://books.google.com/books?id=weOOCfiDhDcC&dq=Merton+thesis&pg=PA125 Google Print, p.125]
The civilizing influence of Christianity includes social welfare, contribution to the medical and health care, }} founding hospitals, economics (as the Protestant work ethic), architecture, literature,Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: "Charting the 'Rise of the West': Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (2009), pp.&nbsp;409–445 (416, table 1) Hygiene in Christianitypersonal hygiene (Ablution in Christianityablution),Christianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene:
 
 
 
 
Christianity's role in the development and promotion of spas:
 
Contribution of the Christian missionaries of better health care of the people through hygiene and introducing and distributing the soaps:
 
  and family life. Historically, Extended familyextended families were the basic family unit in the Christian culture and Christian countriescountries.

Cultural Christians are secular people with a Christian heritage who may not believe in the religious claims of Christianity, but who retain an affinity for the popular culture, art, Christian musicmusic, and so on related to the religion.James D. Mallory, Stanley C. Baldwin, The kink and I: a psychiatrist's guide to untwisted living, 1973, [https://books.google.com/books?id=ahEG4X5pSXIC&q=%22cultural+Christian%22+-%22multi-cultural+Christian%22+-%22cross-cultural+Christian%22 p. 64]

Postchristianity is a term for the decline of Christianity, particularly in Christianity in EuropeEurope, Religion in CanadaCanada, Christianity in AustraliaAustralia, and to a minor degree the Southern Cone, in the 20th and 21st centuries, considered in terms of postmodernism. It refers to the loss of Christianity's monopoly on values and world view in historically Christian societies.G.C. Oosthuizen. Postchristianity in Africa. C Hurst & Co Publishers Ltd (1968). 

Christian leaders and congregations have had an influence on the broader environmental movement. Christian teachings relate to ecology, and draw on teachings of the Bible to promote the moral responsibility of humans to care for God's creation. Christianity acknowledges the tension between humanity's duty to care for God's creation and the natural human inclination to resist God's will.Gottlieb, R.S., & Gottlieb, R.S. (2003). This Sacred Earth: Religion, Nature, Environment (2nd ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203426982 In recent decades, major Christian denominations have revisited their teachings and practices in response to the environmental crisis. There has been a rise in activity in Christian congregations to curb climate change, partly inspired by the advocacy of Pope Francis following his publication of the encyclical letter Laudato Si'—On Care for Our Common Home. Organizations such as Green Christian,"[http://greenchristian.org.uk/ Promoting Prayer, Hope and Action]." Green Christian. Accessed 27 Jan. 2025. Laudato Si' Movement,[http://laudatosimovement.org/ "Laudato Si’ Movement, Catholics for Our Common Home] ." Laudato Si’ Movement, Accessed 6 Jan. 2025. and the Interfaith Center for Sustainable Development"[http://interfaithsustain.com/christian-ecology/ Christian Ecology]." The Interfaith Center for Sustainable Development, 24 May 2024. are a few examples of groups working in the Christian and ecology movement. These initiatives reflect how Christians, alongside other people of faith, are increasingly embracing ecological concerns, recognizing that the protection of the Earth is a spiritual imperative tied to faith and justice.

 Ecumenism 

 of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Winona and Bishop Steven Delzer of List of ELCA synodsEvangelical Lutheran Southeastern Minnesota Synod leading a Reformation Day service (2017)"McManners581">McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, pp. 581–584. One way was greater cooperation between groups, such as the World Evangelical Alliance founded in 1846 in London or the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of Protestants in 1910, the Justice, Peace and Creation Commission of the World Council of Churches founded in 1948 by Protestant and Orthodox churches, and similar national councils like the National Council of Churches in Australia, which includes Catholics.

The other way was an institutional union with United and uniting churchesunited churches, a practice that can be traced back to unions between Lutherans and Calvinists in early 19th-century Germany. Congregationalist, Methodist, and Presbyterian churches united in 1925 to form the United Church of Canada,McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. pp. 413ff. and in 1977 to form the Uniting Church in Australia. The Church of South India was formed in 1947 by the union of Anglican, Baptist, Methodist, Congregationalist, and Presbyterian churches.McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 498.

The Christian Flag is an ecumenical flag designed in the early 20th century to represent all of Christianity and Christendom. Substantial agreement between various Christian denominations, especially those of Catholicism and Protestantism, has led to a unified presentation of the Christian religion in The Common Catechism.

The ecumenical, Christian monasticismmonastic Taizé Community is notable for being composed of more than one hundred monkbrothers from Protestant and Catholic traditions. The community emphasizes the reconciliation of all denominations and its main church, located in Taizé, Saône-et-Loire, France, is named the "Church of Reconciliation". The community is internationally known, attracting over 100,000 young Christian pilgrimagepilgrims annually.Oxford, "Encyclopedia of Christianity, p. 307.

Steps towards reconciliation on a global level were taken in 1965 by the Catholic and Orthodox churches, mutually revoking the excommunications that marked their East-West SchismGreat Schism in 1054;McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 373. the Anglican Catholic International Commission (ARCIC) working towards full communion between those churches since 1970;McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 583. and the Lutheran World Federation and the Catholic Church signing the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification in 1999 to address conflicts at the root of the Protestant Reformation. In 2006, the World Methodist Council, representing all Methodist denominations, adopted the declaration.

 Criticism, persecution, and apologetics 

 Criticism 

 in the place he was executed in Rome]]
Criticism of Christianity and Christians goes back to the Apostolic Age, with the New Testament recording friction between the followers of Jesus and the Pharisees and scribes (e.g.,  and ).International Standard Bible Encyclopedia: E-J by Geoffrey W. Bromiley 1982  p. 175 In the 2nd century, Christianity was criticized by the Jews on various grounds, e.g., that the prophecies of the Hebrew Bible could not have been fulfilled by Jesus, given that he did not have a successful life.Jews and Christians: The Parting of the Ways, A.D. 70 to 135 by James D.G. Dunn 1999  pp.&nbsp;112–113 Additionally, a sacrifice to remove sins in advance, for everyone or as a human being, did not fit the Jewish sacrifice ritual; furthermore, God in Judaism is said to judge people on their deeds instead of their beliefs.Asher Norman Twenty-six Reasons why Jews Don't Believe in Jesus Feldheim Publishers 2007  p. 11Keith Akers The Lost Religion of Jesus: Simple Living and Nonviolence in Early Christianity. Lantern Books 2000  p. 103 One of the first comprehensive attacks on Christianity came from the Greek philosopher Celsus, who wrote The True Word, a polemic criticizing Christians as being unprofitable members of society. In response, the church father Origen published his treatise Contra Celsum, or Against Celsus, a seminal work of Christian apologetics, which systematically addressed Celsus's criticisms and helped bring Christianity a level of academic respectability.

By the 3rd century, criticism of Christianity had mounted. Wild rumors about Christians were widely circulated, claiming that they were atheismatheists and that, as part of their rituals, they devoured human infants and engaged in incestuous orgies. The NeoplatonismNeoplatonist philosopher Porphyry (philosopher)Porphyry wrote the fifteen-volume Adversus Christianos as a comprehensive attack on Christianity, in part building on the teachings of Plotinus.The Encyclopedia of Christian Literature, Volume 1 by George Thomas Kurian and James Smith 2010  p. 527Apologetic Discourse and the Scribal Tradition by Wayne Campbell Kannaday 2005  pp.&nbsp;32–33

By the 12th century, the Mishneh Torah (i.e., Rabbi Moses Maimonides) was criticizing Christianity on the grounds of idol worship, in that Christians attributed divinity to Jesus, who had a physical body.A Dictionary of Jewish-Christian Relations by Edward Kessler, Neil Wenborn 2005  p. 168 In the 19th century, Nietzsche began to write a series of polemics on the "unnatural" teachings of Christianity (e.g. sexual abstinence), and continued his criticism of Christianity to the end of his life.The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche by Bernd Magnus, Kathleen Marie Higgins 1996  pp.&nbsp;90–93 In the 20th century, the philosopher Bertrand Russell expressed his criticism of Christianity in Why I Am Not a Christian, formulating his rejection of Christianity.Russell on Religion: Selections from the Writings of Bertrand Russell by Bertrand Russell, Stefan Andersson and Louis Greenspan 1999  pp.&nbsp;77–87

Criticism of Christianity continues to date, e.g. Jewish and Muslim theologians criticize the doctrine of the Trinity held by most Christians, stating that this doctrine in effect assumes that there are three gods, running against the basic tenet of monotheism.Christianity: An Introduction by Alister E. McGrath 2006  pp.&nbsp;125–126. New Testament scholar Robert M. Price has outlined the possibility that some Bible stories are based partly on myth in The Christ Myth Theory and its problems." The Christ Myth Theory and its Problems ", published 2011 by American Atheist Press, Cranford, NJ, 

 Persecution 

, . Many Christians were persecuted and killed during the Armenian genocide, Greek genocide, and Assyrian genocide.]]

Christians are one of the most Persecution of Christianspersecuted religious groups in the world, especially in the Christianity in the Middle EastMiddle-East, North Africa and South and East Asia.[https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-48146305 "Christian persecution 'at near genocide levels'".] BBC News. 3 May 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. In 2017, Open Doors estimated approximately 260 million Christians are subjected annually to "high, very high, or extreme persecution" with North Korea considered the most hazardous nation for Christians.[https://www.forbes.com/sites/oliviaenos/2017/01/25/north-korea-is-the-worlds-worst-persecutor-of-christians/36250678318e Enos, Olivia. "North Korea is the world's worst persecutor of Christians".] Forbes. 25 January 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2019. In 2019, a report[https://christianpersecutionreview.org.uk/storage/2019/05/interim-report.pdf Mounstephen, Philip. "Interim report".] Bishop of Truro's Independent Review for the Foreign Secretary of FCO Support for Persecuted Christians. April 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. commissioned by the United Kingdom's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth AffairsSecretary of State of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) to investigate global persecution of Christians found persecution has increased, and is highest in the Middle East, North Africa, India, China, North Korea, and Latin America, among others, and that it is global and not limited to Islamic states.[https://christianpersecutionreview.org.uk/storage/2019/07/final-report-and-recommendations.pdf Mounstephen, Philip. "Final Report and Recommendations".] Philip MounstephenBishop of Truro's Independent Review for the Foreign Secretary of FCO Support for Persecuted Christians. July 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. This investigation found that approximately 80% of persecuted believers worldwide are Christians.

 Apologetics 

'' by Thomas Aquinas]]

Christian apologetics aims to present a reasonrational basis for Christianity. The word "apologetic" (Greek: ἀπολογητικός apologētikos) comes from the Greek verb ἀπολογέομαι apologeomai, meaning "(I) speak in defense of"., . Christian apologetics has taken many forms over the centuries, starting with Paul the Apostle. The philosopher Thomas Aquinas presented five arguments for God's existence in the Summa Theologica, while his Summa contra Gentiles was a major apologetic work. Another famous apologist, G. K. Chesterton, wrote in the early twentieth century about the benefits of religion and, specifically, Christianity. Famous for his use of paradox, Chesterton explained that while Christianity had the most mysteries, it was the most practical religion. He pointed to the Role of the Christian Church in civilizationadvance of Christian civilizations as proof of its practicality. The physicist and priest John Polkinghorne, in his Questions of Truth, discusses the subject of religion and science, a topic that other Christian apologists such as Ravi Zacharias, John Lennox, and William Lane Craig have engaged, with the latter two men opining that the Religious interpretations of the Big Bang theoryinflationary Big Bang model is evidence for the existence of God. Creationist apologetics are apologetics that aim to defend creationism.

 See also 

 Outline of Christianity
 Christian atheism
 Christians of Saint John
 Christianity and Islam
 Christianity and Judaism
 Christianity and politics
 Christian mythology
 Christianisation
 One true church
 Prophets in Christianity
 Christian ethics

 Notes 

}}
}}

 References 

 Bibliography 

 Greg BahnsenBahnsen, Greg. [https://www.cmfnow.com/articles/pt173.htm A Reformed Confession Regarding Hermeneutics (article 6)] .
 Ball, Bryan; Johnsson, William (ed.). The Essential Jesus. Pacific Press (2002). .
 Barrett, David; Kurian, Tom and others. (ed.). World Christian Encyclopedia. Oxford University Press (2001).
 Barry, John F. One Faith, One Lord: A Study of Basic Catholic Belief. William H. Sadlier (2001). 
 Benton, John. Is Christianity True? Darlington, Eng.: Evangelical Press (1988). 
 Bettenson, Henry (ed.). Documents of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press (1943).
 
 
 
 
 Chambers, Mortimer; Crew, Herlihy, Rabb, Woloch. The Western Experience. Volume II: The Early Modern Period. Alfred A. Knopf (1974). .
 Coffey, John. Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England 1558–1689. Pearson Education (2000).
 Cross, F. L.; Livingstone, E. A. (ed.). The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press (1997). .
 Deppermann, Klaus. Melchior Hoffman: Social Unrest and Apocalyptic Vision in the Age of Reformation. .
 Dilasser, Maurice. The Symbols of the Church. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press (1999). 
 Duffy, Eamon. Saints and Sinners, a History of the Popes. Yale University Press (1997). 
 
 Esler, Philip F. (2004). The Early Christian World. Routledge.
 Farrar, F. W. [https://www.tentmaker.org/books/mercyandjudgment/mercy_and_judgment_ch1.html Mercy and Judgment. A Few Last Words On Christian Eschatology With Reference to Dr. Pusey's, "What Is Of Faith?"]. Macmillan, London/New York (1904).
 Ferguson, Sinclair; Wright, David, eds. New Dictionary of Theology. consulting ed. Packer, James. Leicester: Inter-Varsity Press (1988). 
 Foutz, Scott. .
 Fowler, Jeaneane D. World Religions: An Introduction for Students, Sussex Academic Press (1997). .
 Reginald H. FullerFuller, Reginald H. The Foundations of New Testament Christology Scribners (1965). .
 Froehle, Bryan; Gautier, Mary, Global Catholicism, Portrait of a World Church, Orbis books; Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate, Georgetown University (2003) 
 Funk, Robert. The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?. Polebridge Press (1998). .
 Glenny, W. Edward. Typology: A Summary of the Present Evangelical Discussion.
 
 Hanegraaff, Hank. Resurrection: The Capstone in the Arch of Christianity. Thomas Nelson (2000). .
 Harnack, Adolf von. [https://www.ccel.org/ccel/harnack/dogma1.ii.iii.iii.html History of Dogma] (1894).
 Hickman, Hoyt L. and others. Handbook of the Christian Year. Abingdon Press (1986). 
 Hitchcock, Susan Tyler. Geography of Religion. National Geographic Society (2004) 
 Kelly, J. N. D. Early Christian Doctrines.
 Kelly, J. N. D. The Athanasian Creed. Harper & Row, New York (1964).
 Kirsch, Jonathan. God Against the Gods.
 Kreeft, Peter. Catholic Christianity. Ignatius Press (2001) 
 Letham, Robert. The Holy Trinity in Scripture, History, Theology, and Worship. P & R Publishing (2005). .
 
 Lorenzen, Thorwald. Resurrection, Discipleship, Justice: Affirming the Resurrection Jesus Christ Today. Smyth & Helwys (2003). .
 Diarmaid MacCullochMacCulloch, Diarmaid, The Reformation: A History. Viking Adult (2004).
 MacCulloch, Diarmaid, A History of Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years. London, Allen Lane. 2009. 
 Marber, Peter. Money Changes Everything: How Global Prosperity Is Reshaping Our Needs, Values and Lifestyles. FT Press (2003). 
 Marthaler, Berard. Introducing the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Traditional Themes and Contemporary Issues. Paulist Press (1994). 
 Mathison, Keith. The Shape of Sola Scriptura (2001).
 McClintock, John, Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature. Harper & Brothers, original from Harvard University (1889)
 McLaughlin, R. Emmet, Caspar Schwenckfeld, reluctant radical: his life to 1540, New Haven: Yale University Press (1986). .
 John McMannersMcManners, John. Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. Oxford University Press (1990). .
 Metzger, Bruce M., Michael Coogan (ed.). Oxford Companion to the Bible. Oxford University Press (1993). .
 .
 Norman, Edward. The Roman Catholic Church, An Illustrated History. University of California (2007) 
 Olson, Roger E., The Mosaic of Christian Belief. InterVarsity Press (2002). .
 Orlandis, Jose, A Short History of the Catholic Church. Scepter Publishers (1993) 
 Otten, Herman J. Baal or God? Liberalism or Christianity, Fantasy vs. Truth: Beliefs and Practices of the Churches of the World Today.... Second ed. New Haven, Mo.: Lutheran News, 1988.
 Pelikan, Jaroslav; Hotchkiss, Valerie (ed.) Creeds and Confessions of Faith in the Christian Tradition. Yale University Press (2003). .
 Putnam, Robert D. Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contemporary Society. Oxford University Press (2002).
 
 
 Riley-Smith, Jonathan. The Oxford History of the Crusades. New York: Oxford University Press, (1999).
 Schama, Simon. A History of Britain. Hyperion (2000). .
 Servetus, Michael. Restoration of Christianity. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press (2007).
 Simon, Edith. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. Time-Life Books (1966). .
 Spitz, Lewis. The Protestant Reformation. Concordia Publishing House (2003). .
 Charles SpurgeonSpurgeon, Charles. ''''.
 Sykes, Stephen; Booty, John; Knight, Jonathan. The Study of Anglicanism. Augsburg Fortress Publishers (1998). .
 Talbott, Thomas. '''' (1995).
 Ustorf, Werner. "A missiological postscript", in: McLeod, Hugh; Ustorf, Werner (ed.). The Decline of Christendom in Western Europe, 1750–2000. Cambridge University Press (2003).
 Walsh, Chad. Campus Gods on Trial. Rev. and enl. ed. New York: Macmillan, 1962, t.p.&nbsp;1964. xiv, [4], 154 p.
 
 
 

 Further reading 

 
 
 
 MacCulloch, Diarmaid. Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years (Viking; 2010) 1,161 pp.; survey by leading historian
 
 
 
 
 Roper, J.C., Bp. (1923), et al.. Faith in God, in series, Layman's Library of Practical Religion, Church of England in Canada, vol. 2. Toronto, Ont.: Musson Book Co. N.B.: The series statement is given in the more extended form which appears on the book's front cover.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garry WillsWills, Garry, "A Wild and Indecent Book" (review of David Bentley Hart, The New Testament: A Translation, Yale University Press, 577 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXV, no. 2 (8 February 2018), pp.&nbsp;34–35. Discusses some pitfalls in interpreting and translating the New Testament.

 External links 

 [https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/115240/Christianity "Christianity"]. Encyclopædia Britannica
 [https://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/index.shtml Religion & Ethics – Christianity] A number of introductory articles on Christianity from the BBC