'']]

]]

In poetry, an epic is a lengthy narrative poem typically about the extraordinary deeds of extraordinary characters who, in dealings with gods or other superhuman strengthsuperhuman forces, gave shape to the mortal universe for their descendants. With regard to oral tradition, epic poems consist of formal speech and are usually learnt word for word, contrasted with narratives that consist of colloquialismeveryday speech, categorised into factual or fiction, the former of which is less susceptible to variation.

Influential epics that have shaped Western literature and Western cultureculture include Homer's Iliad and Odyssey; Virgil's Aeneid; and the anonymous Beowulf. The genre has inspired the adjective wikt:epicepic as well as Epic (genre)derivative works in other mediums (such as epic films) that evoke or emulate the characteristics of epics.

 Etymology 

The English word epic comes from Latin , which itself comes from the Ancient Greek adjective  (), from  (),
'word, story, poem'.

In Ancient Greek, 'epic' could refer to all poetry in dactylic hexameter (), which included not only Homer but also the wisdom poetry of Hesiod, the utterances of the Delphic oracle, and the strange theological verses attributed to Orpheus. Later tradition, however, has restricted the term 'epic' to heroic epic, as described in this article.

 Overview 

'' by Elias Lönnrot]]

Originating before the invention of writing, primary epics, such as those of Homer, were composed by bards who used complex rhetorical and metrical schemes by which they could memorize the epic as received in tradition and add to the epic in their performances. Later writers like Virgil, Apollonius of Rhodes, Dante AlighieriDante, Luís de CamõesCamões, and John MiltonMilton adopted and adapted Homer's Parallels between Virgil's Aeneid and Homer's Iliad and Odysseystyle and subject matter, but used devices available only to those who write.

The oldest epic recognized is the Epic of Gilgamesh (), which was recorded in ancient Sumer during the Neo-Sumerian Empire. The poem details the exploits of Gilgamesh, the king of Uruk. Although recognized as a historical figure, Gilgamesh, as represented in the epic, is a largely legendary or mythical figure.

The longest written epic from antiquity is the ancient Indian Mahabharata (–3rd century AD),Austin, [https://books.google.com/books?id=4jCoDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA21 p. 21] . which consists of 100,000 ślokas or over 200,000 verse lines (each shloka is a couplet), as well as long prose passages, so that at ~1.8 million words it is roughly twice the length of Shahnameh, four times the length of the Rāmāyaṇa, and roughly ten times the length of the Iliad and the Odyssey combined.

Famous examples of epic poetry include the Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh, the ancient Indian Mahabharata and Rāmāyaṇa in Sanskrit and Silappatikaram and Manimekalai in Tamil, the Persian Shahnameh, the Ancient Greek Odyssey and Iliad, Virgil's Aeneid, the Old English Beowulf, Dante AlighieriDante's Divine Comedy, the Finnish Kalevala, the German , the French Song of Roland, the Spanish Cantar de mio Cid, the Portuguese Os Lusíadas, the Armenian Daredevils of Sassoun, the Old East Slavic The Tale of Igor's Campaign, John Milton's Paradise Lost, The Secret History of the Mongols, the Kyrgyz Epic of ManasManas, and the Malian Epic of SundiataSundiata. Epic poems of the modern era include Derek Walcott's Omeros, Mircea Cărtărescu's The Levant (poem)The Levant and Adam Mickiewicz's Pan Tadeusz. Paterson (poem)Paterson by William Carlos Williams, published in five volumes from 1946 to 1958, was inspired in part by another modern epic, The Cantos by Ezra Pound.

 Oral epics 

The first epics were products of literacypreliterate societies and oral history poetic traditions. Oral tradition was used alongside written scriptures to communicate and facilitate the spread of culture.
In these traditions, poetry is transmitted to the audience and from performer to performer by purely oral means. Early 20th-century study of living oral epic traditions in the Balkans by Milman Parry and Albert Lord demonstrated the Parataxisparatactic model used for composing these poems. What they demonstrated was that oral epics tend to be constructed in short episodes, each of equal status, interest and importance. This facilitates memorization, as the poet is recalling each episode in turn and using the completed episodes to recreate the entire epic as he performs it. Parry and Lord also contend that the most likely source for written texts of the epics of Homer was dictation from an oral performance.

Milman Parry and Albert Lord have argued that the Homeric epics, the earliest works of Western literature, were fundamentally an oral poetic form. These works form the basis of the epic genre in Western literature. Nearly all of Western epic (including Virgil's Aeneid and Dante's Divine Comedy) self-consciously presents itself as a continuation of the tradition begun by these poems.

 Composition and conventions 

In his work Poetics (Aristotle)Poetics, Aristotle defines an epic as one of the forms of poetry, contrasted with lyric poetry and drama (in the form of tragedy and comedy).Aristotle: Poetics, translated with an introduction and notes by Malcolm Heath, (Penguin) London 1996.
Of their constituent parts some are common to both, some peculiar to Tragedy: whoever, therefore knows what is good or bad Tragedy, knows also about Epic poetry. All the elements of an Epic poem are found in Tragedy, but the elements of a Tragedy are not all found in the Epic poem.Aristotle, Poetics Part V}}

Harmon & Holman (1999) define an epic:

Harmon and Holman delineate ten main characteristics of an epic:
 Begins in medias res ("in the thick of things").
 The setting is vast, covering many nations, the world or the universe.
 Begins with an invocation to a muse (epic invocation).
 Begins with a statement of the theme.
 Includes the use of epithets.
 Contains long lists, called an epic catalogue.
 Features long and formal speeches.
 Shows divine intervention in human affairs.
 Features heroes that embody the values of the civilization.
 Often features the tragic hero's descent into the underworld or hell.

The hero generally participates in a cyclical journey or quest, faces adversaries that try to defeat them in their journey, and returns home significantly transformed by their journey. The epic hero illustrates traits, performs deeds, and exemplifies certain morals that are valued by the society the epic originates from. Many epic heroes are recurring characters in the legends of their native cultures.

 Conventions of the Indian Epic 

In the Indian mahākāvya epic genre, more emphasis was laid on description than on narration. Indeed, the traditional characteristics of a mahākāvya are listed as: , 
,  , 
,  ; 
,  , 
  
}}
 Kāvyādarśa of : Sanskrit text and English translation
 Kāvyādarśa
 1.15–19
 S.K. Belvalkar
 Poona
}}
}}
 It must take its subject matter from the epics (Ramayana or Mahabharata), or from history,
 It must help further the four goals of man (purusharthas),
 It must contain descriptions of cities, seas, mountains, moonrise and sunrise, and accounts of merrymaking in gardens, of bathing parties, drinking bouts, and love-making.
 It should tell the sorrow of separated lovers and should describe a wedding and the birth of a son.
 It should describe a king's council, an embassy, the marching forth of an army, a battle, and the victory of a hero.

 Themes 

Classical epic poetry recounts a journey, either physical (as typified by Odysseus in the Odyssey) or mental (as typified by Achilles in the Iliad) or both. Epics also tend to highlight cultural norms and to define or call into question cultural values, particularly as they pertain to heroism.

 Conventions 

 Proem 

In the proem or preface, the poet may begin by invoking a Muse or similar divinity. The poet prays to the Muses to provide them with divine inspiration to tell the story of a great hero.

Example opening lines with invocations:
Kramer-1963>
instead, Sumerian poems derived their rhythm solely through constant Repetition (rhetorical device)repetition and parallelism (rhetoric)parallelism, with subtle variations between lines.
Indo-European languagesIndo-European epic poetry, by contrast, usually places strong emphasis on the importance of line consistency and poetic meter. Ancient Greek epics were composed in dactylic hexameter.
Very early Latin epicists, such Livius Andronicus and Gnaeus Naevius, used Saturnian (poetry)Saturnian meter. By the time of Ennius, however, Latin poets had adopted dactylic hexameter.

Dactylic hexameter has been adapted by a few anglophone poets such as Longfellow in "Evangeline", whose first line is as follows:

This is the 
Translation by Edward Fairfax}}

From the 14th century English epic poems were written in heroic couplets,
and rhyme royal,
though in the 16th century the Spenserian stanza
and blank verse
were also introduced. The French alexandrine is currently the heroic line in French literature, though in earlier literature – such as the chanson de geste – the decasyllable grouped in laisses took precedence. In Polish literature, couplets of Polish alexandrines (syllabic lines of 7+6 syllables) prevail.
In Russian, iambic tetrameter verse is the most popular.
In Serbian poetry, the decasyllable is the only form employed.

Baltic FinnsBalto-Finnic (e.g. Estonian, Finnish, Karelian) folk poetry uses a form of trochaic tetrameter that has been called the Kalevala meter. The Finnish and Estonian national epics, Kalevala and Kalevipoeg, are both written in this meter. The meter is thought to have originated during the Finnic languagesProto-Finnic period.

In Indic epics such as the Ramayana and Mahabharata, the shloka form is used.

 Genres and related forms 

The primary form of epic, especially as discussed in this article, is the heroic epic, including such works as the Iliad and Mahabharata. Ancient sources also recognized didactic poetrydidactic epic as a category, represented by such works as Hesiod's Works and Days and Lucretius's De rerum natura.

A related type of poetry is the epyllion (plural: epyllia), a brief narrative poem with a Romance (love)romantic or Mythologymythological Theme (literature)theme. The term, which means "little :wikt:epicepic", came into use in the nineteenth century. It refers primarily to the erudite, shorter hexameter poems of the Hellenistic poetryHellenistic period and the similar works composed at Rome from the age of the neoterics; to a lesser degree, the term includes some poems of the English Renaissance, particularly those influenced by Ovid. The most famous example of Classical antiquityclassical epyllion is perhaps Catullus 64.

Epyllion is to be understood as distinct from mock epic, another light form.

Romantic epic is a term used to designate works such as Morgante, Orlando Innamorato, Orlando Furioso and Gerusalemme Liberata, which freely lift characters, themes, plots and narrative devices from the world of prose chivalric romance.

Non-European forms

Long poetic narratives that do not fit the traditional European definition of the heroic epic are sometimes known as folk epics. Indian folk epics have been investigated by Lauri Honko (1998), Brenda Beck (1982) The Online Books Page https://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/webbin/book//lookupid?key=olbp74886 2022-11-01 onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu}} and John Smith, amongst others. Folk epics are an important part of community identities.

Egypt

The folk genre known as al-sira relates the saga of the Hilālī tribe and their migrations across the Middle East and north Africa, see Bridget Connelly (1986).

 India

In India, folk epics reflect the caste system of Indian society and the life of the lower levels of society, such as cobblers and shepherds, see C.N. Ramachandran, "Ambivalence and Angst: A Note on Indian folk epics," in Lauri Honko (2002. p.&nbsp;295). Some Indian oral epics feature strong women who actively pursue personal freedom in their choice of a romantic partner (Stuart, Claus, Flueckiger and Wadley, eds, 1989, p.&nbsp;5). WorldCat.org https://www.worldcat.org/title/18070481 2022-11-01 www.worldcat.org en}}

 Japan 

Japanese traditional performed narratives were sung by blind singers. One of the most famous, The Tale of the Heike, deals with historical wars and had a ritual function to placate the souls of the dead (Tokita 2015, p.&nbsp;7).

Africa

A variety of epic forms are found in Africa. Some have a linear, unified style while others have a more cyclical, episodic style (Barber 2007, p.&nbsp;50). The best known of African epics is Epic of Sundiata from Mali. Some contemporary scholarship presses against the bifurcation of "epic vs. novel".Repinecz, Jonathon. Subversive traditions: Reinventing the West African Epic. Michigan State University Press, 2019.

There is also the epic of "Kelefaa Saane", "part of the repertoire that maintains the memroy of a legendary warrior prince of Kaabu, a kingdom in the SenegambiaSenegambian area of West Africa, in the nineteenth century".p. ix, Camara, Sirifo. The Epic of Kelefaa Saane. Indiana University Press, 2010.

China

People in the rice cultivation zones of south China sang long narrative songs about the origin of rice growing, rebel heroes, and transgressive love affairs (McLaren 2022). The borderland ethnic populations of China sang heroic epics, such as the Epic of King Gesar of the Mongols, and the creation-myth epics of the Yao people (Asia)Yao people of south China.

See also

 Alliterative verse
 Albanian epic poetry
 Arabic epic literature
 Alpamysh
 Bosniak epic poetry
 Bylina
 Calliope (Greek muse of epic poetry)
 Caribbean poetryCaribbean epic poetry
 Chanson de geste
 Duma (epic)Duma (Ukrainian epic)
 Elegiac
 Epic (genre)Epic fiction
 List of epic poems
 List of world folk-epics
 High fantasyEpic fantasy
 Epic film
 Epic theatre
 Hebrew and Jewish epic poetry
 History painting
 Indian epic poetry
 Mock epic
 Monomyth
 Narrative poetry
 National epic
 National poet
 Oral literature
 Rimur
 Serbian epic poetry

 Footnotes 

 References 

 Bibliography 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 External links 

 
 
 [https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00548t1 "The Epic"], BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Carey, Karen Edwards and Oliver Taplin (In Our Time, 3 February 2003)
 [https://literaturearticles.com/what-is-epic-poem/ "Epic Poem"], Main Features and Conventions of the Epic