Jainism ( ), also known as Jain Dharma, is an Indian religion that teaches a path toward spiritual purity and enlightenment through disciplined nonviolence (') to all living creatures. The tradition is spiritually guided by 24 ' (ford-makers), supreme teachers who have conquered the cycle of rebirth and attained omniscience ('). The core of Jain philosophy is established on three ethical pillars: ' (nonviolence), ' (non-absolutism or many-sided reality), and ' (non-possession). While its ultimate spiritual goal is ' (liberation from '), these ethical principles have historically fostered a community renowned for its high literacy, trusted role in commerce, and distinct intellectual culture.

Jain philosophy includes the doctrine of "'", which holds that truth and reality are complex and have multiple aspects, and that no single viewpoint is absolutely complete. This framework encourages intellectual humility and conflict resolution, in contrast to what the tradition terms "one-sided" ("'") views. Ethically, the vow of "'" (non-attachment) requires Jain monasticismmonks to renounce all property, and encourages laypersons to limit their possessions and desires ("'"). Historically, the application of nonviolence led the Jain community to avoid agriculture and warfare, many Jains engaged in trade and banking, becoming a mercantile presence in ancient and medieval India. The community supported networks of Jain templetemples, libraries, and charitable institutions.

The tradition views itself as eternal, with the  guiding every cosmic time cycle. In the current cycle, the first ' was Rishabhanatha, credited in tradition with establishing civilized society. The 23rd ', Pārśvanātha, is dated by historians to the , making him likely the tradtion's earliest historical figure. The 24th and final ', Mahavira , was a contemporary of the Buddha and a central figure in the ' movement of Greater Magadha, which rejected the authority of the Vedas and established the current ascetic order.

Jainism has between four and five million followers, known as Jains or Jainas, residing mostly in India, with diaspora communities in North America, Europe, and East Asia. The community is divided into two major sub-traditions, the ' ("sky-clad") and ' ("white-clad"), which differ on ascetic practices, gender, and canonical texts, while sharing a core philosophy. Jains have contributed to the development of logic, art, architecture, law, and ethics in Indian culture. Major festivals include ' or ('), ', ', and ''''.

Etymology

The name Jainism comes from ji (Sanskrit), "to conquer," referring to the battle against the passions and bodily desires, aiming to reach omniscience. Those few who accomplish this are called jina, "conqueror." Adherents are called jain or jaina, "follower of the conquerors," a term which replaced the older name nirgrantha, bondless, which was only used for ascetic wanderers.

Jain doctrine and philosophy

Ratnatraya (the three jewels)

, the wheel dharmachakra, the resolve to halt saṃsāra (transmigration).]]

The salvational goal for ascetics is to reach Moksha (Jainism)moksha (liberation), while for most Jain laypersons it is to accumulate good karma that leads to better rebirth and a step closer to liberation. Purification of the soul and liberation are held to be achievable through the three jewels (ratnatraya): samyak darśana, (right vision or faith in the Jain teachings or scriptures, more specifically the seven tattvas);}} samyak gyana, (right knowledge and understanding of the Jain teachings, more specifically of self (jiva) and non-self (ajiva)); and samyak charitra, (correct conduct, behavior consistent with these teachinngs and the five vows.) Jain texts often add "samyak tapas" (correct asceticism) as a fourth jewel, emphasizing ascetic practices as the means to liberation (moksha). The four jewels are called Moksha Marga (the path of liberation).

The core of Jainism is also summarized in the three tenets of ' (nonviolence), ' (asceticism), and '''' (a rejection of all simplistic and one-sided views of truth and reality).

Core principles (the vows)

, depicting the vow of sallekhana, 14th century, Karnataka]]

Jainism teaches five ethical duties, which it calls five vows. These are called anuvratas (small vows) for Jain laypersons, and mahavratas (great vows) for Jain mendicants. For both, its moral precepts preface that the Jain has access to a guru (teacher, counsellor), deva (Jina, god), doctrine, and that the individual is free from five offences: doubts about the faith, indecisiveness about the truths of Jainism, insincerity of desire for Jain teachings, non-recognition of fellow Jains, and insufficient admiration of fellow Jains' spiritual endeavors. Such a person undertakes the following five vows of Jainism:
 Ahiṃsā, ("intentional non-violence" or "noninjury") is the first major vow, to cause no harm to other human beings as well as all living beings, particularly animals. This is the highest ethical duty in Jainism, and it applies not only to one's actions, but demands that one be non-violent in one's speech and thoughts.
 Satya, ("truth") is the vow is to always speak the truth. Neither lie, nor speak what is not true, and do not encourage others or approve anyone who speaks an untruth.
 Asteya, ("not stealing") A Jain layperson should not take anything that is not willingly given. Additionally, a Jain mendicant should ask for permission to take it if something is being given.
 Brahmacharya, ("celibacy") Abstinence from sex and sensual pleasures is prescribed for Jain monks and nuns. For laypersons, the vow means chastity, faithfulness to one's partner.
 Aparigraha, ("non-possessiveness") This includes non-attachment to material and psychological possessions, avoiding craving and greed. Jain monks and nuns completely renounce property and social relations, own nothing and are attached to no one.

Jainism prescribes seven supplementary vows, including three guņa vratas (merit vows) and four śikşā vratas. The Sallekhana (or Santhara) vow is a "religious death" ritual observed at the end of life, historically by Jain monks and nuns, but rare in the modern age. In this vow, there is voluntary and gradual reduction of food and liquid intake to end one's life by choice and with dispassion. This is believed to reduce negative karma that affects a soul's future rebirths.

Ahimsa – non-violence

The principle of Ahimsa in Jainismahimsa (non-violence or non-injury) is a fundamental tenet of Jainism. It holds that one must abandon all violent activity and that without such a commitment to non-violence all religious behavior is worthless. In Jain theology, it does not matter how correct or defensible the violence may be, one must not kill or harm any being, and non-violence is the highest religious duty. Jain texts such as Ācārāṅga Sūtra and Tattvartha SutraTattvarthasūtra state that one must renounce all killing of living beings, whether tiny or large, movable or immovable. Its theology teaches that one must neither kill another living being, nor cause another to kill, nor consent to any killing directly or indirectly.

Furthermore, Jainism emphasizes non-violence against all beings not only in action but also in speech and in thought. It states that instead of hate or violence against anyone, "all living creatures must help each other".}} Jains believe that violence negatively affects and destroys one's soul, particularly when the violence is done with intent, hate or carelessness, or when one indirectly causes or consents to the killing of a human or non-human living being.

The doctrine exists in Hinduism and Buddhism, but is most highly developed in Jainism. The theological basis of non-violence as the highest religious duty has been interpreted by some Jain scholars not to "be driven by merit from giving or compassion to other creatures, nor a duty to rescue all creatures", but resulting from "continual self-discipline", a cleansing of the soul that leads to one's own spiritual development which ultimately affects one's salvation and release from rebirths. Jains believe that causing injury to any being in any form creates bad Karma in Jainismkarma which affects one's rebirth, future well-being and causes suffering.

Late medieval Jain scholars re-examined the Ahiṃsā doctrine when faced with external threat or violence. For example, they justified violence by monks to protect nuns. According to Paul DundasDundas, the Jain scholar Jinadattasuri wrote during a time of destruction of temples and persecution that "anybody engaged in a religious activity who was forced to fight and kill somebody would not lose any spiritual merit but instead attain deliverance". However, examples in Jain texts that condone fighting and killing under certain circumstances are relatively rare.}}

Aparigraha – non-attachment

The third main principle in Jainism is aparigraha which means non-attachment to worldly possessions. For monks and nuns, Jainism requires a vow of complete non-possession of any property, relations and emotions. The ascetic is a wandering mendicant in the Digambara tradition, or a resident mendicant in the Śvētāmbara tradition. For Jain laypersons, it recommends limited possession of property that has been honestly earned, and giving excess property to charity. According to Natubhai Shah, aparigraha applies to both the material and the psychic. Material possessions refer to various forms of property. Psychic possessions refer to emotions, likes and dislikes, and attachments of any form. Unchecked attachment to possessions is said to result in direct harm to one's personality.

Metaphysics and cosmology

Jain metaphysics explains the nature of the universe and its interaction with the soul (jiva). It posits that the soul is an eternal entity that is separate from the body and the physical world. Their interaction is what defines the cycle of rebirth (Saṃsāra).

Soul and karma

According to Jain beliefs, vibrational energy (virya) draws Karma in Jainismkarmic particles to the soul and creates bondages. Purification of soul from karmic particles and thereby liberation can be achieved through ratnatraya, the path of the three jewels, namely samyak darśana, correct faith in the Jain teachings; samyak gyana, correct knowledge and understanding of those teachings; and samyak charitra, correct conduct, behavior consistent with the five vows. (non-violence),  (truth),  (not stealing),  (chastity), and  (non-possessiveness).}}

Jainism, like other Indian religions, believes in karma, but with a unique and fundamental difference. It is the only tradition that conceives of karma as a physical, material substance — subtle, invisible particles of matter (pudgala) that exist in the universe. These particles are drawn to the soul (jiva) by its actions, thoughts, and words.

This "karmic dirt" then sticks to the soul, obscuring its innate, pure qualities of consciousness and bliss. This bondage of karma is the cause of the soul's entrapment in Saṃsāra and its repeated cycles of birth and death.

The Tattvas (fundamental truths)

The tattvas are the seven (or nine) fundamental truths that form the basis of the entire Jain path. They describe the step-by-step process of karmic bondage and liberation:
 Jīva (Jainism)Jīva — The living, sentient soul.
 Ajīva — Non-living substances, including matter, time, and karma.
 Āsrava — The influx or inflow of karmic particles to the soul.
 Bandha (Jainism)Bandha — The bondage of these karmic particles to the soul.
 Saṃvara — The stoppage of new karmic inflow (achieved by vows and discipline).
 Nirjarā — The shedding or purification of existing, bound karma (achieved by asceticism).
 Moksha — The complete liberation of the soul, freeing it from all karma to regain its pure, omniscient state.

Some texts add two more categories, Punya (good karma) and Paapa (bad karma), as sub-types of Āsrava and Bandha, making nine tattvas in total.

Saṃsāra (cycle of rebirth)

Saṃsāra is the doctrine of the worldly cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, through which the soul transmigrates based on its karma. This cycle is considered the natural state of existence, but it is also one of suffering, and the ultimate aim of Jainism is liberation (Moksha) from it.

According to Jain tradition, souls can be reborn in one of four states of existence (gatis): as heavenly beings, humans, animals/plants, or hellish beings. Jain theosophy also describes a vast number of potential birth-situations, traditionally 8.4 million, through which the unliberated soul cycles. Jain philosophy also uniquely posits the existence of abhavya (incapable) souls, a category of souls that are eternally trapped in Saṃsāra and can never attain liberation.

Cosmology: substance, time, and realms

Jain cosmology views the universe as an uncreated, eternal, and self-sustaining entity. It was never created by a god and will never be destroyed.

This universe is composed of six eternal substances known as dravya:
 Jīva (the living soul)
 Pudgala (non-sentient matter)
 Dharma (Jainism)Dharma (the principle of motion)
 Adharma (the principle of rest)
 Ākāśa (Jainism)Ākāśa (space)
 Kāla (time)Kāla (time)

 
Kāla (time) is itself conceived as a boundless, eternal wheel (kālachakra) that rotates ceaselessly. It is divided into two half-cycles: an ascending arc (utsarpiṇī) of progressive happiness and virtue, and a descending arc (avasarpiṇī) of progressive sorrow and decline.

The universe itself is structurally divided into three realms, or lokas: the Urdhva Loka (upper world of heavenly beings), the Madhya Loka (middle world of humans, animals, and plants), and the Adho Loka (lower world of hellish beings). All unliberated souls, including gods and demons, transmigrate through these three realms based on their karma.

Epistemology

Jain philosophy accepts three reliable means of knowledge (pramana). It holds that correct knowledge is based on perception (pratyaksa), inference (anumana), and testimony (sabda or the word of scriptures). These ideas are elaborated in Jain texts such as Tattvarthasūtra, Parvacanasara, Nandi and Anuyogadvarini. Some Jain texts add analogy (upamana) as the fourth reliable means, in a manner similar to pramanaepistemological theories found in other Indian religions.

In Jainism, jnāna (knowledge) is said to be of five kinds—mati jñāna (sensory knowledge), śrutu jñāna (scriptural knowledge), avadhi jñāna (clairvoyance), manah prayāya Jñāna (telepathy) and kevala jnana (omniscience). According to the Jain text Tattvartha sūtra, the first two are indirect knowledge, and the remaining three are direct knowledge.

Anekāntavāda - many-sided reality

]]

The second main principle of Jainism is anekāntavāda, from anekānta ("many-sidedness," etymologically "Privative anon-oneness" or "not being one") and vada ("doctrine"). The doctrine states that truth and reality are complex and always have multiple aspects. It further states that reality can be experienced, but cannot be fully expressed with language. It suggests that human attempts to communicate are Naya, "partial expression of the truth". According to it, one can experience the taste of truth, but cannot fully express that taste through language. It holds that attempts to express experience are syāt, or valid "in some respect", but remain "perhaps, just one perspective, incomplete". It concludes that in the same way, spiritual truths can be experienced but not fully expressed. It suggests that the great error is belief in ekānta (one-sidedness), where some relative truth is treated as absolute. The doctrine is ancient, found in Buddhist texts such as the Samaññaphala Sutta. The Jain Agamas suggest that Mahāvīra's approach to answering all metaphysical philosophical questions was a "qualified yes" (syāt). These texts identify anekāntavāda as a key difference from the Buddha's teachings. The Buddha taught the Middle Way, rejecting extremes of the answer "it is" or "it is not" to metaphysical questions. The Mahāvīra, in contrast, taught his followers to accept both "it is", and "it is not", qualified with "perhaps", to understand Absolute Reality. The permanent being is conceptualized as Jiva (Jainism)jiva (soul) and ajiva (matter) within a dualistic anekāntavāda framework.

According to Paul Dundas, in contemporary times the anekāntavāda doctrine has been interpreted by some Jains as intending to "promote a universal religious tolerance", and a teaching of "plurality" and "benign attitude to other [ethical, religious] positions". Dundas states this is a misreading of historical texts and Mahāvīra's teachings. According to him, the "many pointedness, multiple perspective" teachings of the Mahāvīra is about the nature of Absolute (philosophy)absolute reality and human existence. He claims that it is not about condoning activities such as killing animals for food, nor violence against disbelievers or any other living being as "perhaps right". The five vows for Jain monks and nuns, for example, are strict requirements and there is no "perhaps" about them. Similarly, since ancient times, Jainism co-existed with Buddhism and Hinduism according to Dundas, but Jainism disagreed, in specific areas, with the knowledge systems and beliefs of these traditions, and vice versa.

Concept of God and Tirthankaras

, ]]

Jainism is a transtheistic religion, holding that the Jainism and non-creationismuniverse was not created, and will exist forever. The universe is independent, having no creator, governor, judge, or destroyer. In this, it is unlike the Abrahamic religions and the theistic strands of Hinduism, but similar to Buddhism. However, Jainism believes in the world of heavenly and hellish beings who are born, die, and reborn like earthly beings. The souls who live happily in the body of a heavenly celestial do so because of their positive karma. It is further stated that they possess a more transcendent knowledge about material things and can anticipate events in the human realms. However, once their past karmic merit is exhausted, it is explained that their souls are reborn again as humans, animals, or other beings. The perfect enlightened souls with a body are called Arihant (Jainism)Arihants (victors) and perfect souls without a body are called Siddhas (liberated souls). Only a soul with a human body can attain enlightenment and liberation. The liberated beings are the supreme beings and are worshipped by all heavenly, earthly, and hellish beings who aspire to attain liberation themselves.

History

Jainism is a religion founded in ancient India. Jains trace their history through twenty-four tirthankarstirthankaras and revere Rishabhanatha as the first tirthankara (in the present time-cycle). Some artifacts found in the Indus Valley civilisationIndus River Valley civilization have been suggested as a link to ancient Jain culture, but very little is known about the Indus Valley iconography and script. The last two tirthankaras, the 23rd tirthankara Parshvanatha (c. 9th–8th century BCE) and the 24th tirthankara Mahavira (c. 599 – c. 527 BCE) are historical figures. Mahavira was a contemporary of the Buddha. According to Jain texts, the 22nd Tirthankara Neminatha lived about 85,000 years ago and was the cousin of Krishna.

Origins: Parshvanatha and Mahavira

Jainism is an ancient Indian religion of obscure origins. Jains claim it to be eternal, and consider the first tirthankara Rishabhanatha as the reinforcer of Jain Dharma in the current time cycle. It is one of the Śramaṇa traditions of ancient India, those that rejected the Vedas, and according to the twentieth-century scholar of comparative religion Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Jainism was in existence before the Vedas were composed.}}

The first twenty two tirthankaras are not considered by non-Jain scholars as historicityhistorical figures. The 23rd Tirthankara, Parshvanatha, was likely a historical being, dated by the Jain tradition to the ninth century BCE; historians date him to the eighth or seventh century BCE. Parshvanatha may have founded a proto-Jain Śramaṇaascetic community which subsequently got revived and reformed by Mahavira.

Mahāvīra is considered a contemporary of the Buddha, in around the sixth or 5th century BCE. The interaction between the two religions began with the Buddha; later, they competed for followers and the merchant trade networks that sustained them. Buddhist and Jain texts sometimes have the same or similar titles but present different doctrines.

Kings Bimbisara (–491 BCE), Ajatashatru (–460 BCE), and Udayin (–440 BCE) of the Haryanka dynasty were patrons of Jainism. Jain tradition states that Chandragupta Maurya (322–298 BCE), the founder of the Mauryan Empire and grandfather of Ashoka, became a monk and disciple of Jain ascetic Bhadrabahu in the later part of his life. Jain texts state that he died intentionally at Shravanabelagola by fasting.

Epigraphic and archaeological evidence

The historicity of Jainism is supported by epigraphic and archaeological evidence. The Hathigumpha Inscription at the Udayagiri Caves in Odisha, dated to the 2nd century BCE, is a key piece of early evidence. This inscription, from King Kharavela of Kalinga (region)Kalinga, details his patronage of Jain monks. It also provides a historical reference by mentioning the retrieval of a Jina idol taken from Kalinga by a Nanda dynasty king (c. 4th century BCE).

Additionally, excavations at Kankali Tila in Mathura have provided extensive archaeological evidence of an early Jain center. The site yielded numerous Jain stupas, statues, and ayagapatas (votive tablets) dating from the 2nd century BCE to the 2nd century CE. These tablets, commissioned by lay followers (śrāvakas), represent early physical evidence of an organized sangha (community) that included monks, nuns, and laity.

The third century BCE emperor Ashoka, in his pillar edicts, mentions the Niganthas (Jains). Tirthankara statues date back to the second century BCE. Archeological evidence suggests that Mathura was an important Jain center from the second century BCE. onwards. Inscriptions from as early as the first century CE already show the schism between Digambara and Śvētāmbara. There is inscriptional evidence for the presence of Jain monks in south India by the second or first centuries BCE, and archaeological evidence of Jain monks in Saurashtra in Gujarat by the second century CE.

File:Photo of lord adinath bhagwan at kundalpur.JPG":0"/>]]
Jainism faced persecution during and after the Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent. The scholarship in context of Jain relations with the ruler of Delhi Sultanate remains scarce, notwithstanding there were several instances of cordial relations of Jains with prominent rulers of the Sultanate. Alauddin Khalji (1296–1316), as attested by the Jain texts held discussions with Jain sages and once specially summoned Acharya Mahasena to Delhi. One more prominent Jain figure Acharya Ramachandra Suri was also honored by him. During his reign, his governor of Gujarat, Alp Khan permitted the reconstruction of the temples razed during earlier Muslim conquests and himself made huge donation for the renovation of Jain temples. Muhammad bin Tughluq (1325–1351) according to the Jain chronicles favoured the Jain scholars.

The Mughal EmpireMughal emperors in general were influenced by the Jain scholars and made patronage and grants for their pilgrimage sites under Humayun (1540–1556), Akbar (1556–1605), Jahangir (1605–1627) and even Aurangzeb (1658–1707). Despite this, there were instances of religious bigotry during the Mughal rule towards Jains. Babur (1526–1530), the first Mughal emperor ordered the destruction of various Jain idols in Gwalior. In 1567, Akbar Siege of Chittorgarh (1567-1568)ravaged the fort of Chittor. After the conquest of the fort, Akbar ordered the destruction of several Jain shrines and temples in Chittor. Similarly there were instances of desecration of Jain religious shrines under Jahangir, Shah Jahan and most notably under Aurangzeb.

The Jain community were the traditional bankers and financiers, and this significantly impacted the Muslim rulers. However, they rarely were a part of the political power during the Islamic rule period of the Indian subcontinent.

Colonial era

, who represented Jainism at the Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago in 1893]]
 at Dharampur, GujaratDharampur, Valsad districtValsad]]

A Gujarati Jain scholar, Virchand Gandhi, represented Jainism at the first World Parliament of Religions in 1893, held in America during the World's Columbian ExpositionChicago World's Fair. He worked to defend the rights of Jains and wrote and lectured extensively on Jainism.

Shrimad Rajchandra, a mystic, poet and philosopher from Gujarat is believed to have attained jatismaran gnana (ability to recollect past lives) at the age of seven. Virchand Gandhi mentioned this feat at the Parliament of the World's Religions. He is best known because of his association with Mahatma Gandhi. Shrimad Rajchandra composed Atma SiddhiShri Atmasiddhi Shastra, considered his magnum opus, containing the essence of Jainism in a single sitting of 1.5–2 hours. He expounds on the six fundamental truths of the soul:

 Self (soul) exists
 It is permanent and eternal
 It is the doer of its own actions
 It is the enjoyer or the sufferer of its actions
 Liberation exists
 There is a path to achieve liberation.

Colonial era reports and Christian missions variously viewed Jainism as a sect of Hinduism, a sect of Buddhism, or a distinct religion. 1867 Government of India 31 note 140}} Christian missionaries were frustrated at Jain people without pagan creator gods refusing to convert to Christianity, while colonial era Jain scholars such as Champat Rai Jain defended Jainism against criticism and misrepresentation by Christian activists. Missionaries of Christianity and Islam considered Jain traditions idolatrous and superstitious. These criticisms, states John E. Cort, were flawed and ignored similar practices within sects of Christianity.

The British colonial government in India and Indian princely states promoted religious tolerance. However, laws were passed that made roaming naked by anyone an arrestable crime. This drew popular support from the majority Hindu population, but particularly impacted Digambara monks. The Akhil Bharatiya Jain Samaj opposed this law, claiming that it interfered with Jain religious rights. Acharya Shantisagar entered Bombay (now Mumbai) in 1927, but was forced to cover his body. He then led an India-wide tour as the naked monk with his followers, to various Digambara sacred sites, and was welcomed by kings of the Maharashtra provinces. Shantisagar fasted to oppose the restrictions imposed on Digambara monks by the British Raj and prompted their discontinuance. The laws were abolished by India after independence.

 Modern era 

The texts attributed to Kundakunda inspired two contemporary lay-movements within Jainism with his notion of Two truths doctrinetwo truths and his emphasis on direct insight into niścayanaya or 'ultimate perspective', also called "supreme" (paramārtha) and "pure" (śuddha). Johnson also notes that "his use of a vyavahara/niscaya distinction [...] has more in common with Madhyamaka Buddhism and even more with Advaita Vedanta than with the Jain philosophy of Anekantavada." Cort, referring to Johnson, notes that "a minority position exemplified by Kundakunda has deemphasized conduct and focused upon knowledge alone."}}

Shrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901) was a Jain poet and mystic who was inspired by works of Kundakunda and Digambara mystical tradition. Nominally belonging to the Digambara tradition, his followers sometimes consider his teaching as a new path of Jainism, neither Śvetāmbara nor Digambara, and revere him as a saint. His path is sometimes referred as Raj Bhakta Marg, Kavipanth, or Shrimadiya, which has mostly lay followers as was Rajchandra himself. His teachings influenced Kanji Swami, Dada Bhagwan, Rakesh Jhaveri (Shrimad Rajchandra Mission), SaubhagyabhaiSaubhagbhai, Lalluji MuniLalluji Maharaj (Laghuraj Swami), Atmanandji and several other religious figures.

Kanji Panth is a lay movement founded by Kanji Swami (1890-1980). Nominally it belongs to the Śvetāmbara but is inspired by Kundakunda and Shrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901), though "lacking a place in any Digambara ascetic lineage descending from Kundakunda." Kanji Swami has many followers in the Jain diaspora. They generally regard themselves simply as Digambara Jains, more popularly known as Mumukshu, following the mystical tradition of Kundakunda and Pandit Todarmal.

Bauer notes that "[in] recent years there has been a convergence of the Kanji Swami Panth and the Shrimad Rajcandra movement, part of trend toward a more eucumenical and less sectarian Jainism among educated, mobile Jains living overseas."

The Akram Vignan Movement established by Dada Bhagwan draws inspiration from teachings of Rajchandra and other Jain scriptures, though it is considered as a Jain-Vaishnava Hindu Religious syncretismsyncretistic movement.

Greatly influenced by Shrimad Rajchandra, the leader of the campaign for Indian independence, Mahatma Gandhi stated regarding Jainism:
}}

Acharya ChandanaChandanaji became the first Jain woman to receive the title of Acharya in 1987.

Practices

The Four-Fold Community (Caturvidha Saṅgha)

Of the major Indian religions, Jainism has had the strongest ascetic tradition. Ascetic life may include nakedness, symbolizing non-possession even of clothes, fasting, body mortification, and penance, to burn away past karma and stop producing new karma, both of which are believed essential for reaching siddha and moksha ("liberation from rebirths" and "salvation").

Jain texts like Tattvartha Sūtra and UttaradhyayanaUttaradhyayana Sūtra discuss austerities in detail. Six outer and six inner practices are oft-repeated in later Jain texts. Outer austerities include complete fasting, eating limited amounts, eating restricted items, abstaining from tasty foods, mortifying the flesh, and guarding the flesh (avoiding anything that is a source of temptation). Inner austerities include expiation, confession, respecting and assisting mendicants, studying, meditation, and ignoring bodily wants in order to abandon the body. Lists of internal and external austerities vary with the text and tradition. Asceticism is viewed as a means to control desires, and to purify the jiva (soul). According to tradition, the tirthankaras such as the Mahāvīra (Vardhamana) set an example by performing severe austerities for twelve years.

Monastic organization, sangh, has a four-fold order consisting of sadhu (male ascetics, muni), sadhvi (female ascetics, aryika), Śrāvaka (Jainism)śrāvaka (laymen), and śrāvikā (laywomen). The latter two support the ascetics and their monastic organizations called gacch or samuday, in autonomous regional Jain congregations. Jain monastic rules have encouraged the use of mouth cover, as well as the Dandasan – a long stick with woolen threads – to gently remove ants and insects that may come in their path.

In Jainism, six essential duties (avashyakas) are prescribed for Śrāvaka (Jainism)śrāvakas (householders). The six duties are:
Worship of Pañca-Parameṣṭhi (five supreme beings)
Following the preachings of Jain saints.
Study of Jain scriptures
Samayika: practising serenity and meditation
Following discipline in their daily engagement
Charity (dāna) of four kinds:
Ahara-dāna- donation of food
Ausadha-dāna- donation of medicine
Jnana-dāna- donation of knowledge
Abhaya-dāna- saving the life of a living being or giving of protection to someone under threat

These duties became fundamental ritual activities of a Jain householder. Such as spreading the grain for the birds in the morning, and filter (water)filtering or boiling the water for the next few hours' use became ritual acts of Charity (virtue)charity and non-violence. Samayika was used as a word for all spiritual activity including icon worship during medieval times.

Ahimsa in practice: Jain diet

The practice of nonviolence toward all living beings has led to Jain culture being Jain vegetarianismvegetarian. Devout Jains practice lacto-vegetarianism, meaning that they eat no eggs, but accept dairy products if their production involved no violence to animals. Veganism is encouraged if there are concerns about animal welfare. Jain monks, nuns, and some followers avoid root vegetables such as potatoes, onions, and garlic because tiny organisms are injured when the plant is pulled up, and because a bulb or tuber's ability to sprout is seen as characteristic of a higher living being.}} Jain monks and advanced laypeople avoid eating after sunset, observing a vow of ratri-bhojana-tyaga-vrata. Monks observe a stricter vow by eating only once a day.

Jains fast particularly during festivals. This practice is called upavasa, tapasya or vrata, and may be practiced according to one's ability. Digambaras fast for Dasa-laksana-parvan, eating only one or two meals per day, drinking only boiled water for ten days, or fasting completely on the first and last days of the festival, mimicking the practices of a Jain mendicant for the period. Śvētāmbara Jains do similarly in the eight day paryusana with samvatsari-pratikramana. The practice is believed to remove karma from one's soul and provides merit (punya). A "one-day" fast lasts about 36 hours, starting at sunset before the day of the fast and ending 48 minutes after sunrise the day after. Among laypeople, fasting is more commonly observed by women, as it shows their piety and religious purity, gains merit earning and helps ensure future well-being for their family. Some religious fasts are observed in a social and supportive female group. Long fasts are celebrated by friends and families with special ceremonies.

Meditation - sāmāyika

Jainism considers meditation (dhyana) a necessary practice, but it never has been a central practice. In Jainism, meditation is concerned more with stopping karmic attachments and activity, not as a means to transformational insights or self-realization in other Indian religions.

According to Padmanabh Jaini, Sāmāyika is a practice of "brief periods in meditation" in Jainism that is a part of siksavrata (ritual restraint). The goal of Sāmāyika is to achieve equanimity, and it is the second siksavrata.}} The samayika ritual is practiced at least three times a day by mendicants, while a layperson includes it with other ritual practices such as Puja in a Jain temple and doing charity work. According to Johnson, as well as Jaini, samayika connotes more than meditation, and for a Jain householder is the voluntary ritual practice of "assuming temporary ascetic status".}}

Devotion, worship, and prayer

]]
There are many rituals in Jainism's various sects. According to Dundas, the ritualistic lay path among Śvētāmbara Jains is "heavily imbued with ascetic values", where the rituals either revere or celebrate the ascetic life of tirthankaras, or progressively approach the psychological and physical life of an ascetic. The ultimate ritual is sallekhana, a religious death through ascetic abandonment of food and drinks. The Digambara Jains follow the same theme, but the life cycle and religious rituals are closer to a Hindu liturgy. The overlap is mainly in the life cycle (rites-of-passage) rituals, and likely developed because Jain and Hindu societies overlapped, and rituals were viewed as necessary and secular.

Jains ritually worship numerous deities, especially the Arihant (Jainism)Jinas. In Jainism a Jina as deva is not an avatar (incarnation), but the highest state of omniscience that an ascetic tirthankara achieved. Out of the 24 tirthankaras, Jains predominantly worship four: Mahāvīra, Parshvanatha, Neminatha and Rishabhanatha. Among the non-tirthankara saints, devotional worship is common for Bahubali among the Digambaras. The Panch Kalyanaka rituals remember the five life events of the tirthankaras, including the Panch Kalyanaka Pratishtha Mahotsava, Panch Kalyanaka Puja and Snatrapuja.

The basic ritual is darsana (seeing) of deva, which includes Jina, or other Yakshayaksas, gods and goddesses such as Brahmadeva, 52 Viras, Padmavati (Jainism)Padmavati, Ambika (Jainism)Ambika and 16 Vidyadevis (including Sarasvati and Lakshmi). Terapanthi Digambaras limit their ritual worship to tirthankaras. The worship ritual is called devapuja, and is found in all Jain sub-traditions. Typically, the Jain layperson enters the Derasar (Jain temple) inner sanctum in simple clothing and bare feet with a plate filled with offerings, bows down, says the namaskar, completes his or her litany and prayers, sometimes is assisted by the temple priest, leaves the offerings and then departs.

Jain practices include performing abhisheka (ceremonial bath) of the images. Some Jain sects employ a pujari (also called upadhye), who may be a Hindu, to perform priestly duties at the temple. More elaborate worship includes offerings such as rice, fresh and dry fruits, flowers, coconut, sweets, and money. Some may light up a lamp with camphor and make auspicious marks with sandalwood paste. Devotees also recite Jain texts, particularly the life stories of the tirthankaras.

Traditional Jains, like Buddhists and Hindus, believe in the efficacy of mantras and that certain sounds and words are inherently auspicious, powerful and spiritual. The most famous of the mantras, broadly accepted in various sects of Jainism, is the "five homage" (Namokar Mantrapanca namaskara) mantra which is believed to be eternal and existent since the first tirthankara's time. Medieval worship practices included making tantric diagrams of the Rishi-mandala including the tirthankaras. The Jain tantric traditions use mantra and rituals that are believed to accrue merit for rebirth realms.

Festivals

, New York City]]
The most important annual Jain festival is called the Paryushana by Svetambaras and Dasha-Lakshana-ParvanDasa lakshana parva by the Digambaras. It is celebrated from the 12th day of the waning moon in the traditional lunisolar month of Bhadra (Hindu calendar)Bhadrapada in the Hindu calendarIndian calendar. This typically falls in August or September of the Gregorian calendar. It lasts eight days for Svetambaras, and ten days among the Digambaras. It is a time when lay people fast and pray. The five vows are emphasized during this time. Svetambaras recite the Kalpasūtras, while Digambaras read their own texts. The festival is an occasion where Jains make active effort to stop cruelty towards other life forms, freeing animals in captivity and preventing the slaughter of animals.

 FFDDBB
  right
}}
The last day involves a focused prayer and meditation session known as Samvatsari. Jains consider this a day of atonement, granting forgiveness to others, seeking forgiveness from all living beings, physically or mentally asking for forgiveness and resolving to treat everyone in the world as friends. Forgiveness is asked by saying "Micchami Dukkadam" or "Khamat khamna" to others. This means, "If I have offended you in any way, knowingly or unknowingly, in thought, word or action, then I seek your forgiveness." The literal meaning of Paryushana is "abiding" or "coming together".

Mahavir JayantiMahavir Janma Kalyanak celebrates the birth of Mahāvīra. It is celebrated on the 13th day of the lunisolar month of Chaitra in the traditional Indian calendar. This typically falls in March or April of the Gregorian calendar. The festivities include visiting Jain temples, Tirtha (Jainism)pilgrimages to shrines, reading Jain texts and processions of Mahāvīra by the community. At his legendary birthplace of Kundagrama in Bihar, north of Patna, special events are held by Jains. Diwali (Jainism)The next day of Dipawali is observed by Jains as the anniversary of Mahāvīra's attainment of Moksha (Jainism)moksha. The Hindu festival of Diwali is also celebrated on the same date (Kartika Amavasya). Jain temples, homes, offices, and shops are decorated with lights and Diya (lamp)diyas (small oil lamps). The lights are symbolic of knowledge or removal of ignorance. Sweets are often distributed. On Diwali morning, Nirvan Ladoo is offered after praying to Mahāvīra in all Jain temples across the world. The Jain new year starts right after Diwali. Some other festivals celebrated by Jains are Akshaya Tritiya and Raksha Bandhan, similar to those in the Hindu communities.

Scriptures and texts

 CE.
 Mangulam inscription.jpg
 Mangulam inscription dated 3rd century BCE
 
 
 400
 
}}

Jain canonical scriptures are called Agamas. They are believed to have been oral traditionverbally transmitted, much like the ancient Buddhist and Hindu texts, and to have originated from the sermons of the tirthankaras, whereupon the Ganadharas (chief disciples) transmitted them as Śhrut Jnāna (heard knowledge). The spoken scriptural language is believed to be Ardhamagadhi by the Śvētāmbara Jains, and a form of sonic resonance by the Digambara Jains.

The Śvētāmbaras believe that they have preserved 45 of the 50 original Jain scriptures (having lost an Anga text and four Purva texts), while the Digambaras believe that all were lost, and that Āchārya Bhutabali was the last ascetic who had partial knowledge of the original canon. According to them, Digambara Āchāryas recreated the oldest-known Digambara Jain texts, including the four anuyoga. The Digambara texts partially agree with older Śvētāmbara texts, but there are also gross differences between the texts of the two major Jain traditions. The Digambaras created a secondary canon between 600 and 900 CE, compiling it into four groups or Vedas: history, cosmography, philosophy and ethics.}}

The most popular and influential texts of Jainism have been its non-canonical literature. Of these, the Kalpa Sūtras are particularly popular among Śvētāmbaras, which they attribute to Bhadrabahu (c. 300 BCE). This ancient scholar is revered in the Digambara tradition, and they believe he led their migration into the ancient south Karnataka region and created their tradition. Śvētāmbaras believe instead that Bhadrabahu moved to Nepal. Both traditions consider his Niryuktis and Samhitas important. The earliest surviving Sanskrit text by Umaswati, the Tattvarthasūtra is considered authoritative by all traditions of Jainism.}} In the Digambara tradition, the texts attributed to Kundakunda are highly revered and have been historically influential, while the oldest being Kasayapahuda and Shatkhandagama attributed to Acharya pushpdanta and Bhutbali. Other important Digambara Jain texts include: Samayasara, Ratnakaranda śrāvakācāra, and Niyamasara.

The Digambara-texts attributed to Kundakunda inspired Shrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901), who in turn influenced Kanji Swami (Kanji Path), Dada Bhagwan, Rakesh Jhaveri (Shrimad Rajchandra Mission), SaubhagyabhaiSaubhagbhai, Lalluji MuniLalluji Maharaj (Laghuraj Swami), Atmanandji and several other religious figures. According to Bauer, "[in] recent years there has been a convergence of the Kanji Swami Panth and the Shrimad Rajcandra movement, part of trend toward a more eucumenical and less sectarian Jainism among educated, mobile Jains living overseas."

Culture (art, architecture)

1375–1400 CE)
 "Sihanamdika ayagapata", Jain votive plate, Kankali Tila, Mathura dated 25-50 CE.jpg
 AyagapataSihanamdika ayagapata, 25–50 CE, Kankali Tila, Mathura, Uttar Pradesh
 KHANDAGIRI AND UDAYGIRI Cave Inscriptions 1.jpg
 Inscriptions at a Udayagiri and Khandagiri CavesUdaygiri-Khandagiri 2nd–1st-century BCE Jain rock cut cave, Odisha
 500
}}

Jainism has contributed significantly to Indian art and architecture. Jain arts depict life legends of tirthankara or other important people, particularly with them in a seated or standing meditative posture. Yakshas and yakshinis, attendant spirits who guard the tirthankara, are usually shown with them. The earliest known Jain image is in the Patna museum. It is dated approximately to the third century BCE. Bronze images of Pārśva can be seen in the Prince of Wales Museum, Mumbai, and in the Patna museum; these are dated to the second century BCE.

Ayagapata is a type of votive tablet used in Jainism for donation and worship in the early centuries. These tablets are decorated with objects and designs central to Jain worship such as the stupa, dharmacakra and triratna. They present simultaneous trends or image and symbol worship. Numerous such stone tablets were discovered during excavations at ancient Jain sites like Kankali Tila near Mathura in Uttar Pradesh, India. The practice of donating these tablets is documented from first century BCE to the third century CE. Samavasarana, a preaching hall of tirthankaras with various beings concentrically placed, is an important theme of Jain art.

 in Chittor Fort, 12th century CE]]

The Kirti StambhJain tower in Chittor, Rajasthan, is a good example of Jain architecture. Decorated manuscripts are preserved in Jain libraries, containing diagrams from Jain cosmology. Most of the paintings and illustrations depict historical events, known as Panch Kalyanaka, from the life of the tirthankara. Rishabha, the first tirthankara, is usually depicted in either the lotus position or kayotsarga, the standing position. He is distinguished from other tirthankara by the long locks of hair falling to his shoulders. Bull images also appear in his sculptures. In paintings, incidents from his life, like his marriage and Indra marking his forehead, are depicted. Other paintings show him presenting a pottery bowl to his followers; he is also seen painting a house, weaving, and being visited by his mother Marudevi. Each of the twenty-four tirthankara is associated with distinctive emblems, which are listed in such texts as Tiloyapannati, Kahavaali and Pravacanasaarodhara.

Temples

A Jain temple, a Derasar or Basadi, is a place of worship. Temples contain tirthankara images, some fixed, others moveable. These are stationed in the inner sanctum, one of the two sacred zones, the other being the main hall. One of the images is marked as the moolnayak (primary deity). A manastambha (column of honor) is a pillar that is often constructed in front of Jain temples. Temple construction is considered a meritorious act.

Ancient Jain monuments include the Udaigiri Hills near Bhelsa (Vidisha) and Pataini temple in Madhya Pradesh, the Ellora CavesEllora in Maharashtra, the Palitana temples in Gujarat, and the Jain temples at Dilwara Temples near Mount Abu, Rajasthan. 31 }} Ranakpur Jain templeChaumukha temple in Ranakpur is considered one of the most beautiful Jain temples and is famous for its detailed carvings. According to Jain texts, Shikharji is the place where twenty of the twenty-four Jain Tīrthaṅkaras along with many other monks attained moksha (died without being reborn, with their soul in Siddhashila). The Shikharji site in northeastern Jharkhand is therefore a revered pilgrimage site.}} The Palitana temples are the holiest shrine for the Śvētāmbara Murtipujaka sect. Along with Shikharji the two sites are considered the holiest of all pilgrimage sites by the Jain community. The Jain complex, Khajuraho and PattadakalJain TempleJain Narayana temple are part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Shravanabelagola, Saavira Kambada Basadi or 1000 pillars and Brahma Jinalaya are important Jain centers in Karnataka. In and around Madurai, there are 26 caves, 200 stone beds, 60 inscriptions, and over 100 sculptures.

The second–first century BCE Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves are rich with carvings of tirthanakars and deities with inscriptions including the Hathigumpha inscriptionElephant Cave inscription. Jain cave temples at Badami cave templesBadami, Mangi-Tungi and the Ellora Caves are considered important. The Sittanavasal Cave temple is a fine example of Jain art with an early cave shelter, and a medieval rock-cut temple with excellent fresco paintings comparable to Ajantha. Inside are seventeen stone beds with second century BCE. Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions. The eighth century Kalugumalai Jain BedsKazhugumalai temple marks the revival of Jainism in South India.

File:Jain Temple Ranakpur.jpg":0">

Statues and sculptures

 tall monolithic statue of Bahubali built in 981 CE
}}
 ]]

Jain sculptures usually depict one of the twenty-four tīrthaṅkaras; Parshvanatha, Rishabhanatha and Mahāvīra are among the more popular, often seated in lotus position or kayotsarga, along with Arihant, Bahubali, and protector deities like Ambika (Jainism)Ambika. Quadruple images are also popular. Tirthankar idols look similar, differentiated by their individual symbol, except for Parshvanatha whose head is crowned by a snake. Digambara images are naked without any beautification, whereas Śvētāmbara depictions are clothed and ornamented.

A monolithic,  tall statue of Bahubali, Gommateshvara, built in 981 CE by the Western Ganga dynastyGanga minister and commander Chavundaraya, is situated on a hilltop in Shravanabelagola in Karnataka. This statue was voted first in the SMS poll Seven Wonders of India conducted by The Times of India. The  tall Statue of Ahiṃsā (depicting Rishabhanatha) was erected in the Nashik district in 2015. Idols are often made in Ashtadhatu (literally "eight metals"), namely Akota Bronze, brass, gold, silver, stone monoliths, rock cut, and precious stones.

Symbols

Jain icons and arts incorporate symbols such as the swastika, OmJainismOm, and the Ashtamangala. In Jainism, Om is a condensed reference to the initials "A-A-A-U-M" of the five parameshthis: "Arihant, Ashiri, Acharya, Upajjhaya, Muni". The Ashtamangala is a set of eight auspicious symbols: in the Digambara tradition, these are chatra (umbrella)chatra, dhvaja, kalasha, fly-whisk, mirror, chair, hand fan and vessel. In the Śvētāmbar tradition, they are Swastika, Srivatsa, Nandavarta, Vardhmanaka (food vessel), Bhadrasana (seat), Kalasha (pot), Darpan (mirror) and pair of fish.

The hand with a wheel on the palm symbolizes Ahimsa in Jainismahimsā. The wheel represents the dharmachakra, which stands for the resolve to halt the saṃsāra (wandering) through the relentless pursuit of ahimsā. The five colours of the Jain flag represent the Pañca-Parameṣṭhi and the five vows. The swastika's four arms symbolise the four realms in which rebirth occurs according to Jainism: humans, heavenly beings, hellish beings and non-humans. The three dots on the top represent the three jewels mentioned in ancient texts: correct faith, correct understanding and correct conduct, believed to lead to spiritual perfection.

In 1974, on the 2500th anniversary of the nirvana of Mahāvīra, the Jain community chose a single combined image for Jainism. It depicts the three lokas, heaven, the human world and hell. The semi-circular topmost portion symbolizes Siddhashila, a zone beyond the three realms. The Jain swastika and the symbol of Ahiṃsā are included, with the Jain mantra Parasparopagraho JivanamParasparopagraho Jīvānām from sūtra 5.21 of Umaswati's Tattvarthasūtra, meaning "souls render service to one another".

 Jainism and ecology 

Jainism, one of the world's oldest religions, offers a profound ecological philosophy rooted in its core principles. As noted in the Jain Declaration on Nature, "Jainism is fundamentally a religion of ecology and has turned ecology into a religion. It has enabled Jains to create an environment-friendly value system and code of conduct."Singhvi L.M., Central to Jain ethics is ahimsa (non-violence), which extends beyond human interactions to encompass all living beings. "All breathing, existing, living, sentient beings should not be slain, nor treated with violence, nor abused, nor tormented, nor driven away. This is the pure, unchangeable, eternal law."ĀcārāṅgaSūtra I:4.1, as translated by Hermann Jacobi, Jaina Sutras in Two Parts.  Part One: the ĀkārāṅgaSūtra; The Kalpa Sūtra(New York: Dover, 1968, first published, 1884), p. 36.

The Jain concept of parasparopagrahojīvānām in the Tattvarth Sutra, the most authoritative sacred text of Jains, teaches that all souls are responsible for one another and  underscores the mutual interdependence of all life forms.Dr. Palakh Jain, Mahavira, the founder of Jainism taught, "One who neglects or disregards the existence of earth, air, fire, water and vegetation disregards his own existence which is entwined with them."L. M. SINGHVI, This principle is not merely philosophical but is reflected in daily practices. For instance, Jain monks and nuns often wear masks to prevent inhaling and harming microscopic organisms, demonstrating meticulous care for even the smallest forms of life.ĀcārāṅgaSūtra II:15.i.1-5, Jacobi 1968, 203-204

Jainism also emphasizes aparigraha (non-possessiveness), advocating for minimal consumption and a lifestyle that avoids excess. This principle encourages individuals to live sustainably, reducing their ecological footprint. "Using any resource beyond one's needs and misuse of any part of nature is considered a form of theft. Indeed, the Jain faith goes one radical step further and declares unequivocally that waste and creating pollution are acts of violence."L. M. Singhvi,

In contemporary times, Jain communities continue to uphold these ecological principles through various initiatives. These include tree planting, wildlife conservation, and promoting vegetarianism, all aimed at fostering a harmonious relationship with nature. Such practices exemplify the enduring relevance of Jain teachings in addressing modern environmental challenges.Patil, R.B., Jainism And Ecology, Journal of Dharma 33, 2 April–June 2008

Through its unwavering commitment to non-violence, interdependence, and minimalism, Jainism offers a holistic framework for ecological sustainability, emphasizing the sacredness of all life and the importance of living in harmony with the environment.

Comparison with other religions

The inscription reads:"Adoration to the Arhat Vardhamana. The daughter of the matron (?) courtesan Lonasobhika (Lavanasobhika), the disciple of the ascetics, the junior (?) courtesan Vasu has erected a shrine of the Arhat, a hall of homage (ayagasabha), cistern and a stone slab at the sanctuary of the Nirgrantha Arhats, together with her mother, her daughter, her son and her whole household in honour of the Arhats."
}}

, 75–100 CE]]

All four Indian religionsDharmic religions—Jainism, Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism—share concepts and doctrines such as karma and Reincarnationrebirth. They do not believe in eternal heaven or hell or judgment day, and leave it up to individual discretion to choose whether or not to believe in gods, to disagree with core teachings, and to choose whether to participate in prayers, rituals and festivals. They all consider values such as ahimsa (non-violence) to be important, link suffering to craving, individual's actions, intents, and karma, and believe spirituality is a means to enlightened peace, bliss and eternal liberation (moksha).

Jainism differs from both Buddhism and Hinduism in its ontological premises: While all three believe in impermanence, Buddhism incorporates the premise of anatta ("no eternal self or soul") while Hinduism maintains the concept of an eternal unchanging Atman (Hinduism)atman ("soul"); by contrast, Jainism incorporates an eternal but changing Jiva (Jainism)jiva ("soul"). In Jain thought, there are infinite eternal jivas, predominantly in cycles of rebirth, and a few siddhas (liberated ones). Unlike Jainism, Hindu philosophies encompass advaitanondualism where all souls are identical as Brahman and posited as interconnected one. Jainism rejected the non-dual concept, stating that if there were only one universal consciousness which was already liberated, the purpose of dharma would be nullified. Additionally, the need and desire for an infinitely blissful consciousness to create the universe would imply a limitation within that consciousness. Jainism also criticized Vedanta's inability to explain how an intangible consciousness could create a material universe, filled with countless living beings who experience suffering. Jain scholar Dr. Hukumchand Bharill explains that, according to both Jainism and Vedanta, only consciousness can perceive itself, while the mind and Human bodybody are incapable of recognizing and experiencing the soul. In Jainism, the soul, in its state of ignorance, mistakenly identifies with the body and consequently experiences suffering. When the soul realizes its true nature, it attains enlightenment, gaining infinite knowledge and bliss. If there were only a singular, universal consciousness, Bharill questions, who attains realization as the consciousness is already liberated, and the mind is incapable of experiencing soul's boundless knowledge-bliss nature.

While both Hinduism and Jainism believe "soul exists" to be a self-evident truth, most Hindu systems consider it to be eternally present, infinite and constant (vibhu), but some Hindu scholars propose soul to be atomic. Hindu thought generally discusses Atman and Brahman through a monistic or dualistic framework. In contrast, Jain thought denies the Hindu metaphysical concept of Brahman, and Jain philosophy considers the soul to be ever changing and bound to the body or matter for each lifetime, thereby having a finite size that infuses the entire body of a living being.

Jainism is similar to Buddhism in not recognizing the primacy of the Vedas and the Hindu Brahman. Jainism and Hinduism, however, both believe "soul exists" as a self-evident truth. Jains and Hindus have frequently intermarried, particularly in northern, central and western regions of India. Some early colonial scholars stated that Jainism like Buddhism was, in part, a rejection of the Hindu caste system, but later scholars consider this a Western error. A caste system not based on birth has been a historic part of Jain society, and Jainism focused on transforming the individual, not society.}}

Monasticism is similar in all three traditions, with similar rules, hierarchical structure, not traveling during the four-month monsoon season, and celibacy, originating before the Buddha or the Mahāvīra. Jain and Hindu monastic communities have traditionally been more mobile and had an itinerant lifestyle, while Buddhist monks have favored belonging to a sangha (monastery) and staying in its premises. Buddhist monastic rules forbid a monk to go outside without wearing the sangha's distinctive ruddy robe, or to use wooden bowls. In contrast, Jain monastic rules have either required nakedness (Digambara) or white clothes (Śvētāmbara), and they have disagreed on the legitimacy of the wooden or empty gourd as the begging bowl by Jain monks. }}

Jains have similar views with Hindus that violence in self-defence can be justified,Nisithabhasya (in Nisithasutra) 289; Jinadatta Suri: Upadesharasayana 26; Dundas pp. 162–163; Tähtinen p. 31. and that a soldier who kills enemies in combat is performing a legitimate duty.Jindal pp. 89–90; Laidlaw pp. 154–155; Jaini, Padmanabh S.: Ahimsa and "Just War" in Jainism, in: Ahimsa, Anekanta and Jainism, ed. Tara Sethia, New Delhi 2004, p. 52–60; Tähtinen p. 31. Jain communities accepted the use of military power for their defence; there were Jain monarchs, military commanders, and soldiers.Harisena, Brhatkathakosa 124 (10th century); Jindal pp. 90–91; Sangave p. 259. The Jain and Hindu communities have often been very close and mutually accepting. Some Hindu temples have included a Jain Tirthankara within its premises in a place of honour, while temple complexes such as the Badami cave temples and Khajuraho feature both Hindu and Jain monuments.

Fynes (1996) argues that various Jain influences, particularly ideas on the existence of plant souls, were transmitted from Western SatrapsWestern Kshatrapa territories to Mesopotamia and then integrated into ManichaeismManichaean beliefs.

Demographics

With an estimated four to five million followers worldwide, the vast majority of Jains reside in India. According to the 2011 Census of India, there were 4.45 million Jains in the country, constituting 0.37% of the total population. The community is highly concentrated, with 78.2% of Indian Jains living in four states: Jainism in MaharashtraMaharashtra (31.5%), Jainism in RajasthanRajasthan (14.0%), Jainism in GujaratGujarat (13.0%) and Madhya Pradesh (12.7%). Other states with significant populations include Jainism in KarnatakaKarnataka (9.9%), Jainism in Uttar PradeshUttar Pradesh (4.8%), Jainism in DelhiDelhi (3.7%) and Tamil JainTamil Nadu (2.0%). In 2014, the Government of India granted Jainism "national minority" status.

Global diaspora

Significant Jain communities exist globally, largely tracing their origins to Indian migration. The oldest of these is in Jainism in AfricaEast Africa, particularly Kenya and Uganda, where Jain merchants settled in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Britannica https://www.britannica.com/topic/Jainism/Early-medieval-developments-500-1100 2025-06-07 www.britannica.com en}} Political instability in those countries in the 1960s and 1970s led to a secondary migration, primarily to the Jainism in the United KingdomUnited Kingdom, which now has a community estimated at 25,000 to 30,000. The first Jain temple consecrated outside India was in Leicester.

The largest diaspora community is in the Jainism in the United StatesUnited States, with estimates ranging from 80,000 to 100,000, and a significant population also resides in Jainism in CanadaCanada (est. 12,000+) and Jainism in AustraliaAustralia (5851). A notable community exists in Antwerp, Belgium, where Jains have played a prominent role in the global diamond trade since the mid-20th century. In recent decades, Jainism has also attracted converts in other nations, such as Jainism in JapanJapan. As of 2015, there were approximately 10,000 Jains in Dubai.

Socio-economic profile

The Jain community is a distinct socio-economic group within India. Data from the 2015–16 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4) identified Jains as the wealthiest religious community in the country. This is strongly correlated with high educational attainment. According to the 2011 census, Jains have the highest literacy rate in India at 86.7% (for ages 7+), and this figure exceeded 97% for the population excluding the retired. Jains also have the highest percentage of college graduates of any religious community.

Scholars often attribute this socio-economic profile to the theological principles of the faith. The rigorous observance of Ahiṃsā (non-violence) historically discouraged professions like agriculture, which involve the harming of insects and microbes. This steered the community toward mercantile pursuits, such as commerce, banking, jewelry, and trade. A notable historical example of this financial prominence was the Jagat Seth family, a Jain banking house that served as state bankers to the Nawabs of Bengal and the East India Company in the 18th century.

In the modern era, this focus has translated to high representation in business, finance, and professional fields. Foundational industrialists like Walchand Hirachand, who established India's first modern shipyard and aircraft factory, emerged from the community. In finance, the merchant Premchand Roychand was a key 19th-century founder of the Bombay Stock Exchange. This prominence in large-scale industry continues with contemporary figures such as Gautam Adani, founder of the Adani Group, and the Patni family of Kishangarh, founders of RK Marble, a major global stone processor. This representation also extends to technology and the sciences. Narendra Patni, for instance, was a pioneer of the Indian IT services industry with the founding of Patni Computer Systems. In science, physicist Vikram Sarabhai, founder of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), is widely regarded as the "father of the Indian space program."

Community and philanthropy

A defining characteristic of the Jain community is its highly organized and historical practice of dāna (charity). This is a central religious duty for laypersons (śrāvakas), who are motivated by two key theological concepts. Firstly, scholars identify dāna as the primary mechanism for the laity to acquire good karma (punya), which is sought to ensure worldly well-being and a favorable rebirth. Secondly, this practice is the main expression of the householder's vow of Aparigraha (non-attachment). This dual motivation has resulted in a long-standing tradition of institutional philanthropy.

This is most famously expressed in the establishment of panjrapoles (animal hospitals and sanctuaries), which provide care for animals in accordance with the principle of Ahiṃsā. The community has also historically funded and managed dharamshalas (pilgrim rest-houses), educational institutions, and bhandaras (manuscript libraries), which have been crucial in preserving tens of thousands of ancient and medieval texts.

In the 20th century, this philanthropic tradition of supporting educational institutions evolved to include the founding of major national bodies. Industrialist Kasturbhai Lalbhai, for example, was a key co-founder of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (IIM-A) and the Physical Research Laboratory. In the field of public policy, physicist Daulat Singh Kothari chaired the influential Kothari Commission (1964–1966), which provided the comprehensive framework for the modernization of India's education policy.

See also

 Outline of Jainism
 Jain law
 Jain cosmology
 List of ancient Jains
 List of Jains
 Nonviolence
 Vegetarianism

Notes

References

}}

Sources

 

 2007Walter de Gruyter978-3-11-097134-7en}}
  2016 Taylor & Francis 978-1-317-05574-7 en }}
  }}
  1981 International Association of Tamil Research }}

  1996 University of California Press 978-0-520-91708-8 }}
  Bailey Publishing, PA 2012 978-1-312-23861-9 }}
  2003 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-1977-1 }}
 
  2015 Routledge 978-1-317-53853-0 }}
 
  2013 Routledge 978-1-136-85306-7 }}
 
 
  2010 Pearson Education India 978-81-317-2820-8 }}
 
 
  2003 Lexington Books 978-0-7391-0607-5 }}
 
  Ohio University Press 2004 978-0-8214-1551-1 }}

 
 
  2004 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-2036-4 }}
 2000Munshiram Manoharlal978-81-215-0931-2}}
  2009 Routledge 978-0-203-87212-3 }}
 
 
  SUNY Press 978-0-7914-3785-8 }}
  Oxford University Press 978-0-19-513234-2 }}
  Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-1778-4 }}
  Oxford University Press 978-0-19-538502-1 }}

  2010a 2006 Penguin books] 978-0-14-341517-6 }}
  2010b Penguin Books 978-0-14-341421-6 }}
  English }}
  2005 Sahitya Akademi 978-81-260-2171-0 }}
  1999 Merriam-Webster 978-0-87779-044-0 }}
  Second 2002 1992 Routledge 978-0-415-26605-5 London and New York }}
 
  2006 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-977507-1 }}

  3 John Murray 1876 }}
 1989Paragon House978-0-913729-43-4}}
  2005 ABC-CLIO 978-0-313-31318-9 }}
 
 
  Routledge 978-1-134-23552-0 }}
  2015 Bloomsbury Academic 978-1-4411-5116-2 }} PB: ; ePDF: ; ePub: 
 

  2012 Routledge 978-1-136-15623-6 }}
 
 
 
 

  2008 Equinox Academic 978-1-84553-227-7 }}
  2016 Routledge 978-1-134-93690-8 }}
 
  1993 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-0955-0 }}
  1993 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-1086-0 }}
  1902 Ginn & Company }}

 

 

  1978 Brill 12 978-90-04-05259-8 }}
  1991 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-0805-8  }}
  Jains in India and Abroad: A Sociological Introduction DK Printworld}}
  }}
 University of California Press 978-0-520-03923-0 }}
 978-0-520-06820-9 University of California Press }}
 Motilal Banarsidass Delhi 978-81-208-1578-0 }}
  2000 Motilal Banarsidass Delhi First 978-81-208-1691-6 }}

 
  978-81-89698-09-6 }}
  Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-1309-0 }}
  2000 Routledge 978-1-57958-090-2 }}
  2007 Infobase Publishing 978-0-8160-5458-9 }}
   }}
  2011 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-976764-9 }}

  2009 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-973679-9 }}
  2013 Routledge 978-1-136-98588-1 }}
 
  2004 Routledge 978-0-415-32920-0 }}
  Abhinav Publications 2001 978-81-7017-348-9  }}

  }}
  }}
  2013 2009 I.B. Tauris 978-0-85771-392-6 }}
 

  2009 John Wiley & Sons 978-1-4051-7109-0 }}
  1990 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-0717-4 }}
  1998 State University of New York Press 978-0-7914-3739-1 }}
  2006 Greenwood Publishing 978-0-275-99313-9 }}
  ABC-CLIO 2011 978-1-59884-206-7 }}
  Second One: A–B ABC-CLIO 2010 978-1-59884-204-3 }}
  2014 Niyogi Books 978-93-83098-33-0 }}
 
  2016 Routledge 978-1-317-19374-6 }}
  4th 1988 1966 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-0433-3 }}
  University of Nairobi Press 2010 1990 978-9966-846-89-1 }}
  }}
 

 
  2010 Brill Academic 978-90-04-18159-5 }}
 
  1885 North-Western Provinces and Oudh Government Press }}

 
  2012 Brill Academic 978-90-04-20629-8 }}

  Los Angeles Country Museum of Art, University of California Press 1986 1 978-0-87587-129-5  }}
  1957 Motilal Banarsidass (Reprint: 1995) 978-81-208-1016-7 }}
  1998 Gandhi and 21st Century Concept Publishing Company 978-81-7022-672-7  }}
 Indian Philately DigestPrashant H.Pandya2014}}
 
  Routledge 2013 978-0-203-07993-5 }}
  1977 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-2397-6 }}
 2013Routledge978-1-135-70322-6}}
  1880 W.H. Allen & Company }}
  2010 Bloomsbury Academic 978-0-8264-2354-2 }}

  2003 Jain Publishing Company 978-0-89581-956-7 }}

  2013 John Hunt Publishing 978-1-78099-911-1 }}
  }}
 
 
  Hymns Ancient and ModernHymns Ancient and Modern Ltd 2006 978-0-334-04014-9 }}
  1984 University of Chicago Press 978-0-226-73137-7 }}

 
  1989 Kenway 978-9966-848-05-5 }}
  1980 Popular Prakashan Bombay 2nd 978-0-317-12346-3 }}
  2001 Popular Prakashan Mumbai 978-81-7154-839-2 }}
  5 2006 1990 Bharatiya Jnanpith 978-81-263-1273-3 }}
 
  2004 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-2036-4 }}
  E. J. Brill 90-04-08790-7 }}
  2 Sussex Academic Press 978-1-898723-31-8  }}
  I Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-1938-2  }}
  1987 Abhinav Publications 978-81-7017-208-6  }}
  Definition, Beliefs, History, Literature, & Facts Encyclopædia Britannica Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. https://www.britannica.com/topic/Jainism}}
  2006 Jnanapravaha 978-81-246-0341-3 }}
  2017 ABC-CLIO 978-1-61069-517-6 }}
  Kanji swami Panth Division of Religion and philosophy University of Cumbria  http://www.philtar.ac.uk/encyclopedia/jainism/kanji.html 21 February 2013}}
  2008 1975 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-3323-4  }}
  Pearson Education 2024 2016 978-93-325-6996-6  }}
 
 
  1998 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-511209-2 }}
 
  1934 Cambridge University Press 978-1-001-40429-5 }}
 
 

  2008 Bloomsbury Academic 978-1-4411-2278-0 }}
  Motilal Banarsidass 2 1998 978-81-208-1534-6 }}
 

  1994 Rowman & Littlefield 978-0-06-068985-8 }}

  2002 University of Toronto Press 978-0-8020-8415-6 }}
  2013 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-166739-8 }}
  Motilal Banarsidass (Reprint: 1999) 1925 Delhi 978-81-208-1376-2 }}
 RELG: World2Cengage Learning2014978-1-285-43468-1}}
  Cengage Learning 2015 Second 978-1-285-43468-1 }}
  Studies in Jain Art and Iconography and Allied Subjects The Director, Oriental Institute, on behalf of the Registrar, M.S. University of Baroda, Vadodara 1995 81-7017-316-7 }}

 
 2004Scarecrow978-0-8108-6558-7}}
  2009 38 Scarecrow 978-0-8108-6337-8 }}
  1991 Motilal Banarsidass 978-81-208-0775-4 }}
 1993Motilal Banarsidass978-81-208-0265-0}}

 

 

Attribution:
  }} }}
  }} }}
   }} }}
  2012 Vikalp Printers 978-81-903639-4-5  }} }}
  2013 Vikalp Printers 978-81-903639-5-2  }} }}
   }} }}
  }}

 External links 

  Definition, Beliefs, History, Literature, & Factshttps://www.britannica.com/topic/JainismEncyclopædia Britannica14 July 2023 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. none}}
 [https://www.srikanta-sastri.org/the-original-home-of-jainism "The Original Home of Jainism"] by S. Srikanta Sastri
 [https://www.worldrecordsindia.com/2023/08/31/youngest-jain-sadhviji-to-observe-muktavali-tapasya-girnar-junagadh-parasdham/ "Youngest Jain Sadhviji to Observe 285 Fasts in 11 Months – Muktavali Tapasya"] by World Records India