---
title: The Genuine Works of Hippocrates, Volume 2 (including the Aphorisms), translated by Francis Adams (Sydenham Society, 1849)
collection: 11-multi-language/translations-en
source: archive.org item genuineworksofhi02hippuoft — machine OCR of the printed book (OCR errors kept)
source_url: https://archive.org/details/genuineworksofhi02hippuoft
format: English (machine OCR)
license: public domain (published 1849)
translator: Francis Adams
translation_of: 11-multi-language/greek-originals/hippocrates-aphorisms.txt
date: 1849
---
/  7i 


THE 


SYDENHAM     SOCIETY 


INSTITUTED 


MDCCCXLIII 


LONDON 

MDCCCXLIX. 


THE 


GENUINE  WORKS 


OF 


HIPPOCRATES 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK 


A  PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE  AND  ANNOTATIONS 


FRANCIS   ADAMS,   LL.D. 

SURGEON. 


1 


vr>:  >'  \ 


r 


VOL.  II.  y^\ 


LONDON 

PRINTED  FOR  THE  SYDENHAM  SOCIETY 

MnCCCXMX. 


p. 


C.     AND    J.     ADLARD,     PRINTKRS, 

*HAirni(M  DMKU    ri.OSK. 


CONTENTS  OY  VOL.  11. 


PAGE 

On  Things  relating  to  the  Surgery  ....  4G7 

The  Argument     .  .  .  .  ...  469 

The  Work    .  .  .  .  .  .  .474 


On  Fractures  .                .                .                .                .                .         .  489 

The  Argument  ......  491 

The  Work  .                .                .                .                .                .         .  507 

On  the  Articulations    ......  553 

The  Argument  .                .                .                .                .                .         .  555 

The  Work    .  .                .                .                .                .                .568 

MocHLicus  .                .                .                .                .                .        .  655 

The  Argument  ....;.  657 

The  Work  .                .                 .                .                .                .        .  660 

Aphorisms  .......  683 

The  Argument  .                .                 .                .                .                .        .  685 

The  Work   .  .                .                .                .                .                .697 

The  Oath  .                 .                 .                 .                 .                 .         .  775 

The  Argument  .                .                .                .                .                .777 

The  Work  .                .                .                .               .                .        .  779 

The  Law           .  .                .                .                .                ,                .781 

The  Argument  .                .                .                .                .                .         .  783 

The  Work    .  .                .                .                .                .                .784 


VI 


COPv^TENTS. 


On  Ulckrs 

Tlie  Argument 
The  Work 


PAGE 

787 
789 
794 


On  FisTUL.E 

The  Argument 
Tlie  Work 


811 
813 
816 


Ox  Hemorrhoids 
The  Argument 
The  Work 


823 

825 
820 


On  the  Sacred  Disease 
The  Argument 
The  Work 


831 
833 
843 


Index  to  the  Two  Volumes 


859 


1'lates  IV,  V,  VI,  VII,  VIII,  with  Descriptions. 


ON 

THINGS  RELATING  TO  THE  SURGERY. 


THE  PHYSICIAN'S  ESTABLISHMENT, 


OR 


THE  SUKGERY. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

In  the  critical  notice  of  this  treatise  given  in  the  second 
section  of  the  Preliminary  Discourse,  I  have  briefly  described 
the  nature  and  object  of  the  latrium.  There  seems  to  be  no 
doubt  that  it  was  an  estabhshment  belonging  to  the  periodei(tce, 
or  travelling  physicians,  in  which  were  kept  all  sorts  of  medi- 
cines and  surgical  apparatus  required  in  the  practice  of  the 
profession.  This,  then,  would  resemble  "  the  surgery"  spoken 
of  by  Pott,'  as  a  place  in  wliicli  he  received  his  patients  for 
consultation.  In  my  younger  days  I  have  visited  what  I 
regard  as  having  been  "  the  surgery"  of  a  famous  operator  in 
the  nortli,  a  contemporary  of  Pott,  Dr.  Thomas  Livingston,  of 
Aberdeen.  It  was  then  in  the  keeping  of  his  son,  and,  in 
'  accordance  Avith  the  spirit  of  the  times,  had  ceased  to  be  "  a 
surgery,"  and  was  become  little  more  than  "  a  cabinet  of  antique 
curiosities ;"  it  consisted,  in  short,  of  a  choice  collection  of 
surgical  instruments  and  everything  else  that  constituted  a 
portion  of  the  armamentarium  chirurgicum  ;  but  I  was  given 
to  understand  that,  in  former  times,  medicines  were  regularly 
prepared  and  compounded  in  it  by  the  apprentices  and  atten- 
dants of  the  physician,  for  the  purpose,  no  doubt,  of  being 
used  by  him  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  although  I  can 
scarcely  suppose  that  it  was  patent  to  the  public  as  a  labo- 
ratory. Such  an  establishment,  then,  would  be  quite  akin 
to  the  latrium  of  Hippocrates  and  his  successors.  I  have  ven- 
tured then  to  translate  latrium  by  "the  surgery."  Galen 
hesitates  respecting  the  title ;  he  says,  some  named  it,  "  On  the 

'  Injuries  of  the  Head,  sect.  2,  Case  1. 


470  THE  SURGERY. 

latriiim  •"  aud  some  "  On  tlie  things  relating  to  the  latrium/' 
because  it  treats  of  matters  connected  with  the  latrium.^ 

No  one  can  read  this  tract  attentively  without  being  im- 
pressed with  the  truth  of  Galen's  remark  respecting  it^  namely, 
that  it  is  merely  a  rough  sketch  of  a  work,  and  that  it  had  not 
been  finished  by  the  author  for  publication.  Indeed,  Galen 
sometimes  expresses  himself  in  equivocal  terms  as  to  its  au- 
thenticity, and  M.  Littre  was  at  first  disposed  to  exclude  it 
from  the  list  of  genuine  works,  but  afterwai'ds  decided  upon 
admitting  it.  One  thing,  at  all  events,  is  quite  clear  respecting 
it,  namely,  that  it  is  a  compendium  of  the  subject-matters 
which  are  discussed  fully  in  the  works  '  On  Fractures,'  and 
'  On  the  Articulations,'  more  especially  in  the  former  of 
these.  In  a  word,  it  is  a  succinct  outhne  of  surgical  matters, 
nearly  unintelligible  by  itself,  but  highly  valuable  for  refresh- 
ing the  memory  and  methodising  the  information  collected 
from  the  works  we  have  just  referred  to.  In  execution  it 
bears  a  resemblance  to  some  of  the  esoteric  works  of  Aristotle, 
which  are  composed  in  so  condensed  a  style,  that  they  would 
be  nearly  unintelligible  if  they  Avere  not  illustrated  by  copious 
commentaries.  The  tract  of  Theophrastus  '  On  Stones,'  is 
another  work  of  the  same  class  as  the  present  one. 

§  1.  The  work  begins  with  a  brief  enumeration  of  the  ge- 
neral principles  of  diagnosis,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  of 
semeiology,  and  of  the  objects  and  means  by  which  diseases  are 
to  be  recognised.  The  grand  rule  for  discrimination  is  held 
to  be  the  comparison  of  the  diseased  part  with  the  corresponding 
part  on  the  sound  side. 

'  The  fullest  account  which  ws  possess  of  tlie  ancient  iatrium,  is  that  which  is 
contained  in  the  Ilippocratic  treatise,  De  Medico.  The  author  of  the  treatise,  after 
giving  some  general  directions  respecting  the  construction  of  the  house,  namely,  tliat 
it  should  be  so  constructed  that  neither  the  wind  nor  sun  might  prove  offensive  to 
the  patient,  goes  on  to  enumerate  the  various  articles  which  it  should  contain,  such 
as  scalpels,  lancets,  cupping-instruments,  trepans,  raspatories,  with  handages  and 
medicines.  That  it  was  "an  operation-room"  there  can  be  no  doubt;  whether  it 
was  also  a  public  laboratory  for  the  sale  of  medicines  is  not  so  clear;  but  it  seems 
probable,  from  what  we  learn  respecting  the  iatrium  which  Aristotle  inherited  from 
his  father,  Nicomachus  (see  Suidas,  under  Arl'i(oteles),iov  Athenjeus  taunts  Aristotle 
with  having  been  a  druggist  ((papfictKo-wXiii^). — Deipnos,  viii,  13.  I  ought  to  have 
stated  above,  that  Galen,  in  his  Exegesis,  &c.  explains  the  title  of  this  work  as  follows  : 
Kut'  hiTptiov  TCI  Kurd  ri/i'  x^'povpyiaf. — See  further,  Malgaigne,  Operat.  Surg., 
I'ref.Engl.  Edit. 


ARGUMENT.  471 

§  2.  A  most  comprehensive  statement  is  then  given  of  all 
the  matters  and  objects  relating  to  the  surgery, — tlie  operator^ 
— tlie  patient^ — the  assistants, — the  instruments, — the  light, 
— the  position  of  the  patient  and  of  the  operator,  and  so  forth. 
■'*f  §  3.  The  circumstances  connected  with  surgical  operations 
are  then  discussed  somewhat  more  fullv,  and  verv  sensible  di- 
rections  are  laid  down  in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  operator 
and  of  the  patient. 

§  4.  Some  very  acute  remarks  are  next  made  with  regard 
to  the  operator's  hand,  and  the  means  to  be  used  in  order  to 
acquire  dexterity  and  elegant  manipulation. 


\ 


V 


Directions  are  then  given  for  the  disposal  of  the  surgical 
instruments,  so  that  they  may  be  readily  got  hold  of  when 
required  by  the  operator.  This  paragraph  evinces  much  prac- 
tical acquaintance  with  the  business  of  the  operation-room. 

§  6.  The  duties  of  the  assistant  are  distinctly  laid  down  and 
prescribed. 

§  7.  General  directions  are  given  for  the  application  of  the 
bandages  along  with  a  description  of  the  characters  by  which 
to  distinguish  bandaging  when  properly  applied.  Names  of 
some  of  the  most  important  fasciae,  or  forms  of  bandages. 

§  8.  Directions  are  given  for  regulating  the  amount  of  the 
compression  produced  by  the  bandages,  and  for  securing  the 
bandages  by  a  thread  with  knots. 

§  9.  jNIany  remarks  are  made  on  the  tendency  of  a  bandage 
to  fall  off  from  particular  parts  of  the  body,  and  dii-ections  are 
given  to  obviate  this  tendency. 

§  10.  The  general  characters  of  the  bandage  are  again  de- 
scribed somewhat  more  fully  than  before. 

§  11.  The  application  of  several  forms  of  bandage,  especially 
the  hypodesmis  and  epidesmis,  according  to  circumstances  and 
the  object  for  which  they  are  used,  is  described  with  much 
precision  and  minuteness  of  detail. 

§  12.  The  remainder  of  the  directions  for  bandaging  a  frac- 
tured limb  is  given,  along  with  the  application  of  the  splints, 
and  the  use  of  cerate  for  giving  firmness,  and  of  selvages  or  slips 
of  cloth  for  giving  security  to  them.  The  splints  also  are 
minutely  described. 

§  13.  The  affusion  of  hot  water  on  the  limb  after  the  re- 
moval of  the  bandages  is  particularly  enjoined. 

§  14.  The  adjustment  of  the  limb,  more  especially  by  means 


472  THE  SURGERY. 

of  canals,  or  gutters  for  giving  greater  security  to  the  inferior 
extremity,  is  particularly  insisted  upon. 

§  15.  Directions  are  given  with  regard  to  the  natural,  that  is 
to  say,  the  proper  position  of  a  fractured  limb  while  in  the  acts 
of  setting  and  adjusting  it.  The  fore-arm  is  to  be  placed  at 
right  angles  to  the  arm,  in  a  state  intermediate  between  pro- 
nation and  supination,  and  an  inferior  extremity  is  to  be  laid 
in  an  extended  position. 

<^  IG.  Dii-ections  are  given  with  regard  to  the  force  to  be 
applied  in  adjusting  fractured  bones  :  it  is  to  be  in  proportion 
to  the  size  of  the  bone,  and  stronger  in  the  case  of  young 
than  of  old  persons. 

§  17.   The  general  effects  of  friction  are  briefly  defined. 

§  18.  ]\Iinute  and  very  sensible  directions  are  given  as  to 
the  appearances  which  the  bandaging  should  present  during 
the  process  of  treatment. 

§  19.  The  general  object  of  the  surgical  contrivances  con- 
nected with  the  management  of  a  fractured  limb  is  correctly 
defined  to  be — to  keep  the  limb  in  position. 

§  20.  The  effects  of  rest  and  exercise  on  the  condition  of 
the  limb  or  member  are  briefly  defined. 

§  21.  The  strength  of  the  bandaging  is  directed  to  be  made 
to  depend  on  the  number  of  the  bandages,  rather  than  the 
tightness  with  which  they  are  applied. 

§  22.  The  effects  of  bandaging  in  the  treatment  of  ecchy- 
mosis,  contusions,  and  swellings  are  described,  along  with 
other  circumstances  connected  with  the  treatment  of  these  cases. 

§  23.  The  application  of  bandages,  position,  and  friction, 
in  the  treatment  of  dislocations,  sprains,  separation  of  bones, 
club-feet,  and  other  surgical  cases,  are  minutely  and  accurately 
defined. 

§  24.  The  treatment  of  limbs  which  have  become  atrophied 
from  w^ant  of  exercise  and  the  compression  of  tight  bandages 
during  the  process  of  treatment  for  fracture,  is  strikingly  de- 
fined. The  application  of  a  loose  bandage  in  a  peculiar  form, 
as  here  described,  is  well  deserving  of  attention. 

§  25.   The  means  to  be  taken  in  order  to  steady  the  head  and 

chest  in  injuries  of  the  same,  are  briefly  and  distinctly  defined. 

;  From  this  brief  analvsis  of  its  contents  the  reader  will  readily 

1  •  "  . 

I       perceive  that  the  greater  part  of  the  work  is  devoted  to  the 

I'       reatment  of  fractures  and  injuries  of  a  similar  nature.      The 


ARGUMENT.  4/3 

rules  for  the  management  of  this  part  of  surgical  practice  are  cer- 
tainly laid  down  here  with  a  degree  of  precision  which  bespeaks 
a  minute  and  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  subject^  and  evinces 
a  great  talent  for  judging  correctly  the  bearings  of  practical 
questions  in  surgery.  It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the 
same  subject  be  methodised  and  defined  with  the  same  precision 
in  any  other  work,  ancient  or  modern.  It  must  always  be 
borne  in  mind,  hoAvever,  that,  as  stated  above,  the  work  is  to 
be  viewed  in  the  light  of  a  rough  sketch,  which,  in  order  to  be 
understood,  must  be  taken  in  connexion  with  the  fuller  expo- 
sition of  the  subject  given  in  the  work  '  On  Fractures.'  At 
first,  then,  I  was  inclined  to  arrange  the  present  treatise  after 
the  works  '  On  Fractures,'  and  *  On  the  Articulations,'  believing 
that  it  would  thus  occupy  its  most  suitable  position,  by  serving 
as  a  remembrancer  to  the.  reader  of  the  various  objects  which 
he  had  previously  viewed  in  detail.  But  although  it  might, 
no  doubt,  prove  very  useful  according  to  this  arrangement 
(and  indeed  it  is  so  arranged  by  Galen),  I  am  not  sure  but 
that  it  stands  more  properly  in  its  present  place,  as  it  is 
always  of  advantage  to  take  at  first,  as  it  were,  a  coup-d'oeil  of 
a  subject,  so  as  to  ascertain  its  limits,  divisions,  and  the  bearings 
of  its  particular  parts  upon  one  another,  before  proceeding  to 
examine  each  of  them  in  detail.  There  is  also  a  great  advan- 
tage to  a  student  in  having  a  syllabus  of  any  subject  which 
he  intends  to  investigate,  so  that  his  attention  may  be  awakened 
and  directed  beforehand  to  the  matters  which  will  be  presented 
to  him  in  going  over  the  intended  field  of  inquiry.  For  the 
reasons  now  adverted  to,  I  am  of  opiuionj  then,  that  wdioever 
would  wish  to  make  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
surgical  works  of  Hippocrates,  should  commence  his  studies 
with  the  present  treatise.  v^In  a  word,  this  work  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  prologue,  and  the  '  ISIoehlicus'  as  the  epilogue,  to 
the  great  work  'On  Fractures  and  Dislocations.' 

I  may  mention,  in  conclusion,  that  although  Galen  in  one 
place  expresses  himself  rather  undecidedly  regarding  its  au- 
thenticity, it  would  appear  that,  after  all,  this  tract  was  a  great 
favorite  of  his,  for  he  has  not  only  written  an  elaborate  Com- 
mentary upon  it,  but  has  made  frequent  allusions  to  it  in 
other  parts  of  his  works. 


474 


ON  THE  SURGERY. 

1.  It  is  the  business  of  the  physician  to  know,  in  the  first 
place,  things  similar  and  things  dissimilar ;  those  connected 
with  things  most  important,  most  easiW  known,  and  in  any- 
wise known  ;^  which  are  to  be  seen,  touched,  and  heard ;  which 
are  to  be  perceived  in  the  sight,  and  the  touch,  and  the  hearing, 
and  the  nose,  and  the  tongue,  and  the  understanding ;"  which 
are  to  be  known  by  all  the  means  we  know  other  things."' 

2.  The  things  relatiug  to  surgery,  are — the  patient ;  the 
operator ;  the  assistants ;  the  instruments ;  the  light,  where 
and  how ;  how  many  things,  and  how ;  where  the  body,  and 
the  instruments ;   the  time  ;   the  manner  ;  the  place.^ 

'  Tlie  meaning  of  the  first  clanse  of  this  sentence,  according  to  Galen,  is,  that  the 
first  tiling  which  the  medical  practitioner  must  do  is  to  make  himself  well  acquainted 
with  semeiology,  by  comparing  carefully  the  condition  of  disease  with  that  of  health. 
In  all  cases  of  accident,  it  was  the  practice  of  the  ancient  surgeons  to  compare  care- 
fully the  injured  part  with  its  fellow  or  corresponding  part  on  the  opposite  side. 
Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  relates  an  intcreslii;g  case,  which  shows  the  necessity  of 
care  in  making  such  a  comparison.  A  patient  had  met  w  ith  an  accident,  by  which 
the  acromion  was  torn  from  the  scapula,  and  the  nature  of  the  injury  was  not  re- 
cognised at  first,  owing  to  the  apj)earanccs  being  similar  on  the  opposite  side  ;  but 
Galen,  upon  inquiry,  found  that  these  had  been  occasioned  by  a  previous  accident. 
1  may  mention  here,  by  the  way,  that  Sir  Charles  Bell,  in  treating  of  dislocations  of 
the  hip-joint,  very  properly  inculcates  the  propriety  of  ascertaining  the  previous  state 
of  mutters  licfore  deciding  in  a  case  of  sujiposed  luxation. 

-  It  will  be  perceived  that  this  clause  is  little  else  than  an  apparent  repetition  of 
the  preceding  one.  Galen  meu'.ions  several  explanations  which  had  been  given  to 
account  for  this ;  the  most  plausible  of  which  appears  to  me  to  be,  that  the  former 
clause  relates  to  the  senses  of  the  physician,  and  the  latter  to  those  of  the  patient. 

^  The  last  clause  is  illustrated  by  a  very  elaborate  Commentary  of  Galen,  in  which 
he  discusses  with  his  usual  saljtiUy  the  question  respecting  the  criteria  of  human 
knowledge.  Galen  holds  that  our  gnostic  powers  may  all  be  referred  to  these  three — 
sensation,  understanding,  and  memory.  These  questions  would  now  be  reckoned  too 
metaphysical  for  a  surgical  ti-eatise. 

''  This  will  be  admitted  even  now  to  lie  a  comprehensive  list  of  everything  that 
relates  to  the  operation-room.  Tlie  general  meaning  is  quite  obvious,  and  the  only 
obscurity  in  this  paragraph  consists  in  the  reading,  for  which  see  Galen's  Commen- 
tary, and  the  Annotations  of  Littre.  I  shall  only  mention  that  by  place,  in  the  end  of 
the  sentence,  was  probably  meant  the  diseased  part,  or  seat  of  the  disease.  The 
term  is  thus  used  in  the  Ilippocratic  treatise,  De  Locis  in  Homine. 


THE  SURGERY.  47 n 

3.  The  operator  is  either  sitting  or  standing,  conveniently 
for  himself,  for  the  person  operated  upon,  for  the  light.  There 
are  two  kinds  of  light,  the  common  and  the  artificial ;  the 
common  is  not  at  our  disposal,  the  artificial  is  at  our  disposal. 
There  are  two  modes  of  using  each,  either  to  the  light,  or  from 
the  light  (to  the  side?).  There  is  little  use  of  that  which  is 
from  (or  oblique  to  the  light),  and  the  degree  of  it  is  obvious.^ 
As  to  opposite  the  light,  we  must  turn  the  part  to  be  operated 
upon  to  that  which  is  most  brilliant  of  present  and  convenient 
lights,  unless  those  parts  which  should  be  concealed,  and  which 
it  is  a  shame  to  look  upon ;"  thus  the  part  that  is  operated 
upon  should  be  opposite  the  light,  and  the  operator  opposite 
the  part  operated  iipon,  except  in  so  far  as  he  does  not  stand 
in  his  own  light ;  for  in  this  case  the  operator  will  indeed  see, 
but  the  thing  operated  upon  will  not  be  seen.  With  regard 
to  himself:  when  sitting,  his  feet  should  be  raised  to  a  direct 
hue  with  his  knees,  and  nearlv  in  contact  with  one  another ; 
the  knees  a  little  higher  than  the  groins,  and  at  some  distance 
from  one  another,  for  the  elbows  to  rest  upon  them.  The  robe, 
in  a  neat  aud  orderly  manner,  is  to  be  thrown  over  the  elbows 
and  shoulders  equally  and  proportionally.^  With  regard  to  the 
part  operated  upon;  we  have  to  consider  how  far  distant,  aud  how 
near,  above,  below,  on  this  side,  on  that  side,  or  in  the  middle. 
The  measure  as  to  distance  and  proximity  is,  that  the  elbows 
do  not  press  the  knees  before,  nor  the  sides  behind ;  that  the 
hands  be  not  raised  higher  than  the  breasts,  nor  lower  than  so 
as  that  when  the  breast  reposes  on  the  knees  he  may  have  the 

'  By  "  from  the  light,"  Galen  explains  is  meant  "  turned  from  the  light,"  that  is  to 
say,  oblique  to  the  light.  Galen  mentions  that  it  is  applicable  principally  in  operations 
on  the  eye,  such  as  the  anabrochismus,  the  removing  of  tumours  from  the  eyelids, 
excision  of  the  pterygium,  and  couching  the  cataract. 

2  Galen  remarks,  that  in  operations  on  the  parts  of  generation,  and  on  the  breasts 
in  females,  it  is  proper  that  the  patient  should  l)e  blindfolded.  He  also  recom- 
mends in  certain  cases,  when  the  patient  is  remarkably  timid,  to  deceive  him  by 
telling  him  that  the  operation  had  been  put  otf  until  another  day,  and  while  in  the 
act  of  making,  as  it  were,  preparations  for  it,  to  perform  the  necessary  incision. 

3  The  ancient  physicians  attached  much  importance  to  decorum,  and  studied 
eifect  verj'  much  in  the  practice  of  their  art.  In  the  Hippocratic  treatise.  On  Ele- 
gance, the  dress  of  the  physician  is  not  forgotten.  In  this  passage  it  will  he  seen 
that  the  manner  in  which  the  sm-geou's  robe,  o/'  mantle,  should  be  flung  over  him, 
while  in  the  act  of  operating,  is  graphically  described. 


476  THE  SURGERY. 

hands  at  right  angles  with  the  arm  :  thus  it  is  as  regards  the 
medium;  but  as  concerns  this  side  or  that,  the  operator  must  not 
be  beyond  his  seat,  but  in  proportion  as  he  may  require  turning 
he  must  shift  the  body,  or  part  of  the  body,  that  is  operated 
upon.  When  standing,  he  must  make  his  inspection,  resting 
firmly  and  equally  on  both  feet ;  but  he  must  operate  while 
supporting  himself  upon  either  leg,  and  not  the  one  on  the 
same  side  with  the  hand  Avhicli  he  makes  use  of;  the  knee 
being  raised  to  the  height  of  the  groins  as  while  sitting;  and 
the  other  measures  in  like  manner.  The  person  operated  upon 
should  accommodate  the  operator  with  regard  to  the  other  parts 
of  his  body,  either  standing,  sitting,  or  lying ;  so  as  that  he 
may  continue  to  preserve  his  figure,  avoid  sinking  down, 
shrinking  from,  turning  away ;  and  may  maintain  the  figure 
and  position  of  the  part  operated  upon,  during  the  act  of  pre- 
sentation, during  the  operation,  and  in  the  subsequent  position.' 
4.  The  nails  should  be  neither  longer  nor  shorter  than  the 
points  of  the  fingers  ;  and  the  surgeon  should  practise  Avith 
the  extremities  of  the  fingers,  the  index-finger  being  usually 
turned  to  the  thumb  ;  when  using  the  entire  hand,  it  should  be 
prone  ;  when  both  hands,  they  should  be  opposed  to  one  another. 
It  greatly  promotes  a  dexterous  use  of  the  fingers  when  the  space 
between  them  is  large,  and  when  the  thumb  is  opposed  to  the 
index.  But  it  is  clearly  a  disease  when  the  thumb  is  impaired 
from  birth,  or  when,  from  a  habit  contracted  during  the  time 
of  nursing,  it  is  impeded  in  its  motions  by  the  fingers.  One 
should  practise  all  sorts  of  work  with  either  of  them,  and  with 
l)oth  together  (for  they  are  both  alike),  endeavouring  to  do  them 
well,  elegantly,  quickly,  without  trouljle,  neatly,  and  promptly." 

'  The  description  of  tlie  position  of  the  operator,  and  of  the  person  operated  upon, 
contained  in  this  paragraph,  is  so  clear  as  to  stand  Uttle  in  need  of  elucidation.  1 
may  mention,  that  l)y  the  act  of  presentation,  an  expression  wliich  often  occurs  in 
ilie  surgical  treatises  of  Hippocrates,  was  meant  the  position  in  which  the  injured 
or  diseased  nienil)er  of  the  patient  is  presented  to  the  surgeon  for  operating  upon  it. 
By  subsequent  positions,  it  will  readily  be  understood,  is  meant  the  state  in  which 
tlie  limb  is  placed  after  the  operation  ;  such,  for  example,  as  the  adjustment  of  the 
leg  in  a  canal,  and  the  suspension  of  the  arm  in  a  sling  after  bandaging  for  fracture. 
These  questions  we  shall  find  fully  discussed  in  the  work  On  the  Articulations. 

-  The  importance  of  these  general  dh-ections  for  the  surgeon,  in  order  that  he 
may  acquire  skilful  manipulation,  is  obvious.  The  free  motion  of  the  thumb  and 
index-finger  evidently  contributes  in  an  especial  manner  to  the  dexterity  of  the  ope- 


THE  SURGERY.  477 

5.  The  instruments^  and  wlien  and  how  they  shouhl  be  pre- 
pared, will  be  treated  of  afterwards ;  so  that  they  may  not 
impede  the  work,  and  that  there  may  be  no  difficulty  in  taking 
hold  of  them,  with  the  part  of  the  body  which  operates.  But 
if  another  gives  them,  he  must  be  ready  a  little  beforehand, 
and  do  as  you  direct.' 

6.  Those  about  the  patient  must  present  the  part  to  be  ope- 
rated upon  as  may  seem  proper,  and  they  must  hold  the  rest 
of  the  body  steady,  in  silence,  and  listening  to  the  commands 
of  the  operator. 

7.  There  are  two  views  of  bandaging :  that  which  regards 
it  while  doing,  and  that  which  regards  it  when  done."  It  should 
be  done  quickly,  without  pain,  with  ease,  and  with  elegance ; 
([uickly,  by  despatching  the  work ;  without  pain,  by  being 
readily  done  ;  with  ease,  h\  being  prepared  for  everything ;  and 
with  elegance,  so  that  it  may  he.  agreeable  to  the  sight.  By 
what  mode  of  training  these  accomplishments  are  to  be  acquired 
has  been  stated.  When  done,  it  should  fit  well  and  neatly  ;  j 
it  is  neatly  done  when  with  judgment,  and  when  it  is  equal  and 
unequal,  according  as  the  parts  are  equal  or  unequal.  The 
forms  of  it  (the  bandage  ?)  are  the  simple,  the  slightly  winding 
(called  ascia),  the  sloping  (sima),  the  monoculus,  tlie  rhombus, 
and  the  semi-rhombus.^  The  form  of  bandage  should  be  suitable 
to  the  form  and  the  affection  of  the  part  to  which  it  is  applied. 

rator.  The  importance  also  of  practising  witli  eitlier  hand,  so  as  to  heconie  anihi- 
dextrous,  is  now  generally  admitted.  The  text  in  the  clause  of  the  sentence,  wliere 
tlie  impediment  of  the  hand  is  described,  would  appear  to  be  corrupted.  See 
Galen,  Foes,  and  Littre. 

'  The  directions,  I  need  scarcely  remark,  are  most  apposite,  and  bespeak  a 
familiar  acquaintance  with  surgical  practice.  By  instruments,  as  Galen  in  his  Com- 
mentary remarks,  is  meant  in  this  place  not  only  mechanical  contrivances,  such  as 
the  ambe  and  bench,  used  in  the  reduction  of  dislocations,  but  all  the  apparatus 
used  by  the  surgeon  in  performing  operations. 

*  The  meaning  of  this  clause,  although  rather  quaintly  expressed,  seems  pretty 
obvious.  It  is  thus  rendered  by  Verduc :  "  We  must  observe,  with  Hippocrates, 
that  with  regard  to  the  first  difference  drawn  from  the  time  of  the  operation,  we 
must  consider  a  bandage  while  it  is  yet  amaking,  by  way  of  distinction  from  one 
that  is  already  made.  For  the  former  there  are  three  conditions  required,  which  are 
couched  imder  these  three  words,  cilo,  tule,  jiicunde,  i.  e.  speedily,  safely,  and  dex- 
terously, &c."     (On  Fractures,  Bandages,  &c.) 

•*  Our  author  here  describes,  rather  confusedly  and  indistinctly,  six  sorts  of  ban- 
dages, namely,  three  simple,  and  three  compound :  the  simple  are,  the  circular,  the 
ascia,  and  the  sima;  the  compound  arc,  the  monoculus,  the  rhombus,  and  the  semi- 
rhombus.     The  circular  cannot  be  misunderstood ;  it  consisted  of  a  single  roll  of 


478  THE  SURGERY. 

8.  There  are  two  useful  purposes  to  be  fulfilled  ])y  bandaging  :' 
{first,)  strength,  which  is  impai'ted  by  the  compression  and  the 
number  of  folds.  In  one  case  the  bandage  effects  the  cure^ 
and  in  another  it  contributes  to  the  cure.  For  these  purposes 
this  is  the  rule — that  the  force  of  the  constriction  be  such  as 
to  prevent  the  adjoining  parts  from  separating,  Avithout  com- 
pressing them  much,  and  so  that  the  parts  may  be  adjusted 
but  not  forced  together  ;  and  that  the  constriction  be  small  at 
the  extremities,  and  least  of  all  in  the  middle.  The  knot  and 
the  thread  that  is  passed  through  should  not  be  in  a  downward 
but  in  an  upward  direction,  regard  being  had  to  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  case  is  presented ;  to  position,  to  the 
bandaging,  and  to  the  compression.  The  commencement  of 
the  ligatures  is  not  to  be  placed  at  the  wound,  but  where  the 
knot  is  situated."  The  knot  should  not  be  placed  where  it  will 
be  exposed  to  friction,  nor  where  it  will  be  in  the  Avay,  nor  where 
it  will  be  useless.  The  knot  and  the  thread  should  be  soft,  and 
not  large. 

9.  [Second.)  One  ought  to  ])c  well  aware  that  every  baudage 
lias  a  tendency  to  full  oft"  towards  the  part  that  declines  or  be- 
comes smaller ;  as,  for  example,  upwards,  in  the  case  of  the 
head,  and  downwards,  in  the  case  of  the  leg.  The  turns  of 
the  bandage  should  ])c  made  from  right  to  left,  and  from  left 
to  right,  except  on  the  head,  where  it  should  be  in  a  straight 
direction.'^      When  opposite  parts  are  to  be  bandaged  together, 

bandage  carried  circularly  round  the  liml)  or  lucmher.  The  ascia  {aKiitapvoi')  and 
the  sima  were  two  forms  of  spiral  bandage  differing  only  in  this  respect,  that  in  the 
former  the  edges  of  the  l)an(lage  passed  each  other  to  a  small  extent,  in  the  latter  to 
a  greater.  The  oculus,  or  inonocnlus,  was  a  bandage  adapted  to  dressings  on  one 
eye.  The  rhombus  and  semi-rhombus  took  their  names  from  their  figiu-e,  and  were 
used  principally  on  the  head  and  feet.  It  being  very  ditficult  to  convey  a  coiTcct 
idea  of  these  bandages  in  words,  I  will  give  figures  of  them  taken  from  Vidus 
Vidius,  from  which  their  construction  will  be  readily  comprehended  at  a  glance. 

'  As  Galen  states  in  his  Commentary,  it  does  not  clearly  appear  from  the  text 
what  are  the  two  purposes  which  l)andaging  supplies.  M.  Littre  supposes  that  the 
exposition  of  the  second  begins  at  §  9. 

-  The  meaning  of  this  sentence  is  doubtful.  See  Galen's  Commentaiy,  and 
Littre's  notes. 

2  Galen  explains  the  meaning  of  this  expression  {kcit'  'ihv)  by  stating  that  in 
bandaging  the  head,  the  fold  of  the  bandage  is  to  l)e  brought  from  the  top  of  the 
head  straiglit  down  below  the  chin,  and  is  to  be  carried  thence  to  the  part  af- 
fected, and  then  again  in  like  manner,  either  twice,  or  thrice,  or  as  often  as  is 
thouffht  necessarv. 


THE  SURGERY.  4/9 

we  must  use  a  bandage  with  two  heads ;  or  if  we  make  use  of 
a  bandage  with  one  head,  we  must  attach  it  in  like  manner  at 
some  fixed  point ;  such,  for  example,  as  the  middle  of  the 
head;  and  so  in  other  cases.  Those  parts  which  are  much 
exposed  to  motion,  such  as  the  joints,  where  there  is  flexion, 
should  have  few  and  slight  bandages  applied  to  them,  as  at  the 
ham ;  but  where  there  is  much  extension,  the  bandage  should 
be  single  and  broad,  as  at  the  kneepan ;  and  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  bandage  in  its  proper  place,  some  turns  should  be 
carried  to  those  parts  which  are  not  much  moved,  and  are  lank, 
such  as  the  parts  above  and  below  the  knee.'  In  the  case  of 
the  shoulder,  a  fold  should  be  carried  round  by  the  other  armpit ; 
in  that  of  the  groin,  by  the  flanks  of  the  opposite  side ;  and  of 
the  leg,  to  above  the  calf  of  the  leg.  AYhen  the  bandage  has 
a  tendency  to  escape  above,  it  should  be  secured  below,  and 
vice  versa ;  and  where  there  is  no  means  of  doing  this,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  head,  the  turns  are  to  be  made  mostly  on  the 
most  level  part  of  the  head,  and  the  folds  are  to  be  done  with 
as  little  obhquity  as  possible,  so  that  the  firmest  part  being  last 
applied  may  secure  the  portions  which  are  more  moveable. 
When  we  cannot  secure  the  bandaging  by  means  of  folds  of  the 
cloth,  nor  by  suspending  them  from  the  opposite  side,  we  must 
have  recourse  to  stitching  it  with  ligatures,  either  passed  cir- 
cularly or  in  the  form  of  a  seam." 

10.  The  bandages  should  be  clean,  hght,  soft,  and  thin."" 
One  should  practise  rolHng  with  both  hands  together,  and  with 
either  separately.  One  should  also  choose  a  suitable  one,  ac- 
cording to  the  breadth  and  thickness  of  the  parts.  The  heads 
of  the  bandages  should  be  hard,  smooth,  and  neatly  put   on. 

'  The  propriety  of  these  directions  for  bandaging  the  knee  will  readily  be  acknow- 
ledged. By  lank  parts  (\rt7rapa),  Galen  explains,  were  meant  loose  and  slender 
parts,  as  opposed  to  such  as  are  full  and  prominent. 

2  The  meaning  in  the  last  clause  of  this  paragraph  is  difficult  to  determine.  See 
Galen,  Vidus  Vidius,  and  Littre. 

3  Verduc  translates  and  explains  this  passage  as  follows :  "  Hippocrates  enjoins 
further,  that  the  bands  be  smooth,  plain,  soft,  and  light ;  by  smoothness  and  plain- 
ness he  excludes  unevenness,  or  the  least  puckering  and  rising  unequally ;  by  requir- 
ing softness,  he  insinuates  that  they  must  not  press,  or  wring,  or  wound  the  part ; 
and  fineness  is  requisite  to  facilitate  the  passage  of  the  liquors  through  its  substance  ; 
and  the  inconveniency  of  overloading  the  aftected  part  makes  lightness  a  necessary 
quality."     On  Fractures,  Bandages,  &c.,  p.  291. 


480  THE  SURGERY. 

That  sort  of  bandaging  is  the  worst  which  quickly  falls  off; 
but  those  arc  bad  bandages  which  neither  compress  nor  yet 
come  off.' 

11.  The  following  are  the  objects  which  the  upper  bandage, 
the  under  bandage,  or  both  aim  at  r  The  object  of  the  under 
bandage  is  either  to  bring  together  parts  that  are  separated, 
or  to  compress  such  as  are  expanded,  or  to  separate  what  are 
contracted,  or  to  restore  to  shape  what  are  distorted,  or  the 
contrary.  It  is  necessary  to  prepare  pieces  of  linen  cloth, 
which  are  light,  thin,  soft,  clean,  having  no  seams  nor  pro- 
tuberances on  them,  but  sound,  and  able  to  bear  some  stretching, 
or  even  a  little  more  than  required ;  not  dry,  but  wetted  with 
a  juice  suitable  to  the  purpose  required.  We  must  deal  with 
parts  separated  {in  a  sijuis  ?)  in  such  wise,  that  the  parts 
which  are  raised  may  touch  the  bottom  without  producing 
pressure  ;  we  must  begin  on  the  sound  part,  and  terminate  at 
the  wound ;  so  that  whatever  humour  is  in  it  may  be  expelled, 
and  that  it  may  be  prevented  from  collecting  more.-^  And 
sti'aight  parts  are  to  be  bandaged  in  a  straight  direction,  and 
oblique  obliquely,  in  such  a  position  as  to  create  no  pain ;  and 
so  that  there  may  be  no  constriction  nor  fsxlling  off  on  a  change 
of  position,  either  for  the  purpose  of  taking  hold  of  anything, 
or  laying  the  limb ;  and  that  muscles,  veins,  nerves,  and  bones 
may  be  properly  placed  and  adjusted  to  one  another.  It  should 
be  raised  or  laid  in  a  natural  position,  so  as  not  to  occasion 
pain.  In  those  cases  in  which  an  abscess  is  formed,  we  must 
act  in  a  contrary  way.'^      When  our  object  is  to  bring  together 

'  Though  the  general  drii't  of  this  paragraph  be  sufficiently  clear,  there  are  inanj' 
things  in  it  by  no  means  easy  to  be  uiulerstood.  Indeed,  Galen  finds  the  language 
so  unworthy  of  Hippocrates,  that  he  does  not  scruple  to  give  it  as  his  opinion  that 
the  work  had  never  been  finished  for  publication  by  the  author.  By  heads  Galen 
says,  that  some  of  the  commentators  understood  the  ends,  and  others  the  edges  of 
the  bandages.     The  text  in  the  last  clause  seems  evidently  to  be  corrupt. 

'■'  The  epidesmis  and  /ii/podesmis,  which  are  both  described  in  a  very  distinct 
manner  in  this  paragraph,  evidently  apply  principally  to  fractures  and  other  injuries 
of  the  extremities.  There  is  little  in  this  description  that  requires  explanation. 
The  application  of  them  in  the  case  of  a  fractured  arm,  we  shall  find  minutely 
described  in  the  work  On  the  Articulations. 

^  This  description  seems  evidently  to  apply  to  a  sinus,  or  collection  of  matter 
below  the  skin.  In  this  sense  it  is  understood  by  Galen,  and  by  Verduc,  in  his  work 
OH  Fractures  and  Bandasres, 

*  There  is  great  uncertainty   about  the  meaning  of  this  sentence,  as  may   be 


THE  SURGERY.  481 

parts  which  have  become  expanded,  in  other  respects  we  must 
proceed  on  the  same  plan  ;  and  we  must  commence  the  bringing 
together  from  some  considerable  distance ;  and  after  their  ap- 
proach, we  must  apply  compression,  at  first  slight,  and  afterwards 
stronger,  the  limit  of  it  being  the  actual  contact  of  the  parts.  In 
order  to  separate  parts  which  are  drawn  together,  when  attended 
with  inflammation,  we  must  proceed  on  the  opposite  plan ;  but 
when  without  inflammation,  we  must  use  the  same  preparations, 
but  bandage  in  the  opposite  direction.  In  order  to  rectify  dis- 
torted parts,  we  must  proceed  otherwise  on  the  same  principles ; 
but  the  parts  which  are  separated  must  be  brought  together  by 
an  under  bandage,  by  agglutinants,  and  l)y  suspending  it  {the 
limb?)  in  its  natural  position.^  And  when  the  deformities  are 
the  contrary,  this  is  to  be  done  on  the  contrary  plan. 

12.  In  fractures  we  must  attend  to  the  length,  breadth,  thick- 
ness, and  number  of  the  compresses.  The  length  should  be 
that  of  the  bandaging;  the  breadth,  three  or  four  fingers; 
thickness,  three  or  fourfold ;  number  so  as  to  encircle  the  limb, 
neither  more  nor  less ;  those  applied  for  the  purpose  of  recti- 
fying a  deformity,  should  be  of  such  a  length  as  to  encircle  it ; 
the  breadth  and  thickness  being  determined  by  the  vacuity, 
which  is  not  to  be  filled  up  at  once.  The  under  bandages 
are  two,  the  first  of  which  is  to  be  carried  from  the  seat  of  the 
injury  upwards,  and  the  second  from  the  seat  of  the  injury 
downwards,  and  from  below  upwards ;  the  parts  about  the  seat 
of  the  injury  being  most  compressed,  the  extremities  least,  and 
the  rest  in  proportion.  The  upper  bandages  should  take  in  a 
considerable  portion  of  the  sound  parts.  We  must  attend  to 
the  number,  length,  and  breadth  of  the  bandages ;  the  numlier 
must  be  such  as  not  to  be  inferior  to  what  the  injury  requires, 
nor  occasion  compression  with  the  splints,  nor  prove  cumber- 
some,  nor  occasion  any  slipping  of  them,  nor  render  them  in- 


learned  from  the  Commentary  of  Galen.  lie  informs  us  that  some  read  it  nega- 
tively, that  is  to  say,  with  the  negative  particle  [fii]),  and  that  Asclepiades  put  an 
entirely  different  sense  on  the  passage,  understanding  the  words  to  apply  to  the 
loosening  of  the  ban'dages,  and  not  to  the  condition  of  the  part  to  which  they  are  ap- 
plied. FoL-s  inclines  to  adopt  this  interpretation,  which  I  must  say  is,  in  many 
respects,  more  feasible  than  the  other.     Galen  seems  undecided. 

'  This  passage  refers  apparently  to  fractm-es  of  the  fore-arm,  which  we  shall  firid 
treated  of  very  fully  in  the  work  On  Fractures.  The  suspension  of  the  hmb  in  a 
napkin,  or  other  cloth,  constituted  a  very  important  part  of  the  process  of  treatment, 

31 

It 


482  THE  SURGERY. 

efficient.  As  to  length  and  breadth,  they  should  be  three, 
four,  five,  or  six  cubits  in  length,  and  as  many  fingers  broad. 
The  folds  of  the  strings  {selvages?Y  should  be  such  as  not  to 
occasion  pressure;  they  are  to  be  soft  and  not  thick ;  and  all  these 
things  arc  to  be  proportionate  to  the  length,  breadth,  and 
thickness  of  the  part  affected.  The  splints  are  to  be  smooth, 
even,  and  rounded  at  the  extremities ;  somewhat  less  all  along 
tlian  the  upper  bandaging,  and  thickest  at  the  part  to  which 
the  fracture  inclines.  Those  parts  where  there  are  tuberosities, 
and  which  are  devoid  of  flesh,  such  as  the  ankles  or  fingers,  we 
must  guard  from  the  splints  which  are  placed  over  them,  either 
by  position  or  by  their  shortness.  They  are  to  be  secured  by 
the  strings  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  occasion  pressure  at 
first.  A  soft,  consistent,  and  clean  cerate  should  be  rubbed 
into  the  folds  of  the  bandage. ~ 

13.  As  to  the  temperature  and  quantity  of  the  water  used, 
its  heat  should  be  just  such  as  the  hand  can  bear,  and  it  ought 

'  Tlicre  is  a  good  deal  of  ditliciilty  in  determining  the  exact  meaning  of  this 
term  {-n-apaipmia) ;  indeed,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  reading. 
Consult  Galen,  Vidus  Vidius,  Foes,  Littre,  and  Schneider  (Lexicon).  Both  Foes  and 
Tjittre  iiichne  to  render  it  by  Unit  re  in  French,  that  is  to  say,  the  list  or  selvage  of 
linen  cloth.  That  this  should  have  been  used  to  seciu'C  the  compresses,  and  keep 
them  in  position,  seems  very  natural,  and  I  am  inclined  to  adopt  this  explanation  of 
the  term,  as  it  suits  so  well  with  the  sense.  See  Avicenna,  iv,  5,  2,  7 ;  also,  Sculteti 
Armanicntarium  Chirurgicum,  tab.  29.  In  plate  4,  the  appearance  of  the  bandaged 
Hml),  having  the  splints  secm-ed  witli  strings,  is  well  represented. 

2  I  need  scarcely  remark  that  this  description  of  the  process  of  treating  a  fractured 
limb  is  remarkable  for  precision  and  clearness,  and  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether 
in  the  whole  compass  of  medical  literature  there  be  a  passage  which  contains 
so  judicious  an  exposition  of  the  principles  upon  which  this  surgical  case  sliould 
be  managed.  An  important  point  connected  with  the  ancient  mode  of  treating 
fractures  was  the  use  of  cerate,  or  a  composition  from  wax,  in  the  application  of 
the  l)andages.  Unfortunately  our  information  regarding  the  use  of  this  article  by  the 
ancient  surgeons  in  baiulaging  is  very  limited,  being  mostly  confined  to  this  passage 
of  our  author,  and  the  Commentary  of  Calen  on  tlie  same,  which,  it  is  to  be  regretted, 
lias  come  down  to  us  in  a  corrupt  state.  It  appears  from  it,  however,  that  the  wax  was 
rubbed  not  only  into  the  skin  of  tlie  j)art  to  which  the  bandage  was  to  be  applied, 
l)ut  also  upon  every  fold  of  tlie  bandage  as  it  was  put  on.  It  was  applied  in  mode- 
rate quantity.  Sec  Chirurgici  Grajci,  cd.  Cocchi  (p.  6()).  There  can  be  no  doubt  then, 
that  applied  in  tliis  manner,  the  waxed  bandages  nuist  have  been  fully  as  secure  as 
the  starched  bandages  now  in  use.  The  wax  used  for  this  purpose  was  cleansed  from 
all  impurities,  and  probably  bleached.  On  the  ancient  mode  of  bleaching  wax,  see 
Dioscorides  (ii,  105).  The  Arabians  adopted  this  and  all  the  other  steps  of  this  process 
from  the  Greeks.  See,  in  particular,  Avicenna  (iv,  5,  2,  G).     I  may  be  allowed  to  re- 


THE  SURGERY.  483 

to  be  known  that  a  large  quantityis  best  for  producing  relaxation 
and  attenuation,  wliereas  a  moderate  quantity  is  best  for  in- 
carnating and  softening.  The  limit  to  the  affusion  is,  to  stop 
when  the  parts  become  swelled  up,  and  before  the  swelling 
subsides ;  for  the  parts  sv.ell  up  at  first,  and  fall  afterwards.^ 

14.  The  object  on  Avhich  it  [tJie  limb?)  is  laid  should  be 
soft,  smooth,  and  sloping  upM'ards  towards  the  protuberant 
parts  of  the  body,  such  as  the  heel  or  hips,  so  that  there  may 
be  no  projection,  nor  bending  inwards,  nor  turning  aside." 
The  canal  [sjwut  or  gutter?)  should  rather  comprehend  the 
whole  limb  than  the  half  of  it,  attention  being  paid  to  the  in- 
jury and  to  whatever  else  appears  to  create  inconvenience.'^ 

15,  The  presentation  of  the  injured  part  to  the  physician, 
the  extension,  the  arrangement,  and  so  forth,  are  to  be  regu- 
lated according  to  nature.  What  is  nature  in  these  operations 
is  to  be  determined  by  the  accomplishment  of  the  object  which 
we  have  in  view,  and  for  this  purpose  we  must  look  to  the  part 
in  the  state  of  rest,  in  its  middle  state,  and  to  habit ;  in  regard 
to  the  state  of  rest  and  relaxation,  as  in  the  arm,  that  it  be  in 
a  line  with  the  hand ;  and  with  regard  to  the  medium  between 

mark  in  this  place,  that  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Arabs  in  Algiers,  from  whom  it  is 
well  known  that  the  French  surgeons  learned  the  process  of  treating  fractures  by  the 
immoveable  apparatus,  may  have  derived  their  knowledge  from  their  forefathers. 
How  or  when  this  excellent  practice  fell  into  disuse  in  civiUzed  Europe  I  cannot 
pretend  to  explain.  I  may  mention,  however,  that  Verduc,  who  professes  to  follow 
Galen  and  Hippocrates  implicitly  in  describing  the  application  of  ])andages  to 
fractured  limbs,  takes  no  notice  whatever  of  the  use  of  cerate.  Thus  it  is  tliat  wo 
always  pass  by  valuable  things  when  we  do  not  estimate  the  use  of  them  properly. 

'  The  warm  water,  I  may  just  mention,  was  applied  upon  the  removal  of  the  ban- 
dages. The  objects  for  which  it  was  apphed  are  briefly  noticed  by  our  author,  and 
are  fidly  explained  by  Galen  in  his  Commentary.  Galen  further  alludes  to  the  prac- 
tice elsewhere.  (Meth.  Med.,  xiv  ;  and  Hygiene,  ii.)  We  shall  find  further  mention 
of  it  in  the  work  On  Fractures. 

-  The  meaning  of  this  sentence,  notwitlistanding  the  explanations  furnished  by 
Galen,  is  somewhat  obscure.  One  can  readily  appreciate  the  propriety  of  the  direc- 
tion to  lay  the  heel  in  particular  on  an  elevated  object,  in  order,  as  Galen  remarks, 
to  prevent  a  defluxion  to  the  part. 

'  The  canal  (called  in  French  youttiire),  although  Hippocrates  elsewhere  ex- 
presses himself  regarding  its  usefulness  in  rather  equivocal  terms,  appears  to  me  to 
be  one  of  the  simplest  and  most  ingenious  contrivances  imaginable  for  securing  a 
fractured  leg.  For  several  years  I  have  used  in  imitation  of  it  a  half-boot  made 
of  the  strongest  pasteboard,  and  have  found  it  the  greatest  improvement  imaginable 
in  the  treatment  of  fractures.  It  appears  to  me  preferable  to  any  of  the  mechanical 
contrivances  which  are  at  present  in  use  in  the  London  hospitals. 


484  THE  SURGERY. 

flexion  and  extension,  that  the  forearm  be  at  riglit  angles  to 
the  arm;  and  with  regard  to  habit,  it  should  be  considered 
that  some  limbs  bear  certain  positions  preferably,  as,  for  example, 
the  thighs  extension ;  for  in  such  attitudes  the  parts  can  best 
bear  to  be  placed  for  a  considerable  time  without  a  change  of 
posture.  And  in  the  change  from  the  state  of  distension,  the 
muscles,  veins,  nerves,  and  bones,  when  properly  arranged  and 
secured,  will  preserve  their  relations  to  one  another  while  the 
limb  is  raised  or  placed.^ 

IG.  The  extension  should  be  most  powerful  when  the  largest 
and  thickest  bones,  or  when  both  are  broken ;  next  when  the 
vinder-bone,  and  least  of  all,  when  the  upper.  When  immo- 
derate, it  is  injurious,  except  in  the  case  of  children.  The  limb 
should  be  a  little  elevated.  The  model  by  which  we  judge  if 
the  part  be  properly  set  is  the  sound  part  of  the  same  name,  or 
the  part  which  is  its  pair.^ 

17.  Friction  can  relax,  brace,  incarnate,  attenuate:  hard 
braces,  soft  relaxes,  much  attenuates,  and  moderate  thickens." 

18.  The  following  should  be  the  state  of  matters  on  the 
first  application  of  the  bandage.  The  person  to  whom  it  has 
been  applied  should  say  that  he  feels  the  compression  parti- 
cularly at  the  seat  of  the  injury,  but  very  little  at  the  extre- 
mities; the  parts  should  be  adjusted  but  not  pressed  together,  and 
that  rather  by  the  number  of  the  bandages  than  by  the  force 
of  the  constriction ;  and  the  tightness  shoidd  rather  be  on  the 
increase  during  the   first   day  and  night;  but  on  the  next  it 

'  There  is  not  much  of  auy  practical  importance  in  this  paragraph  whicli  requires 
illustration.  The  hest  position  for  a  fractured  linih,  as  Galen  remarks,  is  that  in 
which  it  can  be  longest  kept  without  producing  pain  ;  this,  in  the  forearm,  Hippocrates 
holds  to  he  the  state  intermediate  between  pronation  and  supination,  with  the  fore- 
arm at  right  angles  to  the  arm,  and  in  the  leg  complete  extension.  Galen  pro- 
nounces decidedly  in  favour  of  the  extended  position  during  the  treatment  of  a 
fi'actured  thigh. 

^  This  paragraph,  it  will  readily  be  perceived,  relates  to  fractures  of  the  forearm. 
There  is  little  in  it  which  requires  illustration.  Galen  remarks,  that  the  bodies  of 
young  persons,  being  of  a  softer  and  more  humid  nature,  endure  greater  extension 
than  those  of  the  aged  without  being  exposed  to  pain  or  more  serious  consequences. 
This  is  no  doubt  the  fact,  and  it  is  equally  true  that  aged  persons  can  scarcely  bear 
to  be  touched  without  experiencing  most  acute  pain. 

^  This  subject  is  so  fully  treated  of  in  the  English  edition  of  Paulus  /Egineta, 
Book  I,  18,  that  I  need  not  touch  upon  it  in  this  place.  See,  in  particular,  Galen 
(De  Sanit.  tuend.,  ii,  Comment,  h.  1.),  and  Oribasius  (Med.  Collect.,  vi). 


THE  SURGERY.  485 

slioiild  be  less^  and  on  the  third  the  bandages  should  be  loose. 
On  the  next  day  a  soft  swelling  should  be  observed  in  the  ex- 
tremities ;'  aud  on  the  third  day,  when  the  bandaging  is  loosed, 
the   swelling   should   be  found   diminished   in   size,    and    this 
should  be  the  case  every  time  the  bandages  are  removed.      At 
the  second  application  of  the  bandage,  it  should  be  ascertained 
whether  the  dressing  has  been  properly  done,  and  then  greater 
compression  should  be  made,  and  with  more  bandages ;  and  on 
the  third,  still  greater,  and  still  more.    On  the  seventh  day  from 
the   first   dressing,  "when   the   bandages   are  loosed,   the   limb 
should  be  found  slender  and  the  bones  mobile.      We  must  then 
have   recourse   to   the   splints,   provided   the   limb   be  free  of 
swelling,  pruritus,   and  ulceration,  and  allow  them  to  remain 
until  twenty  days  after  the  accident ;  but  if  any  suspicions  arise, 
the  bandages   must   be   loosed   in   the  interval.      The    splints 
should  be  tightened  everv  third  dav.^ 

19.  The  suspending  of  a  fractured  limb  in  a  sling,  the  dis- 
position of  it,  and  the  bandaging,  all  have  for  their  object  to 
preserve  it  in  position.  The  principal  considerations  with  regard 
to  the  position  are  the  haliits  and  the  peculiar  nature  of  each 
of  the  limbs :  the  varieties  are  shown  in  running,  Avalking, 
standing,  lying,  action,  repose.'^ 

'  On  this  direction  Verduc  makes  the  following  remark :  "  Hippocrates,  wlio  so 
often  forewarns  us  of  the  danger  of  making  the  bandages  either  too  tight  or  too 
slack,  gives  us  a  certain  sign  of  the  due  tightness  of  the  bandage,  viz.  the  inflam- 
mation and  rising  softness  of  the  lower  extremity,  whether  the  foot  or  hand.  So 
that  if  the  foot  is  not  at  all  inflamed,  you  must  immediately  undo  the  dressings, 
for  fear  of  a  false  callus.  If  the  inferior  extremities  are  very  much  inflamed,  and 
have  a  hard  tumour  upon  them,  you  must  slacken  the  rollers." — On  Fractures,  Ban- 
dages, &c.  It  is  well  known  that  in  modern  practice  the  extremities  are  l)andaged 
to  prevent  swelling  from  taking  place  in  them.  Whether  or  not  this  be  in  all  cases  a 
wise  practice,  I  have  my  doubts ;  indeed  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  swelling  below 
relieves  the  swelling,  and  consequently  the  congestion,  in  the  seat  of  the  fracture.  When 
the  bandages  are  not  too  tight,  nor  the  patient  in  an  unliealthy  condition  of  body, 
the  swelling  below,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  can  do  no  harm,  and,  besides  serving  as 
an  index  of  the  state  of  the  bandaging  above,  may,  aud  I  think  certainly  in  some 
cases  does,  relieve  the  tension  in  the  seat  of  the  injury.  The  contents  of  this 
chapter  is  an  accurate  risiimi  of  the  more  ample  directions  which,  as  we  shall  see 
below,  are  given  in  the  works  On  Fractures  and  On  Articulations. 

-  The  sphuts,  I  believe,  were  secured  by  ligatures  going  round  the  limb  in  differ- 
ent places,  care  being  taken  to  avoid  the  spot  where  the  fracture  was  situated.  See, 
in  particular,  Avicenna  (iv,  5,  2,  7,  8). 

^  The  subject-matters  contained  in  this  passage  are  evidently  pretty  much  the 


486  THE  SURGERY. 

20.  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  exercise  strengthens,  and 
inactivity  wastes.^ 

21.  Compression    should  be    produced  by  the    number   of 
bandages,  rather  than  by  the  force  of  the  constriction. 

22.  In  cases  of  ecchyraosis,  contusions,  sprains,  or  swellings 
not  attended  with  inflammations,  blood  is  to  be  expelled  from 
the  wound,  in  greatest  quantity  to  the  upper  part,  and  in 
smallest  to  the  inferior ;  neither  the  arm  nor  the  leg  should  be 
placed  in  a  declining  position  :  the  head  of  the  bandage  should 
be  placed  on  the  wound,  and  there  the  greatest  pressure  should 
be  made ;  the  least  at  the  extremities,  and  intermediately  in 
the  middle ;  the  last  fold  of  the  bandage  should  be  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  body.  As  to  binding  and  compression,  these  objects 
are  to  be  attained  rather  by  the  number  of  the  bandages  than 
the  force  of  the  constriction ;  and  moreover,  in  these  cases  the 
bandages  should  be  thin,  light,  soft,  clean,  broad,  sound,  so 
that  they  may  cftect  their  purpose,  even  without  splints.  And 
we  must  use  affusious=" 

23.  Dislocations,  sprains,  diastases  of  bones,  violent  sepa- 
ration, abruption  of  the  extremities  of  bones,  and  distrainings, 
so  as  to  induce  van(s  or  valyus,  in  these  cases  Ave  must  apply 
the  bandages  so  as  not  to  compress  the  part  whence  the  dis- 
placement took  place,  and  that  we  may  render  them  tight  at 
the  side  to  which  the  displacement  was,  and  give  the  limb  an 
inclination  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  that  in  an  excessive 
degree.  We  employ  bandages,  compresses,  suspension  of  the 
limb  in  a  sling,  attitude,  extension,  friction,  rectification;  and 
along  with  these  the  aff'usion  of  much  water.^ 

same  as  those  contained  in  (J  IT),  (ialeu  insists  strongly  upon  tliis  being  a  clear 
proof  that  the  present  work  is  a  mere  rough  sketch,  and  that  it  had  never  been 
completed  l)y  our  author.  In  the  course  of  liis  Commentary,  he  repeatedly  insists 
that  the  original  publisher  must  have  used  great  liberties  with  the  text. 

'  As  a  corollary  to  this  proposition  Galen  remarks,  that  in  surgical  treatment  an 
injured  limb  ought  not  to  be  too  long  kept  entu-ely  without  motion,  but  that  as  soon 
as  the  inflammation  has  subsided,  it  should  be  cautiously  moved  after  hot  water  has 
been  poured  upon  it,  Sec. 

'  It  is  foreign  to  my  purpose  to  enter  upon  a  discussion  of  the  different  read- 
ings in  this  paragraph,  as  this  would  occupy  too  much  time  and  space.  See  Galen, 
Foes,  and  Littre.  As  I  have  translated  it,  the  meaning  seems  obvious,  and  the 
practice  very  rational.  The  subject  herein  treated  will  be  found  more  fully  discussed 
in  the  work  On  Fractures. 

■'  This  paragraph,  as  Galen  remarks,  contains  an  epitome  of  a  variety  of  matters 


THE  SURGERY.  487 

24.  In  treating  parts  which  are  atrophied,  we  must  com- 
prehend a  considerable  part  of  the  sound  limb  with  the  ban- 
dage, so  that  by  the  influx  thereby  produced,  the  wasted  part 
may  acquire  a  supply  greater  than  its  loss,  and  may  be  thus 
disposed  to  growth  and  restoration  of  its  fleshy  parts.  It  is 
better  also  to  bandage  the  parts  above,  as  the  thigh  in  the 
case  of  the  leg,  and  also  the  thigh  and  leg  of  the  opposite  side, 
so  that  they  may  be  placed  in  similar  circumstances,  and  may 
both  equally  be  deprived  of  motion ;  and  that  the  supply  of 
nourishment  may  be  alike  curtailed  and  open  to  both.  The 
compression  should  be  the  eff'ect  rather  of  the  number  of  the 
bandages  than  of  their  tightness.  We  relax  first  the  part  most 
requiring  it,  and  have  recourse  to  that  kind  of  friction  which 
will  promote  the  growth  of  flesh,  and  to  afl'usion.    No  splints.^ 

25.  Those  things  which  are  for  the  purpose  of  giving  support 
and  strength  to  the  part,  as  to  the  breast,  side,  head,  and  so 
forth,  are  used  in  such  cases  as  the  following  :  for  pulsations, 
that  there  may  be  no  motion  in  the  part ;  and  in  separation  at 
the  sutures  of  the  skull,  in  order  to  give  support ;  and  in  order 
to  strengthen  the  chest  and  head,  in  coughs,  sneezings,  and 
other  movements.      In  all  these  cases  the  same  measure   of 

which  are  fully  treated  of  in  the  treatises,  On  Fractures,  and  On  the  Articulations. 
Whatever  is  obscure  iu  it  -will  readily  be  understood  upon  reference  to  these  works. 
I  shall  only  notice  a  few  of  the  terms  which  may  be  somewhat  obscure  to  the 
modern  reader  who  is  not  familiar  with  the  two  treatises  now  referred  to.  Diastasis 
is  the  separation  of  the  two  bones  not  connected  together  by  diarthrosis,  but  iu  im- 
mediate connexion,  such  as  the  separation  of  the  radius  from  the  ulna  at  the 
elbow-joint,  and  the  separation  of  the  cranial  bones  at  a  suture.  Abruption  applies 
to  the  snapping  off  of  the  extremity  of  a  bone,  such  as  that  of  the  humerus.  The 
distrainings,  or  distortions  {ciaaTpkfinara),  relate  principally  to  cases  of  club-foot, 
and  will  come  to  be  more  properly  treated  of  in  the  portion  of  the  work  On  the 
Articulations,  which  relates  to  that  subject. 

'  Upon  reference  to  Galen,  it  will  ))e  seen  that  he  bestows  a  very  lengthy  and 
elaborate  Commentary  on  this  paragraph,  partly  in  illustration  of  the  verbal  meaning 
of  the  terms  here  used,  and  partly  in  discussing  the  merit  of  the  practical  rules  laid 
down  by  our  author.  By  atrophied  parts  in  this  place,  Hippocrates  would  appear 
to  allude  to  parts  which  have  become  wasted  in  flesh,  owing  to  the  compression 
and  want  of  exercise  during  their  treatment  for  fractures.  The  treatment  of  ema- 
ciated parts  is  briefly  laid  down  by  Paulus  iEoiXETA,  Book  I,  59,  and  the  other 
authorities.  See  the  Commentary.  It  is  remarkable  that,  as  far  as  I  can  discover, 
none  of  the  later  authorities  make  mention  of  the  loose  bandaging  here  recom- 
mended by  our  author.  Galen,  however,  states  that  he  had  used  it  as  directed  by 
Hippocrates, and  with  good  effect. 


488  THE  SURGERY. 

bandaging  is  to  he  observed,  for  wliere  the  injury  is,  there  the 
bandage  should  compress  most,  and  something  soft  is  to  be 
placed  below  that  suits  with  the  complaint ;  and  we  must  not 
apply  the  bandages  tighter  than  just  to  stop  the  pulsations  from 
creating  disturbance,  and  that  the  separated  parts  at  the  sutures 
may  be  brought  into  contact,  they  must  not  be  such  as  ab- 
solutely to  stop  the  coughs  and  sneezings,  but  so  as  to  give 
support,  and,  without  occasioning  uneasiness,^  prevent  the  parts 
from  being  shaken. 

'  There  is  not  much  in  tliis  paragraph  which  stands  in  need  of  iUustration,  but 
then  Galen's  Commentary  is  well  deserving  of  being  consulted.  lie  explains  that, 
in  afifections  of  the  head  and  chest,  it  was  customary  to  use  small  pillows  and  bags 
filled  with  millet  to  give  support  to  the  parts  affected  and  stop  motion  in  them.  It 
will  be  remarked,  that  in  this  place  our  author  makes  distinct  mention  of  diastasis 
or  separation  of  the  bones  of  the  cranium  at  the  sutures.     See  above. 


ON    FRACTURES. 


ON   FRACTURES. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

The  work  commences  with  an  announcement  of  the  general 
principle  upon  which  all  cases  of  fracture  and  dislocation  arc 
to  be  rectified,  which  is  this,  that  extension  should  be  made  as 
straight  as  possible,  the  term  straight  being  immediately  after- 
wards explained  to  be  meant  as  applying  to  that  direction 
which  is  most  natural  to  the  limb  affected,  that  is  to  say,  the 
position  which  will  afford  the  patient  most  ease  and  comfort 
after  the  limb  has  been  properly  arranged.  This  principle  of 
treatment  he  illustrates  at  considerable  length,  and  with  great 
force  of  argument,  in  the  case  of  the  fore- arm,  and  reviews  the 
different  positions  in  which  it  had  been  recommended  that  it 
should  be  placed,  namely,  the  state  of  pronation,  of  supination, 
the  intermediate,  and,  lastly,  that  of  the  archer  when  he  is  in 
the  attitude  of  drawing  the  string  of  his  bow.  The  author 
shows,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  the  evil  effects  resulting 
from  the  practice  of  not  putting  the  limb,  during  the  process 
of  bandaging,  into  the  attitude  in  Avhich  it  is  meant  that  it 
should  be  kept  afterwards,  as  by  the  change  of  position  the 
whole  apparatus  will  be  in  so  far  deranged.      §§  1 — 3, 

Fractures  of  the  fore-arm  are  next  considered,  and  most 
minute  directions  are  given  regarding  the  whole  process  of 
managing  it — the  setting  of  the  fractured  bones — the  applica- 
tion of  the  bandages,  the  compresses,  and  splints,  and  the 
arrangement  of  the  limb  after  the  process  is  completed.  The 
general  rules  of  practice  laid  down  for  the  management  of  this 
case  are  meant  to  apply  to  all  fractures,  with  a  few  exceptions. 
§§  4—7. 

Fracture  of  the  arm,  or  humerus,  is  next  considered,  and 
here  our  author^s  mode  of  procedure  is  highly  deserving  of 
attention,  as   being   considerably  different   from   the  method 


492  FRACTURES. 

now  in  use  :  lie  attaches  mucli  importance  to  the  mode  in 
which  extension  is  made,  and  pointedly  directs  that  the  limb 
be  placed  in  its  proper  position  before  the  application  of  the 
bandages  and  the  rest  of  the  apparatus.    §  8. 

He  then  proceeds  to  the  consideration  of  the  foot  and  the 
injuries  of  the  bones  which  compose  it.    §  9. 

The  displacement  of  the  tarsal  bones  from  those  of  the  leg 
are  next  considered,  by  which  luxations  of  the  astragalus  and 
OS  calcis  are  probably  meant.    §§>  10,  11. 

After  a  brief  description  of  the  bones  of  the  leg,  he  gives  an 
account,  in  general  terms,  of  luxations  of  the  foot,  and  then 
describes  very  elaborately  the  process  of  reducing  them,  and  of 
conducting  the  treatment  afterwards.    §§  13,  14. 

Fractures  of  the  leg  are  then  treated  of  at  considerable 
length  in  §§  15,  16^  17,  ]8. 

Fractures  of  the  thigh-bone  are  next  taken  into  considera- 
tion, and  most  minute  directions  are  given  for  the  management 
of  them  in  §§  19,  20,  21,  22,  23.  Our  author  gives  some 
account  of  the  canals,  or  gutters,  then  used  for  receiving  the 
limb  in  cases  of  fractured  leg  or  thigh;  he  does  not  much 
approve  of  them,  but  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that  the  beneficial 
etiects  of  them  had  been  much  exaggerated. 

Compound  fractures  are  next  considered,  and  all  the  diffe- 
rent modes  of  treating  them  which  were  then  in  vogue  are  dis- 
cussed, and  freely  criticised  in  §§  21,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29.  The 
exfoliation  of  the  ])ones  and  the  separation  of  spicuhie  are  next 
brought  under  notice,  and  the  treatment  of  such  cases  freely 
considered.  §  30. 

jSIany  minute  directions  are  given  relative  to  the  reduction 
of  broken  bones  by  means  of  the  lever,  and  the  treatment 
afterwards.   §'^  31,  32. 

The  treatment  in  those  cases  in  which  it  has  been  found 
impracticable  to  reduce  the  fractured  bones  is  next  delivered, 
including  many  important  observations  regarding  the  exfoliation 
of  bones,  and  the  resection  of  them.    §§  33,  34. 

The  danger  of  compound  fractiu'cs  of  the  femur  and 
humerus  is  pointedly  declared,  and  the  treatment  of  such  cases 
when  it  is  to  be  attempted  is  clearly  indicated.    §§  35,  30. 

In  §  37  is  given  a  brief  description  of  luxations  of  the  knee, 
along  with  an  elaborate,  and,  upon  the  whole,  a  very  accurate 


ARGUMENT.  49.'? 

stutcmcnt  of  the  points  of  analogy  between  the  knee-  and 
elbow-joints. 

In  §§  38,  39,  40,  41,  42,  43,  44,  the  luxations  and  sub- 
luxations at  the  elbow-joint  are  treated  of  very  succinctly,  but 
so  as  to  display  a  very  intimate  acquaintance  with  this  chiss  of 
accidents. 

In  §  45  there  is  given  a  curious,  but  rather  obscure, 
description  of  fracture  of  the  olecranon. 

In  §  46  is  given  a  brief  account  of  fracture  of  the  epiphysis, 
or  trochlea  of  the  humerus,  a  most  interesting  subject,  on 
which  we  shall  enter  more  fully  by  and  by. 

In  the  last  two  paragraphs  some  general  rules  are  given 
respecting  accidents  at  the  elbow,  as  regards  bandages  and 
position. 

From  this  enumeration  of  the  contents  of  the  present 
work,  it  will  be  readily  seen  that  it  is  not  a  complete  work  on 
fractures ;  and,  moreover,  that  it  contains  many  things  which 
are  altogether  foreign  to  that  subject.  In  short,  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  it  is  evidently  devoted  to  dislocations  and 
other  cognate  subjects,  as  in  like  manner  it  will  be  presently 
seen  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  next  work,  which  is 
more  especially  devoted  to  dislocations,  is  occupied  with  obser- 
vations on  fractures.  It  is  difficult  to  account  in  a  satisfac- 
tory manner  for  this  want  of  arrangement,  more  especially  as 
the  two  treatises  are  generally  acknowledged  to  have  con- 
stituted originally  one  work.  The  most  plausible  conjecture 
which  I  can  form,  in  order  to  account  for  this  mixing  up 
together  of  the  different  matters  in  each,  is  this, — that  when, 
for  convenience  sake,  the  work  was  divided  into  two,  namely, 
one  part  '  On  Fractures,^  and  another  '  On  the  Articulations,' 
it  was  found  necessary,  in  order  to  give  a  clear  view  of  the 
subjects  treated  of  in  the  one,  to  illustrate  them  by  extracts 
relative  to  the  cognate  subjects  treated  of  in  the  other.  And, 
in  fact,  although  the  subjects  here  discussed  be  given  rather 
confusedly,  it  will  be  found,  in  a  practical  point  of  view, 
very  convenient,  nay,  indispensably  necessary,  to  consider  cer- 
tain fractures  and  dislocations  at  the  same  time,  in  order  to 
establish  an  accurate  diagnosis  between  them.  For  example, 
how  is  it  possible  to  understand  dislocations  at  the  elbow 
without   a  knowledge   of  fractures   of  the  extremities   of  the 


494  FRACTURES. 

bones  which  enter  into  the  formation  of  it^  namely^  of  the 
humerus  and  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  ?  And  again^  who 
could  understand  fractures  at  the  lower  end  of  the  ti1)ia  and  fibula 
without  an  acquaintance  with  dislocations  at  the  ankle-joint  ? 
Altogether,  then,  it  certainly  appears  to  mc,  upon  mature 
reflection,  rather  an  advantage  to  the  student  to  have  these  two 
classes  of  accident  treated  of  together,  as  they  are  in  this  and 
the  succeeding  work.  The  complete  manner  in  which  the 
various  subjects  are  handled,  the  admirable  plan  upon  which 
oiu'  author  proceeds  from  obvious  and  indisputable  principles, 
cannot  fail  to  command  the  admiration  of  every  careful  and 
intelligent  reader.  The  whole  treatise,  also,  is  written  in  so 
lucid  a  style  that,  with  the  few  foot-notes  which  I  have  added, 
the  reader  will  find  no  more  difficulty  in  availing  himself  of 
the  contents  of  this  work,  although  written  twenty-two  cen- 
turies ago,  than  if  it  had  been  a  publication  of  the  present  day. 
I  shall  now  only  make  a  few  observations  on  certain  subjects, 
either  because  they  seem  to  require  some  elucidation,  owing  to 
their  being  treated  of  very  succinctly,  or  because  I  look  upon 
them  as  being  particularly  deserving  of  attention. 

The  process  of  setting,  bandaging,  and  arranging  a  frac- 
tured limb,  although  this  truly  is  now  a  hackneyed  subject, 
will  be  found  described  in  this  treatise  with  so  nuich  precision, 
that  I  am  persuaded  the  surgeon  of  the  present  day  may 
derive  information  from  it,  for  it  appears  to  me  that  certain 
of  the  rules  of  practice  here  laid  down  by  Hippocrates,  are 
sometimes  improperly  overlooked  by  the  modern  practitioner. 
For  example,  although  the  propriety  of  putting  a  fractured 
limb,  before  it  is  set,  into  the  position  in  which  it  is 
to  be  kept  afterwards,  is  so  clearly  stated  in  this  work,  it  is 
often  disregarded  in  modern  practice,  and  the  consequences 
here  described  follow  accordingly,  namely,  the  derangement  of 
the  bandages,  and,  consequently,  displacement  of  the  frac- 
tured portions  of  bone  after  the  position  of  the  limb  is  altered. 
I  am  also  of  opinion,  after  having  repeatedly  adopted  the 
practice  recommended  by  Hippocrates,  that  the  rule  here  stated, 
not  to  apply  the  bandages  and  apparatus  beyond  the  fractured 
limb,  is  consistent  with  sound  principles,  and  that  the  depar- 
ture from  it  in  modern  practice  is,  in  many  cases,  anything 
but  an  improvement.      This  I  have  hinted  in  the  annotations 


ARGUMENT.  495 

on  the  preceding  treatise,  and  I  am  now  glad  to  find  that  so 
distingnislied    an    authority    as    M.    Malgaigne    joins    me   in 
expressing  this  opinion.      Treating  of  the  splints,  compresses, 
and  bandages  used  in  the  Hippocratic  system  of  bandaging  a 
fractured  limb,  he  adds  :  "  Reste  enfin  leur  longueur,  qui  cheque 
nos  habitudes ;   car  ou  est  le  chirurgien  qui  se  borne  h  recou- 
vrir  Favant-bras  fracture,  sans  empieter  sur  la  main  et  avec  les 
bandes  et  avec  les  attelles  ?      Or,  deja  Toccasion  ne  m'a  pas 
manque  pour  le  dire,  et  je  n'hesiterai  pas  a  le  repeter  ici,  ces 
bandes,  ces  attelles,  prolongees  sur  la  main,   ne  sent  justifiees 
par  aucune  consideration  serieuse  et  legitime,  et  elles  ont  de 
graves  inconvenients.    En  these  generale,  attelles  ou  bandages 
ne  sont  faits  que  pour  remplacer  par  un  squelette  exterieur  le 
squelette  naturel  fracture,  qui  donnait  au  membre  sa  longueur, 
sa  forme,  sa  solidite,  et  ils  ne  doivent  pas  se  prolonger  au-dela, 
il  moius  d'indications  toutes  speciales.      II  faut  ajouter  cepen- 
dant  que  tout  membre  fracture,  pour  arriver  a  la  consolidation, 
devant   rester   long-temps   dans  Timmobilite,    a  besoin  d\me 
position  stable  qui  la  lui  garantisse,  et  que  Tappareil  que  nous 
venons    d'etudier    serait    insuffisant    a   cet   egard.       Mais  les 
moyens  de  remplir  cette  indication  nouvelle  sont  divers  pour 
chaque  membre  et  pour  chaque  brisure  du  membre ;  ils  pour- 
raient  etre  decrits  sous  le  noni  d'appareils  complementaires. 
Or,   ces   appareils   complementaires   ne   sont   pas   oublies   par 
Hippocrate ;  Techarpe  pour  I'avant-bras,  le  bandage  de  corps 
pour  le  bras,  les  coussins  ou  les  gouttieres  pour  le  membre 
inferieur.^'^     And,  in  addition  to  the  reasons  here  assigned  by 
M.  Malgaigne  for  confining  the  apparatus,  in  general,  to  the 
fractured  portion  of  the  limb,  I  would  again  say,  that  I  am  in- 
clined to  think  that  bandaging  the  part  below  the  injury,  for 
example,  the  hand,  in  fractures  of  the  fore-arm,  has  a  tendency  to 
increase  the  swelling  above,  which  would  otherwise  be  determined 
to  the  parts  l)elow,  and  thus  relieve  the  seat  of  the  injury. 

I  would  beg  leave  most  particularly  to  direct  attention  to  the 
condemnatory  remarks  of  our  author  upon  the  method  of  treat- 
ing compound  fractures,  by  bandaging  the  parts  on  both  sides 
of  the  wound,  and  leaving  it  uncovered  to  admit  of  dressings 
being  applied  to  it.  I  may  mention  in  this  place,  that  the  last 
occasion  on  which  I  met  with  the  lamented   Mr.   Liston,  we 

'  Des  Appareils  pour  le  Traitcment  cles  Fractures  en  general,  &c. 


496  FRACTURES. 

conversed  on  this  subject,  when  he  stated  decidedly  that  he  agreed 
with  Hippocrates  in  condemning  the  practice,  which,  however, 
he  often  saw  adopted  in  hospital  practice.  Our  author's  treat- 
ment of  compound  fractm-es  is  also  deserving  of  much  attention, 
as  indicating  the  large  amount  of  experience  which  he  must  have 
had  in  this  way. 

There  are  three  surgical  subjects  which  are  very  fully,  bvit  yet 
rather  confusedly,  treated  of  by  our  author  in  this  and  the  two 
following  works,  namely,  the  accidents  which  befall  the  knee, 
the  ankle,  and  the  elbow. 

On  Dislocations  at  the  Knee. 

It  strikes  one  as  very  remarkable,  that  the  ancient  surgeons 
should  all  speak  of  dislocations  at  the  knee-joint  as  being  of 
frequent  occurrence,  whereas  they  are  now  regarded  as  being 
among  the  rarest  accidents  of  the  kind  to  which  the  joints 
of  the  human  body  are  subject.  In  this  case,  we  must  either 
suppose  that  the  ancient  surgeons  had  somehow  been  guilty 
of  a  mistake,  or  that  the  accident  had  been  more  common 
in  ancient  times  than  it  is  now.  I  have  often  wondered 
whether  the  difficulty  might  not  he  got  over,  l)y  su})posing  that 
the  wrestlers  at  the  public  games  of  his  country,  who,  it  is 
clear,  furnished  Hippocrates  with  a  large  proportion  of  his  cases 
of  fracture  and  dislocation,  may  not  have  been  particularly 
liable  to  this  accident.  Having  once  met  with  a  very  interest- 
ing case  of  dislocation  at  the  knee-joint,  I  persuade  myself  that 
I  cannot  better  illustrate  this  subject  than  by  gi^'ing  a  Keport 
of  it  which  I  pubUshed  in  the  London  ^Medical  Gazette, 
Dec.  1812.  I  do  so  the  more  readily,  as  it  will  enable  me  to 
correct  some  unfortunate  typographical  blunders  which  occur  in 
the  Report  as  it  appeared  in  the  Gazette. 

"Case  of  Dislocation  at  the  Knee-joint. — By  Francis  Adams, 
Esq.,  Surgeon;  Sept.  10th,  1812.  Alexander  llobie,  aet.  55, 
while  in  the  act  of  carrying  provender  between  two  large 
bullocks  in  their  stall,  was  knocked  down  bv  a  stroke  of  one  of 
their  hind  legs  on  the  right  knee;  and  while  lying  on  the  ground, 
was  severely  injured  by  being  trod  upon  in  several  parts  of  the 
body,  especially  near  the  middle  of  the  right  leg.  I  saw  him 
about  two  hours  after  the  accident,  and  found  the  bones  of  the 
right  leg  lying  on  the  fore  part  of  the  femur;  the  articular 
cavities  could  be  distinctly  felt,  while,  below,  the  contour  of  the 


ARGUMENT.  497 

condyles  could  be  traced  :  in  short,  I  never  saw  a  case  of  dislo- 
cation in  which  the  symptoms  were  so  strongly  marked.  The 
patella  Avas  pulled  considerably  up  the  thigh;  but  it  appeared 
pretty  obvious  that  neither  the  I'tfjamentuni  patellae,  nor  the 
tendon  of  the  triceps,  was  ruptured ;  but  my  impression  at  the 
time  certainly  was,  that,  in  order  to  admit  of  so  great  a  dis- 
placement, all  the  principal  hgaments  of  the  joint  must  be  torn. 
The  limb  was  immoveably  extended.  By  making  proper  ex- 
tension and  counter-extension,  the  reduction  was  effected  with 
little  difficulty.  The  limb  was  then  bandaged  looselv,  from  the 
toes  to  near  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  and  laid  half-bent  on  a 
thick  pillow,  and  evaporating  lotions  were  directed  to  be  applied 
occasionally.  For  some  days  no  severe  symptoms  occurred  in 
the  joint ;  but  swelling  and  suppuration  having  afterwards  taken 
place  in  the  leg,  especially  about  the  calf  of  it,  the  bandages 
had  to  be  removed  and  poultices  applied.  The  limb  continued 
very  much  swollen,  and  the  discharges  became  fetid,  while, 
owing  perhaps  to  its  Aveight,  the  bones  of  the  leg,  about  the 
twelfth  day,  were  dragged  downwards,  so  as  then  to  give  the 
knee-joint  the  appearance  of  a  semi-luxation  ])ackwards.  The 
limb  was  secured  in  the  best  manner  that  could  be  managed  in 
its  tender  state,  and  the  bones  retained  in  position  by  means  of 
a  jointed  splint  applied  below  the  thigh  and  leg. 

^'  30th.  The  limb  has  gone  on  getting  daily  into  a  worse  state; 
the  foot  has  lost  its  heat  and  sensibility,  and  the  whole  leg 
behind  np  to  the  knee  is  of  a  darkish  green  colour.  About  the 
calf  of  the  leg  it  is  greatly  swollen,  and  the  discharge  from  it 
very  copious.  The  joint  is  so  loose  that  the  bones  can  with  dif- 
ficulty be  kept  in  position  :  the  pulse  about  115.  He  has  agreed 
to  have  his  limb  removed  to-morrow,  if  no  improvoment  take 
place  in  the  interval. 

"  Oct.  1st.  I  amputated  the  limb  to-day  about  the  middle  of 
the  thigh,  with  the  assistance  of  my  professional  neighbour 
Mr.  "Walker.  The  patient  bore  the  operation  with  great  forti- 
tude, and  appeared  soon  afterwards  much  relieved  from  his  suf- 
ferings. The  muscles  felt  so  soft  and  flabby,  as  to  excite  appre- 
hensions in  my  mind,  that  the  vessels  might  not  bear  the  liga- 
tures well ;  no  unpleasant  symptoms,  however,  occurred,  and  in 
the  course  of  three  weeks  the  stump  was  completely  healed. 

"  We  examined  the  parts  about  tlie  knee-joint  immediately 


498  FRACTURES. 

after  the  operation.  As  I  had  formerly  supposed  to  be  the 
case,  the  tendon  of  the  quadriceps  and  liyamentum  ■pateUce 
^yere  entire ;  the  hitter,  however,  was  remarkably  stretched 
and  slackened  ;  contrary  to  my  expectations,  I  found  that  the 
lateral  ligaments  were  not  torn.  Upon  cutting  into  the  joint, 
the  crucial  ligaments  w^ere  found  to  be  torn  in  pieces,  but  all 
the  other  parts  were  uninjured;  the  posterior  ligament,  the 
heads  of  the  gastrocnemius,  and  the  popliteal  vessels,  being  all 
safe  from  any  serious  injury.  The  limb  below  being  a  general 
mass  of  suppuration  and  putridity,  was  but  cursorily  examined; 
it  appeared  certain,  however,  that  the  back  part  of  the  leg  had 
been  bruised  to  the  state  of  a  pulp.  The  condyles  of  the  femur 
were  somewhat  smaller  than  they  normally  are,  and  were  so 
rounded  as  to  show  an  unusual  aptitude  to  slip  out  of  the 
articular  cavities  ;  and  to  this  construction  of  the  bones,  joined, 
perhaps,  to  some  preternatural  laxity  of  the  ligaments,  the  acci- 
dent, in  all  probability,  is  to  be  ascribed. 

"  This  would  appear  to  be  one  of  the  rarest  dislocations  to 
which  the  joints  of  the  human  body  are  subject.  The  only 
unequivocal  case  which  I  know  of  as  having  been  reported  in 
this  country,  is  the  one  related  b}^  Mr.  Jonathan  Toogood,  in 
the  '  Provincial  INIedical  and  Surgical  Journal,^  June,  1812. 
Another,  supposed  to  be  of  a  similar  nature,  he  justly  regards 
as  probably  incomplete.  In  these  two  cases  recovery  took 
place  Avithout  any  untoward  symptoms,  as  I  have  no  doidjt 
would  have  happened  to  my  patient,  had  the  injury  been  con- 
fined to  the  knee-joint.  Mr.  Toogood  mentions,  that  neither 
Sir  Astley  Cooper,  Dupuytren,  nor  Roux,  had  ever  met  wdth 
such  a  case,  nor,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,  do  any  of  our  latest 
Avriters  on  surgery  mention  having  ever  had  occasion  to  treat 
this  accident.  Cheselden,  although  correct  in  stating  that  'the 
knee  cannot  be  completely  dislocated  without  breaking  the  cross 
ligaments'  (Anatom.p.  45),  may  be  supposed  from  the  problema- 
tical way  in  which  he  expresses  himself,  to  have  had  no  expe- 
rience of  such  a  case.  Boyer  also  writes  of  the  accident  in 
equivocal  terms,  and  is  wrong  in  stating  that  the  heads  of  the 
gastrocnemius,  and  other  soft  parts,  must  necessarily  be  torn. 
Of  the  ancient  authorities  in  surgery  Celsus  is  the  only  one  who 
makes  mention  of  dislocation  forwards  :  he  says,  'In  priorcm 
nou  prolabi  plerique  scripserunt ;  potestque  id  vero  proximum 


ARGUMENT.  499 

esse,  cum  inde  opposita  patella  ipsa  quoque  tibiae  caput  contineat. 
Meges  tamen  eum  cui  in  priorem  partem  excidisset,  a  se 
curatum  esse  memoriae  prodidit.'  (viii.  21.)  Hippocrates,  the 
great  ancient  authority  on  fractures  and  dislocations,  describes 
dislocations  of  the  knee  outwards,  inwards,  and  backwards,  but 
savs  nothing  of  dislocations  forwards:  and  all  the  other  ancient 
writers  on  surgery,  both  Greek  and  Araliian,  repeat  the  same 
statement.  In  like  manner  the  earlier  surgical  writers  in 
modern  times,  being  all  servile  copyists  of  the  Arabians,  give 
the  same  account  of  dislocations  at  the  knee.  See  Theodoricus, 
ii,  52.  As  far  as  I  can  learn,  the  case  now  related  is  the  only 
one  on  record  in  which  the  actual  state  of  the  parts  was  ascer- 
tained bv  dissection.^' 

Since  writing  the  above  report,  I  have  ascertained  that  I  had 
overlooked  an  unequivocal  case  of  dislocation  at  the  knee-joint 
related  by  our  old  authority,  Wiseman.  He  describes  it  most 
circumstantially,  to  the  effect  that  "  the  head  of  the  os  tibiae 
was  shot  under  the  thigh-bone,  and  lay  stretched  out  straight. 
By  making  extension  and  counter-extension,  and  fixing  the  limb 
towards  the  buttocks,  it  slipped  into  its  place."  This,  then,  w^as 
a  case  of  dislocation  of  the  tibia  backwards,  and  in  so  far  differed 
from  mine,  which  was  a  dislocation  forwards.  It  has  been  made 
a  question  whether  or  not  our  author,  in  treating  of  displace- 
ments at  the  knee,  regards  the  femur  or  the  tibia  as  the  fixed 
point.  ]M.  Littre  inclines  to  the  opinion,  that  he  makes  the 
tibia  the  fixed  point,  and  regards  the  femur  as  the  part  which 
is  displaced ;  according  to  this  rule,  the  case  I  have  related  would 
have  been  ranked  by  Hippocrates  as  a  dislocation  backwards. 
It  would  appear,  then,  after  all,  that  the  case  related  above  is 
one  of  the  forms  which  Hippocrates  recognises.  Of  the  lateral 
dislocations  noticed  by  Hippocrates,  and  the  other  ancient  au- 
thorities, there  is  hardly  any  unequivocal  case  reported  in  modern 
works  on  surgery.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  they  must  all 
be  incomplete,  or  connected  with  congenital  malformation. 
Subluxations  constitute  a  class  of  accidents,  about  the  nature 
of  which  there  is  still  much  uncertaintv,  after  all  the  investi- 
gations  which  they  have  undergone  of  late  years.  Many  of 
them  would  appear  to  be  mere  displacements  of  the  semi-lunar 
cartilages.      It  is  curious  to  remark,  that  all  our  earlier  authori- 


sou  rRACTlIRES. 

ties  agree  witli  the  ancient  in  representing  dislocations  at  the 
knee  as  a  very  mikl  class  of  accidents.  Wiseman  says,  "  They 
are  not  difficult  to  reduce,  nor  subject  to  such  accidents  as  those 
of  the  elbow."  (v,  9.)  Yesalius  speaks  of  them  as  being  very 
insignificant  accidents,  insomuch  that  the  patient  himself  can 
readily  reduce  them.  (Chivurg.  INIag.  i,  17.)  Ambrose  Pare 
writes  of  them  in  similar  terms.  It  is  probable  that  these,  and 
other  modern  authorities,  merely  copy  from  the  ancient  authori- 
ties, and  that  severe  sprains,  exaggerated  by  the  imaginations 
of  the  patients  into  dislocations,  have  been  often  recognised  as 
such  by  the  professional  attendants. 

On  the  Accidents  which  befall  the  Bones  of  the  EWoid. 

As  there  is  scarcely  a  subject  connected  with  surgery  more 
puzzling,  even  at  the  present  day,  than  the  fractures  and 
luxations  which  occur  at  tlie  elbow-joint,  so  it  is  one  to  Avhich 
Hippocrates  had  evidently  paid  the  most  minute  attention,  and 
accordingly  he  has  treated  of  it  in  three  different  works,  namely, 
at  aWtures/  §§  38,  39,  10,  11,  A^,  43,  44,  45,  40;  'Articu- 
lations,' §§  17,  IS,  19,  20,21,22,23,  24,  25,  6(3;  'Mochlicus,' 
§§  7,  H,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13.  Of  the  important  matters  contained 
in  these  paragraphs  I  noAv  feel  myself  called  upon  to  attempt 
an  accurate  analysis,  without  which  it  must  be  admitted  that 
my  translation  can  })ossess  but  little  value ;  for  he  forms  but  a 
very  imperfect  idea  of  the  duties  of  a  translator  who  thinks 
he  has  nothing  to  do  but  merely  to  render  certain  vocables  of 
the  original  into  the  corresponding  ones  in  the  language  of  the 
translation,  without  concerning  himself  with  the  exact  sense 
and  import  of  the  original  author. 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  enumerate  all  the  varieties  of  dislo- 
cation and  fracture  at  the  elbow-joint,  which  our  author 
describes,  or,  at  least,  appears  to  describe. 

1.  Dislocation  of  the  ulna  and  r;idius  backwards,  'Articu- 
lations/ §§  19—23;  'Fractures,'  §  42;  '  I^Iochlicus,'  §  9: 
there  his  descriptions  agree  very  well  Avith  those  of  Sir  Astlc}^ 
Cooper,  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,^  and  all  the  best  modern  autho- 
rities.      Incomplete    dislocations,    described    by    our    author, 

'  Lectures  in  tlic  Medical  Gazette,  No.  1005. 


ARGUMENT.  501 

'Articulations/  §§  17 — 21;   'Fractures/  §§  39,  40;   '  Mocli- 
licus/  §  14;  but  scarcely  recognised  by  modern  authorities.^ 

2.  Dislocation  of  the  ulna  and  radius  forwards ;  see  '  Frac- 
tures/ §  43;  'Articulations/  §§  19 — 23;  '  Mochlicus/  §  9. 
This  case  is  scarcely  admitted  as  possible,  by  modern  autho- 
rities, unless  attended  with  fracture  of  the  olecranon.  Dr. 
Fergusson,  however,  is  not  quite  decided  upon  this  point,  and 
in  great  laxity  of  the  joint  I  can  easily  suppose  it  possible. 

3.  Complete  lateral  dislocation  described  at  '  Fractures,' 
§  41;  'Articulations/  §§  18 — 22;  '  Mochlicus,'  §  12.  This 
case  is  scarcely  recognised  as  possible  by  Sir  Charles  Bell,  Sir 
Astley  Cooper,  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,  and  Mr.  Liston;  but 
is  distinctly  admitted  by  Chehus,  §  1018,  and  partially  so  by 
Mr.  R.  Adams,  in  the  '  Cyclopaidia  of  Anatomy.^" 

4.  Partial  or  incomplete  lateral  dislocations  described  at 'Frac- 
tures,' §  40.  These  are  recognised  and  described  by  Sir  Charles 
Bell,  Mr.  Liston,  Mr.  R.Adams,  in  the  'Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy/ 
and  by  Chelius,  and  all  our  best  authorities  of  the  present  day. 

5.  Luxation  of  the  radius  forwards,  backwards,  and  to  either 
side,  obscurely  noticed  at  'Fractures/  §  41 — 44;  'Articula- 
tions,' §  18.  Those  backwards  and  forwards  are  described  by 
Sir  Astley  Cooper,  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,  Mr.  R.  Adams 
(Cyc.  Anat.,  1.  c),  and  all  our  best  authorities  ;  but  lateral 
dislocation  has  been  noticed  by  few.  It  is  recognised,  how- 
ever, by  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  in  the  Appendix  to  his  work  on 
Luxations,  and  Mr.  R.  Adams,  in  the  '  Dublin  Journal  of 
Medical  Science,'  vol.  xxii,  p.  504. 

6.  Fractures  of  the  olecranon,  described  bv  our  author  at 
'  Fractures,'  §  45,  and  still  more  distinctly  by  Galen,  (Chirur- 
gici  Grseci,  p.  87).  Sir  Charles  Bell,  and  all  the  best  modern 
authorities  describe  this  accident  in  similar  terms.  I  may 
mention,  under  this  head,  that  neither  Hippocrates,  nor  any 
other  author,  ancient  or  modern,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  has 
noticed  rupture  of  the  tendon  of  the  triceps,  and  yet  I  have 
met  with  a  case  of  this  accident. 

7.  Abruption  of  the  articular  extremity  of  the  humerus,  that 
is  to  say,  of  its  apophysis,   or  trochlea,    is    described   by  our 

'  Chelius,  indeed,  speaks  of  incomplete  lateral  dislocations,  but  only  in  very  general 
terms  (§  1048). 

■^  Almornial  Condition  of  the  Elbow-joint. 


502  FRACTURES. 

author  as  being  an  accident  which,  although  it  may  appear 
more  serious,  is,  in  fact,  far  milder  than  most  of  the  injuries  of 
the  elbow -joint,  ^  Fractures,^  §  46.  It  is  more  distinctly 
noticed  by  Galen,  in  a  fragment  of  his  '  Commentary,'  pre- 
served by  Cocchi  (Chirurg.  Gnec,  p.  86)  :  "Abruption  is  not 
a  different  sort  of  injury  from  fracture,  but  abruption  is  a  frac- 
ture taking  place  in  the  seat  of  the  articulation.  In  the  arti- 
culation at  the  elbow  sometimes  the  bone  of  the  fore-arm  is 
broken  off,^  and  sometimes  that  of  the  arm  (the  humerus).'^ 
Nothing  can  be  more  distinct  than  the  description  given  by 
these  two  authors,  and  yet  it  is  singular  that  scarcely  any 
modern  authority  has  noticed  this  accident,  although  I  believe 
it  to  be  of  frequent  occurrence.  Complicated  with  dislocations, 
it  lias,  indeed,  been  described  of  late,  and  most  distinctly  by 
Sir  Charles  Bell  and  Baron  Dupuytreu.  Sir  Charles  writes  of  it 
thus  :  ''Fracture  through  the  trocJilea  and  across  the  fossa.  Take 
care  to  distinguish  this  accident  from  dislocation  of  the  ulna 
and  radius  backwards,  etc.""  Baron  Dupuytren,  in  like  manner, 
in  his  admirable  work,  on  Fractures  and  Dislocations,  lately 
reprinted  by  the  Sydenham  Society,  gives  a  masterly  account 
of  this  case  when  it  puts  on  the  appearance  of  dislocation  at 
the  elbow -joint,  but  neither  he,  nor  any  other  authority  of 
late  years,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  has  descri])ed  the  case  when 
not  accompanied  by  displacement.  This  appears  to  me  most 
remarkable,  since  I  can  attest,  from  the  most  ample  experience, 
that  it  is  an  accident  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  insomuch 
that  scarcely  a  year  passes  in  which  I  am  not  called  upon  to 
treat  several  cases  of  it.  It  occurs  most  frequently  in  young 
persons  from  falls,  and  may  be  readily  discovered  by  pulling 
gently  at  the  arm  and  fore-arm,  and  placing  the  thumb  on  the 
front  of  the  articulation,  when  a  crepitus  will  be  easily  detected. 
If  not  detected  and  properly  treated,  the  case  ends  in  a  stiff 
joint,  so  that  extension  cannot  be  made  to  a  greater  extent 
than  about  130  or  140  degrees,  and  flexion  also  is  imperfectly 
performed.      The  fore-arm  at  first  should  be  bent  at  about  a 

'  Does  he  mean  fracture  of  the  coronoid  process  of  the  ulna  ?  Dr.  Fergusson,  as 
far  as  I  am  aware,  is  the  only  one  of  our  recent  authorities  who  hints  that  it  is  often 
fractured  in  dislocations  backwards.  Sir  A.  Cooper,  however,  has  also  noticed  frac- 
ture of  the  coronoid  process.     Sec  his  work  on  Dislocations,  &c.,  p.  183. 

■■'  Institutes  of  Surgery,  p.  12(). 


ARGUMENT.  50.3 

right  angle  to  the  arm,  and  secured  with  bandages,  as  the 
ligatures  are  usually  put  on  after  venesection,  hut  these  should 
soon  be  loosed,  and  the  motion  of  the  joint  secured  by  making 
extension  in  good  time.  I  also  avail  myself  of  the  present 
opportunity  to  state  it  as  my  own  belief,  after  a  pretty  ex- 
tensive acquaintance  with  this  class  of  accidents,  that  what  is 
taken  for  a  dislocation  at  the  elbow  is  usually  complicated  with 
fracture  of  the  apophysis  of  the  humerus.  Hence  it  is  that 
patients  so  frequently  complain  of  their  surgeon  having  left 
them  with  a  stiff  joint  after  such  an  accident. 

8.  Congenital  dislocation  at  the  elbow-joint  is  briefly  noticed 
by  our  author;  '  Mochlicus,^  §  11;  'Articulations,^  §  21. 
Cases  of  congenital  dislocations  would  appear  to  be  particularly 
rare,  but  yet  congenital  dislocation  of  the  radius  is  noticed  by 
Dupuytren  and  R.  Adams. ^ 

From  the  account  which  I  have  now  given  of  our  author's 
opinions  regarding  the  accidents  which  befall  the  elbow -joint,  it 
will  be  admitted  even  at  the  present  day,  that  his  information 
on  the  subject  was  almost  complete.  The  only  well-marked  case 
which  is  omitted  l)y  him  is  the  separate  dislocation  of  tiie  ulna; 
it  is  noticed  by  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper  in  the  following  terms  : 
"  It  sometimes,  but  very  rarely,  occurs  that  the  ulna  is  thrown 
backwards  from  the  inner  condyle,  without  a  corresponding  dis- 
placement of  the  radius.'^  It  is  also  noticed  by  Sir  Astley  Cooper 
and  by  R.  Adams  in  the  'Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy.'  But,  in  fact, 
it  had  been  distinctly  described  in  ancient  times,  by  Celsus  and 
Oribasius.  SeetheComment.onPAULUS7EGiNETA,Book VI,  115. 
Is  it  not,  in  so  far,  consolatory  to  find  that  a  great  genius,  like 
our  author,  does  not  anticipate  all  the  discoveries  which  any  sub- 
ject he  handles  is  capable  of  receiving  ?  Yet,  after  the  lapse  of 
twenty-two  centuries,  how  few  additions  have  been  made  to  the 
information  which  he  supplies  on  this  head  !" 

'  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy,  Abnormal  Elbow-joint. 

^  The  reader  may  find  it  interesting  to  compare  with  the  list  of  accidents  de- 
scril)ed  by  our  author  that  which  is  given  of  them  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy  : 
"  1 ,  Luxations  of  both  bones  backwards  ;  2,  Luxations  of  both  bones  laterally,  com- 
plete and  incomplete;  3,  Luxations  of  both  bones  laterally  and  posteriorly;  4,  Lux- 
ation of  the  ulna  alone  backwards ;  5,  Luxation  of  the  radius  alone  forward ;  6, 
Luxation  of  the  radius  externally  and  superiorly;  7,  Complete  luxation  of  the  radius 
backwards ;  8,  Sub-luxation  of  the  radius  backwards ;  9,  Congenital  luxation  of  llie 
radius."  (Abnormal  Elbow-joint.) 


504  FRACTURES. 

On  the  Fractures  and  Dislocations  at  the  Ankle-joint. 

In  order  to  understand  the  account  given  by  our  author  of 
accidents  which  befall  the  ankle-joint;,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
advert  to  his  description  of  the  bones  which  compose  the  leg. 
Turning,  then,  to  '  Fractures/  §  12,  and  '  Mochlicus/  §  1,  it 
will  be  seen  that  Hippocrates  describes  the  tibia  and  fibula  as 
being  united  together,  above  and  below,  by  an  epiphysis,  and 
it  appears  problematical  whether,  by  the  lower  epiphysis,  he 
meant  the  outer  malleolus,  or  the  t^  o  malleoli  taken  together ; 
and  further,  it  will  be  a  question  for  the  reader  to  consider 
whether  he  does  not  use  the  term  vaguely,  sometimes  in  the 
one  sense  and  sometimes  in  the  other.  It  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  Hippocrates  lived  at  a  time  when  the  terms  of  art 
were  by  no  means  strictly  defined.  Thus  it  is  well  known 
that  he  applies  the  term  nerve  (rfj^oi-)  to  nerves  properly 
speaking,  and  also  to  tendons  and  membranes.  By  ''great 
vertebra"  he  sometimes  means  the  second  cervical,  sometimes 
the  first  dorsal,  and  at  other  times  the  last  lumbar.  It  seems 
undeniable  that  he  applies  the  term  "  head  of  the  humerus,'^ 
both  to  its  ujiper  and  inferior  extremity.^  It  need  not  be 
thought  singular,  then,  that  he  should  be  found  to  use  the  term 
epiphysis  in  the  same  indefinite  manner.  He  knows  nothing 
of  the  distinction  between  epiphysis  and  apophysis,  as  applied 
by  Galen,  the  one  to  the  junction  of  two  bones  together,  and 
the  other  to  a  protuberance  of  a  single  bone ;"  the  latter  term, 
indeed,  he  rarely  or  never  uses,  as  applied  to  bones.  See  Foes, 
'  CEcon.  Hippocrat.' 

We  shall  now  examine  the  contents  of  the  paragraphs  in 
which  these  accidents  are  described.  See  'Fractures,'  §§  10, 
11,  12,  13;  'Articulations,'  §§  83,  8!,  85,80,87;  'Mochlicus/ 
§§  27,  28,  29,  30,  31.  "  j 

Dislocations  of  the  astragalus,  along  with  the  other  bones  of     I 
the  tarsus  from  the  bones  of  the  leg,  arc  described  at   '  Frac-      i 
tures,'    ^    10,    and  at  'Articulations,'  §§  83,  85,   87;  in   the 
last  of  these  paragraphs  to  the  following  effect :  "  In  those  cases 

'  Our  old  autlioiity  ^yiseman,  in  like  manner,  applies  the  term  "head"  to  the 
inferior  as  well  as  to  the  upper  extremity  of  the  humerus;  he  says,  "the  os  humeri 
ciideth  hroad  towards  the  cuhit,  with  a  (loul)Ic  head,"  &c.  (vii,  (i.) 

'■'  De  Ossi])us  ad  Tironcs. 


ARGUMENT.  505 

in  which  the  foot  is  displaced^  cither  by  itself  or  with  its 
e^jiphysis,  it  generally  is  dislocated  inwards/^  Nearly  the  same 
description  is  repeated  at  '  Mochlicus/  §  31,  and  dislocations 
of  these  bones  are  otherwise  alluded  to  at  §§  27,  28,  29,  of  the 
same  work.  The  great  puzzle  is  the  description  given  at  §  13 
of  '  Fractures,'  which  is  as  follows  :  "  The  bones  connected 
with  the  foot  are  sometimes  displaced,  sometimes  both  the 
bones  Avith  the  epiphysis  ;  sometimes  the  epiphysis  is  displaced, 
and  sometimes  the  other  bone.''  It  would  be  tedious  to  the 
professional  reader,  I  fear,  if  I  were  to  go  into  a  lengthened 
discussion  of  all  the  different  interpretations  which  might  be 
given  of  this  very  obscure  passage,  and  I  must  own  that  I  have 
but  little  heart  for  the  task,  knowing,  as  I  do,  that  I  should 
not  arrive  at  any  very  satisfactory  result  at  the  conclusion  of 
my  long  labours.  I  shall  give,  then,  a  summary  view  of  a 
question,  the  consideration  of  which  has  cost  me  no  little  time 
and  application.  If  by  epiphysis  is  here  meant  the  conjoined 
malleoli,  that  is  to  say,  the  extremity  of  both  bones  of  the  leg, 
the  first  case  described  thus  :  "  The  bones  connected  with  the 
foot  are  sometimes  displaced,  sometimes  both  bones  with  the 
epiphysis,"  may  be  taken  to  mean  simple  fracture  of  the 
extremity  of  the  leg  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  joint — a 
case  of  not  unfrequent  occurrence,  and  w'hicli,  from  ample  expe- 
rience, I  know  puts  on  very  much  the  appearance  of  a  dislo- 
cation ;  in  fact,  this  is  the  case  which  Mr,  Brausby  Cooper 
describes  as  dislocation  of  the  astragalus  outwards.^  The  next 
case,  "  sometimes  the  epiphysis  is  moved,"  may  mean  subluxa- 
tion outwards;  and  the  third,  "sometimes  the  other  bone,"  may 
apply  to  subluxation  inwards.  Indeed,  the  word  here  used 
{sKivriOr))  is  generally  restricted  by  our  author  to  sul)luxations. 
It  is  to  be  recollected  that,  by  dislocation  at  the  ankle,  Hippo- 
crates meant,  like  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  jNIr.  Bransby  Cooper, 
and  most  of  our  late  authorities,  displacement  of  the  bones  of 
the  leg  from  the  astragalus. 

If  we  turn  to  the  authorities  subsequent  to  Hippocrates,  we 
shall  not  meet  with  much  that  is  calculated  to  throw  additional 
light  upon  the  subject.  Paulus  iEgiueta  describes  dislocation  at 
the  ankle  briefly  and  vaguely.      Celsus  says  the  displacements 


>  s, 


!ec  his  Lectures  in  the  Medical  (iazette,  formerly  referred  to. 


506  FRACTURES. 

may  be  in  all  directions.  Oribasius  describes  tliree^  namely, 
inwards,  outwards,  and  backwards.  Tlie  Arabian  Albucasis  men- 
tions only  two,  inwards  and  outwards.  See  Paulus  ^Egineta, 
Book  VI,  120.  Most  of  our  late  authorities,  like  Celsus, 
admit  the  possibility  of  displacements  inwards,  outwards,  back- 
wards, and  forwards.  But,  after  all,  it  is  a  subject  Avhich  still 
stands  much  in  want  of  further  elucidation.  For  my  own  part, 
after  a  good  deal  of  experience  in  treating  these  accidents,  I 
must  say  that  I  incline  very  much  to  Mr.  Sj-me^s  ^dews,  and 
am  disposed  to  range  them  with  fractures  rather  than  with 
luxations,  for  I  believe  that  fracture  is  generally,  if  not  always, 
the  primary  and  the  more  important  injury. 

Dislocation  of  the  os  calcis  from  the  cuboid,  or  dislocation  at 
Chopart's  tarsal  joint,  would  seem  to  be  the  accident  described 
at  §  11  of  '  Fractures,^  §  86  of  '  Articulations,^  and  '^  30  of 
'  Mochlicus.'      See  the  annotations. 

These  are  the  only  luxations  at  the  ankle  described  by  our 
author,  and  I  need  scarcely  say  that  they  comprise  the  principal 
accidents  of  this  class  with  which  the  modern  surgeon  is  ac- 
quainted. It  will  be  seen,  that  the  explanation  of  the  passages 
in  which  they  are  noticed  is  attended  with  much  difficulty :  and 
I  am  bound  to  say,  that  great  credit  is  due  to  M.  Littre,  and 
his  countrymen  MINI.  Malgaigne  and  Bosquillon,  for  the  pains 
they  have  taken  in  elucidating  their  obscurities.  I  shall  be  much 
gratified  if  my  exertions  be  found  to  have  cast  some  additional 
light  upon  the  subject.      See  further  the  annotations. 

Congenital  dislocations  at  the  ankle-joint,  or  clubfoot,  and 
also  those  of  the  hip-joint  and  wrist,  will  come  to  be  treated  of 
in  the  Argument  prefixed  to  the  next  treatise. 


507 


ON  FRACTURES. 

In  treating  fractures  and  dislocations^  the  physician  must 
make  the  extension  as  straight  as  possible,  for  this  is  the  most 
natural  direction.^  But  if  it  incline  to  either  side,  it  should 
rather  turn  to  that  of  pronation,  for  there  is  thus  less  harm 
than  if  it  be  towards  supination.  Those,  then,  who  act  in 
such  cases  without  deliberation,  for  the  most  part  do  not 
fall  into  any  great  mistake,  for  the  person  who  is  to  have  his 
arm  bound,  presents  it  in  the  proper  position  from  necessity, 
but  physicians  who  fancy  themselves  learned  in  these  matters, 
are  thev  who  commit  blunders.  There  is  no  necessity  for  much 
study,  then,  in  order  to  set  a  broken  arm,  and  in  a  word, 
any  ordinary  physician  can  perform  it ;  but  I  am  under  the 
necessity  of  giving  the  longer  directions  on  this  subject,  because 
I  know  physicians  who  have  the  reputation  of  being  skilled 
in  gi^ing  the  proper  positions  to  the  arm  in  binding  it  up, 
while  in  reality  they  are  only  showing  their  own  ignorance. 
But  many  other  things  in  ovoc  art  are  judged  of  in  this  manner, 
for  people  rather  admire  what  is  new,  although  they  do  not 
know  whether  it  be  proper  or  not,  than  what  they  are  accus- 
tomed to,  and  know  already  to  be  proper ;  and  what  is  strange, 
they  prefer  to  what  is  obvious.  I  must  now  state  what  the 
mistakes  of  medical  men  are,  which  I  wish  to  unteach,  and  what 
instructions  I  have  to  give  as  to  the  management  of  the  arm ; 
for  what  I  have  to  say  regarding  it,  will  apply  to  the  other 
bones  in  the  body. 

'  I  may  mention  at  the  commencement,  that,  in  this  treatise  and  the  succeeding 
one,  On  the  Articulations,  our  author  expresses  himself  in  general  so  fully  that  there 
is  little  need  of  any  commentary  to  explain  his  meaning.  For  this  reason  my 
annotations  on  these  two  works  will  be  much  briefer  than  those  on  the  preceding 
treatises.  In  this  place  I  have  to  remark  that  the  reader  must  understand  the  epithet 
"  straight,"  as  explained  by  the  context,  that  is  to  say,  as  signifying  "  the  most 
natural"  direction  for  the  limb  to  which  it  is  applied ;  its  meaning  in  the  case  of 
fractures  of  the  fore-arm  will  appear  presently.  See  an  elaborate  disquisition  on  the 
meaning  of  the  term  by  M.  Littre  (CEuvres  d'Hippocrat.,  tom.  iii,  p.  389).  It  does 
not  appear  to  me,  however,  that  there  is  any  difficulty  in  comprehending  our  author's 
use  of  the  term. 


508  FRACTURES. 

2.  The  arm,  then,  for  that  is  the  subject  we  were  treating 
of,  Avas  presented  in  the  prone  position  to  be  bound,  but  the 
physician  foi'ced  his  patient  to  hokl  it  as  the  archers  do  when 
they  project  the  shouhler,  and  in  this  position  he  bound  it  up, 
thinking  within  himself  that  he  Avas  acting  according  to  Nature, 
and  in  proof  of  this  he  pointed  ont  that  all  the  bones  in  the 
forearm  were  thus  in  a  straight  line,  and  that  the  integuments 
both  inside  and  outside,  were  also  in  a  straight  line,  and  that 
the  flesh  and  nerves  [tendons  ?)  were  thus  pvit  in  their  natural 
position,  and  he  appealed  to  what  happens  in  archery,  as  a 
proof  of  tliis.^  And  so  saying,  and  so  doing,  he  is  looked  np 
to  as  a  sage ;  and  yet  he  forgets  that  in  all  the  other  arts  and 
performances,  whether  executed  by  strength  or  dexterity,  what 
is  reckoned  the  natural  position  is  not  the  same,  and  that  in  the 
same  piece  of  work  it  may  happen  that  the  natural  position  of 
the  right  arm  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  left.  For  there 
is  one  attitude  in  throwing  the  javelin,  and  another  in  slinging, 
another  in  casting  stones,  another  in  boxing,  and  another  in  a 
state  of  repose.  And  whatever  arts  one  examines,  it  will  be 
found  that  the  natural  position  of  the  arms  is  not  the  same  in 
each,  but  that  in  every  case  the  arms  are  put  into  the  attitude 
which  suits   best  Avith  the   instrument  that   is   used,  and  the 

'  There  is  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  in  determining  what  position  of  the  arm  is  here 
meant,  and  there  is  the  greatest  diversity  of  opinion  among  tlie  expositors  on  this 
head.  Palladius  says  expressly,  that  supination  is  the  position  here  referred  to;  hut 
this  apparently  cannot  he  the  case,  as  supination  is  treated  of  helow  in  the  third 
paragra])h.  Galen  also  calls  tlie  jjosition  either  complete  su])ination  or  nearly  so. 
Littrc  sought  to  solve  the  difficulty  by  examining  tlie  figures  of  ancient  archers  in 
the  attitude  of  drawing  the  bow,  as  represented  in  the  Temple  of  Jupiter  in  Egina. 
In  general,  he  found  the  arm  in  the  position  intermediate  between  pronation  and 
supination.  This,  then,  would  appear  to  be  the  position  here  meant ;  hut  as  this  is, 
in  fact,  the  best  and  easiest  position  in  wliich  a  fractured  arm  can  l)e  placed,  it  may 
be  asked  in  what  respect  then  is  it  condemned  as  faulty?  From  what  is  stated  in 
the  latter  part  of  this  paragraph,  it  is  clear  that  it  is  in  being  completely  extended; 
whereas  the  easy  and  natm-al  position  is  tliat  with  the  fore-arm  at  right  angles  to  the 
body.  In  the  attitude  of  drawing  the  how,  of  course  the  left  arm  is  strongly  ex- 
tended. Were  a  fractured  arm,  then,  to  be  put  into  this  position  while  it  was  in  the 
act  of  being  bandaged,  its  position  could  not  be  changed  without  deranging  the 
bandages ;  and  if  it  were  to  be  kept  thus  extended  for  a  time,  the  attitude,  as  stated  by 
our  author,  would  no  doubt  be  very  painful.  Galen,  in  his  very  lucid  description  of 
the  process  of  putting  np  fractured  limbs,  states  decidedly  that,  in  the  case  of  tlie 
fore-arm,  the  proper  position  is  the  rectangular  {lyyMviov). — Meth.  Med.,  vi,  5. 
Tliis  is  a  principle  whicli  our  author  enforces  on  all  occasions. 


FRACTURES.  5U9 

work  to  he  performed.  In  practising  archery,  no  douht 
this  is  the  hest  attitude  of  the  left  arm,  for  the  ginglymoid 
extremity  of  the  humerus  being  fixed  in  the  cavity  of  the  uhia, 
in  this  position,  throws  the  bones  of  the  forearm  and  arm  into 
a  Kne,  as  if  they  constituted  a  single  bone,  and  all  flexion  at 
the  joint  is  prevented  in  this  position.  It  is  no  doubt  certain 
that  the  member  is  thus  put  into  the  most  unbending  and 
extended  position  possible,  so  as  not  to  be  overcome  or  yield  when 
the  string  is  drawn  by  the  right  arm,  and  thus  will  the  archer 
be  enabled  to  draw  the  string  farthest,  and  discharge  his  arrow 
with  the  greatest  force  and  rapidity,  for  arrows  thus  discharged 
have  the  greatest  swiftness  and  foi'ce,  and  are  carried  to  the 
greatest  distances.  But  there  is  nothing  in  common  between 
the  binding  up  of  an  arm  and  archery.  ^Moreover,  if  having 
thus  bound  up  the  arm,  the  physician  direct  the  patient  to  keep 
it  thus,  he  will  occasion  him  greater  pain  than  he  had  from  the 
wound  itself;  and  thus  also,  if  the  physician  order  him  to  bend 
the  arm,  neither  the  bones,  the  nerves,  nor  the  flesh  will  any 
longer  be  in  the  same  condition,  but  will  be  arranged  diff'erently, 
having  overcome  the  bandaging.  What  use,  then,  is  there 
of  the  archer^s  attitude  ?  And  these  mistakes,  the  physician, 
conceited  in  his  knowledge,  would  probably  not  have  committed 
if  he  had  allowed  the  patient  himself  to  present  his  arm. 

3.  But  another  physician  putting  the  arm  into  the  state 
of  supination,  gives  orders  to  extend  the  arm  thus,  and  bandages 
it  in  this  position,  reckoning  it  the  one  according  to  nature, 
judging  thus  from  the  skin,  and  also  fancying  the  bones  to  be 
thus  in  their  natural  position,  because  the  bone  which  protrudes 
at  the  wrist,  where  the  little  finger  is,  appears  to  be  in  a  line 
with  the  bone  from  Avliich  people  measure  the  bone  of  the 
forearm.  These  things  he  brings  forwards  as  proofs  that  the 
parts  are  in  their  natural  state,  and  he  is  supposed  to  speak 
correctly.  But,  indeed,  if  the  arm  be  kept  stretched  in  a 
supine  position,  it  will  become  very  painful,  and  this  fact  any 
one  may  ascertain  by  extending  his  own  arm  in  tliis  attitude. 
And  also  a  weaker  man  grasping  with  his  hands  a  stronger 
man  whose  arm  is  turned  in  a  supine  position,  could  lead  him 
wherever  he  chose,  and  neither,  if  a  man  held  a  sword  thus  in 
his  hand,  could  he  make  any  proper  use  of  it,  so  constrained  is 
this  position.      And,  moreover,  if,  when  a  physician  has  thus 


510  FRACTURES. 

bound  up  the  arm,  he  allow  it  to  remain  in  the  same  position, 
the  patient  will  endure  greater  pain  if  he  walk  about,  but 
considerable,  even  if  he  remain  at  rest.  And  thus  too,  if  he 
shall  bend  the  arm,  the  muscles  and  the  bones  must  necessarily 
assume  a  different  position.  But,  in  addition  to  other  mischief, 
he  is  ignorant  of  these  facts  regarding  the  position,  that  the 
bone  which  protrudes  at  the  wrist,  close  to  the  little  finger, 
belongs  to  the  forearm,  whereas  the  one  at  the  joint,  from  which 
people  measure  the  forearm,  is  the  head  of  the  humerus.  He 
fancies  that  both  these  belong  to  the  same  bone,  and  many 
others  are  of  this  opinion.  The  latter,  in  fact,  is  the  same  part 
as  that  which  is  called  the  elbow,  upon  which  we  sometimes 
rest,^  and  when  he  holds  the  arm  thus  in  a  supine  position,  in 
the  first  place  the  bone  appears  distorted,  and  in  the  next  place 
the  tendons  which  extend  from  the  carpus  along  the  inner  side 
and  from  the  fingers  become  distorted  while  the  arm  has  a 
supine  position ;  for  these  tendons  proceed  to  the  bone  of  the 
humerus,  from  Avhicli  the  forearm  is  measured.  Such,  and  so 
many  mistakes  and  marks  of  ignorance  are  committed,  regard- 
ing the  natural  construction  of  the  arm.  But  if  one  will 
extend  a  broken  arm  as  I  direct,  he  will  turn  the  bone,  situated 
at  the  extremity  of  the  little  finger,  into  the  straiglit  line,  and 
also  the  one  at  the  elbow,  and  the  tendons  which  stretch  from 
the  carpus  to  the  extremity  of  the  humerus  will  be  placed  in 
the  straight  line  ;  and  when  the  arm  is  suspended  in  a  sling, 
it  will  be  in  the  same  attitude  as  that  in  which  it  was  bound 
lip,  and  will  give  no  pain  to  the  jDatient  when  he  walks  about, 
nor  when  he  lies  reclined,  and  will  not  become  fatigued."  The 
man  should  be  so  seated  that  the  prominent  part  of  the  bone 
may  be  turned  to  the  brightest  light  which  is  at  hand,  so  that 
the  operator  in  making  the  extension,  may  be  at  no  loss  to 
discover  if  it  be  sufficiently  straight.  The  prominence  of  a 
broken  bone  could  not  escape  being  detected  by  the  hand  of 
an  experienced  person,  when  applied  for  this  pm-pose,  and, 
moreover,  the  projecting  part  is  particularly  painful  to  the 
touch. 

'  Compare  Ruifus  Epliesius  (De  Partib.  Horn.),  and  Galen  (De  Motu  Muscul.,  ii). 

-  All  the  ancient  anthorities  put  a  fractured  fore-arm  in  this  position,  with  the 
thnnil)  above  and  the  little  finger  below.  See  Paulus  j-Egineta,  Book  VI,  100,  and 
the  authorities  (pioted  in  the  Commentary,  Syd.  Soc.  edition. 


FRACTURES.  oil 

4.  In  cases  of  fracture  in  either  of  the  bones  of  the  forearm, 
it  is  easier  to  effect  a  cure  if  the  upper  bone  be  broken, 
altliough  it  be  the  tliickcr  one,  both  because  the  sound  bone 
is  situated  below,  and  forms  a  support  to  it,  and  because  the 
deformity  is  more  easily  concealed,  there  being  a  thick  mass 
of  flesh  on  the  upper  side,  except  near  to  the  wrist.  But  the 
lower  bone  is  without  a  covering  of  flesh,  is  not  easily  concealed, 
and  requires  stronger  extension.  If  it  is  not  this  l)one,  but 
the  other  which  is  broken,  a  more  feeble  extension  proves 
sufficient,  but  if  both  be  broken,  a  more  powerful  extension 
is  required.  In  the  case  of  a  young  person  I  have  known  the 
extension  made  more  strong  than  was  necessary,  but  in  general 
the  extension  made  is  less  than  what  is  required.  And  when  they 
are  extended,  the  physician  should  apply  the  palms  of  his  hands, 
and  adjust  the  fractured  parts  and  then  having  rubbed  the  parts 
with  cerate,^  but  not  in  large  quantity,  so  that  the  bandages  may 
not  come  off',  it  is  to  be  bound  up  in  this  state,  care  being  taken 
that  the  hand  be  not  lower  than  the  elbow,  but  a  little  higher, 
so  that  the  blood  do  not  flow  towards  the  extremity,  but  may  be 
determined  to  the  upper  part ;  and  then  it  is  to  be  secured  Avith 
the  Ijandage,  the  head  of  which  is  to  be  placed  at  the  fracture, 
and  the  bandage  should  impart  firmness  to  the  parts  without 
occasioning  strong  compression.^  AVhen  you  have  carried  the 
bandage  twice  or  thrice  round  at  the  seat  of  the  fracture,  it  is 
to  be  carried  upwards,  so  that  the  afflux  of  blood  into  it  may 
be  stopped,  and  the  bandage  should  terminate  there,  and  the 
first  bandages  ought  not  to  be  long.  The  head  of  the  second 
bandage  is  also  to  be  placed  upon  the  seat  of  the  fracture,  and 
a  single  round  of  it  being  made  there,  it  is  then  to  be  carried 

'  I  have  drawn  attention,  in  the  annotations  on  the  work,  On  the  Surgery,  to 
this  highly  important  article  on  the  ancient  system  of  bandaging.  Palladius  says  ex- 
pressly, that  the  object  for  which  it  was  nsed  was  to  secure  the  fractured  parts  by 
agglutinating  the  bandages.  On  the  nature  of  the  ancient  cerates,  see  Galen's 
Comment.,  torn,  v,  p.  531 ;  ed.  Basil.  Galen,  however,  seems  to  say,  in  another  place, 
that  tlie  cerate  was  used  to  dispel  inflammation  (Meth.  Med.,  vi,  5).  Mention, 
however,  is  made  on  various  occasions  of  rosin  being  added  to  the  cerate,  evidently 
for  the  purpose  of  rendering  it  more  glutinous. 

^  Galcu,  in  his  description  of  the  process,  points  out  in  strong  terms  the  propriety 
of  putting  the  arm  into  position  before  the  bandages  are  applied,  otherwise  they 
will  l)ecome  deranged  wlien  the  position  is  altered.  (Meth.  Med.,  vi,  5.)  This  rule, 
I  have  reason  to  thinlv,  is  often  forgot  in  modern  practice. 


512  FRACTURES. 

clownAvards^  and  is  not  to  be  applied  so  tight  as  tlie  other,  and 
there  should  be  greater  distances  between  the  turns,  so  that  the 
bandage  may  prove  sufFicient  to  reA^ert  to  the  spot  where  the 
other  terminated.  The  bandages  may  be  rolled  to  the  le.ft 
hand  or  to  the  right,  or  to  whatever  side  suits  best  with  the 
position  of  the  fractured  arm,  or  according  to  the  inclination 
which  it  may  have.  Afterwards  we  must  place  along  the  arm, 
compresses,  smeared  with  a  little  cerate,  for  thus  they  occasion 
less  uneasiness,  and  are  more  easily  arranged.  And  then  we 
must  apply  the  bandages  cross-ways,  sometimes  to  the  right 
hand,  and  sometimes  to  the  left,  for  the  most  part  beginning 
below  and  terminating  above,  but  sometimes  commencing 
above  and  ending  below.  The  parts  which  are  thinly  covered 
with  flesh  should  be  wrapped  round  with  compresses,  and 
inequalities  should  be  made  up,  not  by  a  number  of  folds  at 
once,  but  by  degrees.  Some  slack  turns  are  also  to  be  made 
around  the  wrist,  to  this  side  and  to  that.  These  two  bandages 
are  sufficient  at  first. ^ 

5.  And  these  arc  the  signs  that  the  patient  has  been  well 
treated  and  properh^  bandaged  :  if  you  ask  him  if  the  arm  feels 
tight,  and  he  says  it  does,  but  moderately  so,  and  especially 
about  the  fracture ;  and  this  reply  he  should  make  all  along,  if 
the  bandage  be  properly  applied.  And  those  are  symptoms  of 
the  bandaging  being  moderately  tight ;  if  for  the  first  day  and 
night  he  fancies  that  the  tightness  does  not  diminish,  but  rather 
increases  ;  and  if  on  the  next  day  there  be  a  soft  swelling  in  the 
hand,  for  this  is  a  .sign  of  moderate  compression,  but  at  the  end 
of  the  second  day  tlic  compression  shoidd  feel  less,  and  on  the 
third  day  the  bandaging  should  appear  loose.  And  if  any  of 
these  symptoms  be  Avanting,  you  may  conclude  that  the  ban- 
daging is  slacker  than  it  should  be ;  or  if  any  of  these  symptoms 
be  in  excess,  you  may  infer  that  the  compression  is  more  than 
moderate ;  and  judging  from  these,  you  Avill  apply  the  next  ban- 
dages either  slacker  or  tighter.  Having  removed  the  bandages 
on  the  third  day,  you  must  make  extension  and  adjust  thefrac- 

'  The  dimensions  of  these  two  bandages,  in  the  work  On  the  Surgery,  are 
fixed  to  be  three  or  four  cubits  in  length,  and  three,  four,  five,  or  six  inches  in 
breadth,  according  to  tlie  age  and  size  of  the  patient.  See  Galen's  Comment. 
Palladius  remarks,  that  it  is  inconvenient  to  have  the  bandages  very  l)road,  as  they 
get  rutHed,  that  is  to  say,  do  not  lie  smooth  on  the  Umb. 


FRACTURES.  513 

ture,  and  bind  it  up  again  ;  and  if  the  first  bandaging  was  mode- 
rately applied,  the  second  bandaging  should  be  made  somewhat 
tighter.  The  heads  of  the  bandages  should  be  placed  on  the 
fractui-e  as  in  the  former  case ;  for,  by  so  doing,  the  humours 
will  be  driven  to  the  extremities,  whereas  if  you  bandage  any 
other  part  beforehand,  the  humours  will  be  forced  from  it  to  the 
seat  of  the  fractui'e :  it  is  of  much  importance  that  this  should 
be  properly  understood.  Thus  the  bandaging  and  compression 
should  always  commence  at  the  seat  of  the  fracture,  and  every- 
thing  else  should  be  conducted  on  the  same  principle,  so  that 
the  farther  you  proceed  from  the  fracture,  the  compression 
should  always  be  the  less.  The  bandages  should  never  be  actu- 
ally loose,  but  should  be  smoothly  put  on.  At  each  dressing 
the  number  of  bandages  should  be  increased;  and  the  patient,  if 
asked,  should  answer,  that  he  feels  the  bandages  somewhat 
tighter  than  on  the  former  occasion,  especially  about  the  frac- 
ture, and  everything  else  in  proportion  ;  and  with  respect  to  the 
swelling,  the  pain,  and  recovery,  everything  should  proceed  as 
after  the  former  dressing.  But  on  the  third  day  the  outer  ban- 
daging should  appear  looser.  Then  having  removed  thebandages, 
you  should  bind  it  up  again,  somewhat  tighter  than  before,  and 
with  all  the  bandages  which  will  be  required  on  the  occasion,  and 
afterwards  one  ought  to  experience  the  same  train  of  symptoms 
as  at  the  former  periods  of  bandaging. 

6.  "When  the  third  day  arrives,  that  is  to  say,  the  seventh 
from  the  first  dressing,  if  properly  done,  the  swelling  in  the 
hand  should  be  not  very  great ;  and  the  part  which  has  been 
bandaged  should  be  found  more  slender  and  less  swelled  at  each 
time,  and  on  the  seventh  day  the  swelling  should  be  quite  gone, 
and  the  broken  bones  should  be  more  readily  moved,  and  admit 
of  being  easily  adjusted.  And  if  these  things  be  so,  you  should, 
after  setting  the  fracture,  apply  the  bandages  so  as  to  suit  the 
splints,  and  a  little  more  tight  than  formerly,  unless  there  be 
more  pain  from  the  swelling  in  the  hand.  "When  you  have 
applied  the  bandages,  you  must  adjust  the  splints  all  around  the 
limb,  and  secure  them  with  strings  so  loose  as  just  to  keep  them 
in  their  place,  without  the  application  of  the  splints  contributing 
at  all  to  the  compression  of  the  arm.^      After  this  the  pain  and 

'  Our  author  nowliere  describes  the  ferula  or  splints,  nor  defines  their  dimensions 
or  the  materials  of  which  they  consisted.     Palladins  speaks  of  their  being  made  of 

33 


514  FRACTURES. 

recovery  should  proceed  as  in  the  preceding  periods  of  the  ban- 
daging. But  if,  on  the  third  day,  the  patient  say  that  the  ban- 
daging is  loose,  you  must  then  fasten  the  splints,  especially  at 
the  fracture,  but  also  elsewhere,  wherever  the  bandaging  is 
rather  loose  than  tight.  The  splint  should  be  thickest  where 
the  fracture  protrudes,  but  it  should  not  be  much  more  so  than 
elsewhere.  Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  line  of 
the  arm  corresponding  to  the  thumb,  so  that  no  splint  be  laid 
on  it,  but  upon  each  side  of  it,  nor  in  the  line  of  the  little  finger 
where  the  bone  is  prominent  at  the  wrist,  l)ut  on  each  side  of 
it.  And  if  it  be  found  necessary  that  splints  should  be  apjdied 
in  these  directions  at  the  seat  of  the  fracture,  they  should  be 
made  shorter  than  the  others,  so  as  that  thev  may  not  reach  the 
bones  which  are  prominent  at  the  wrist,  for  otherwise  there  is 
danger  of  ulceration,  and  of  the  tendons  being  laid  bare.  The 
splints  should  be  adjusted  anew  every  third  day  in  a  very  gentle 
manner,  always  keeping  in  mind  that  the  o1)iect  of  the  splints 
is  to  maintain  the  lower  bandages  in  their  place,  and  that 
the}'  are  not  needed  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  compression. 
7.  Tf,  then,  you  see  that  the  bones  are  pi'operly  adjusted  by 
the  first  dressings,  and  that  there  is  no  tr(>u])lesome  prm-itus  in 
the  part,  nor  any  reason  to  suspect  ulceration,  you  may  allow  the 

the  wood  of  the  pJiili/ra,  hy  wliicli  was  probably  meant  the  Tilia  europrea,  or  bme- 
tree.  See  Theo])lirastus  (II.  P.,  i,  12;  C.  PL,  vi,  12),  When  they  could  not  be  pro- 
cured, he  recommends  reeds  {Ki'iKa^oi)  to  be  used  instead.  The  ancients  have 
described  various  calami,  but  the  sort  liere  referred  to  was  most  probably  the  com- 
mon reed,  or  Ariindo  phragmUes.  I  can  readdy  suppose  that  it  might  serve  this 
purpose  very  well.  The  Arabian  medical  authors  make  mention  of  various  other 
substances  out  of  which  sj)lints  were  fabricated,  such  as  the  ])ine-tree,  the  .alcanna, 
the  oleander,  the  palm-tree,  and  the  pomegranate.  See  the  authorities  rpioted  at 
Paulus  /Egineta,  Book  VI,  99.  Triller,  as  quoted  by  M.  Littre  in  the  Advertisement 
to  the  fourth  volume  of  Hippocrates,  decides,  respecting  the  splints  of  the  ancients, 
that  they  were  composed  of  the  stalks  of  feruh-c  and  of  reeds.  Not  having  seen 
Trillcr's  work,  I  am  ignorant  what  his  authorities  are  for  this  opinion,  but  I  cannot 
suppose  them  superior  to  those  1  have  referred  to  above.  Palladius  says,  the  splints 
were  secm-ed  by  three  loose  tillets  or  ribands,  one  at  each  end  and  another  in  the 
middle.  From  the  directions  given  by  our  author,  it  will  be  readily  seen  that  he  was 
aware  of  the  danger  of  tying  the  ligatures  too  tight.  I  need  scarcely  say  that  tight 
bandages  and  strings,  in  fractures  of  the  fore-arm,  do  mischief  by  encroaching  upon 
the  intcr-osscous  space.  For  the  same  reason  our  author  has  properly  forbid  splints 
to  be  put  on  along  the  bone  of  the  thumb  and  the  little  tinger.  I  need  scarcely  add 
that  modern  surgery  can  boast  of  no  new  views  or  improved  methods  of  practice  iu 
the  treatment  of  fractures  of  the  fore-arm. 


FRACTURES.  515 

arm  to  remain  bandaged  in  the  splints  until  after  the  lapse  of 
more  than  twenty  days.  The  bones  of  the  fore-arm  generally 
get  consolidated  in  thirty  days  altogether;  but  there  is  nothing 
precise  in  this  matter,  for  one  constitution  differs  from  another, 
and  one  period  of  life  from  another.  When  you  remove  the 
bandages,  you  must  pour  hot  water  on  the  arm  and  bind  it  up 
again,  but  somewhat  slacker,  and  with  fewer  bandages  than 
formerly :  and  again  on  the  third  day  you  undo  tlie  bandages, 
and  bind  it  still  more  looselv,  and  with  still  fewer  bandasres. 
And  if,  while  the  arm  is  bound  up  in  the  splints,  you  should 
at  any  time  suspect  that  the  bones  do  not  lie  properly,  or  if 
anything  about  the  bandages  annoys  the  patient,  you  should 
loose  them  at  the  middle  of  the  time,  or  a  little  earlier,  and 
apply  them  again.  A  diet  slightly  restricted  v/ill  be  sufficient 
in  those  cases  in  which  there  was  no  external  wound  at  first, 
or  when  the  bone  does  not  protrude  ;  but  one  should  live  rather 
sparingly  until  the  tenth  day,  as  being  now  deprived  of  exercise; 
and  tender  articles  of  food  should  be  used,  such  as  moderately 
loosen  the  bowels ;  but  one  should  abstain  altogether  from  flesh 
and  wine,  and  then  by  degrees  resume  a  more  nourishing  diet.^ 
This  doctrine  may  be  laid  down  as  a  just  rule  in  the  treatment 
of  fractures,  both  as  to  how  they  should  be  treated,  and  what 
will  be  the  results  of  a  proper  plan  of  treatment ;  so  that  one 
may  know,  that  if  things  do  not  turn  out  thus,  there  has  been 
some  defect  or  excess  in  the  treatment.  And  in  this  simple 
plan  of  treatment  it  is  necessar\"  to  attend  also  to  the  following 
directions,  which  some  physicians  pay  little  attention  to, 
although,  when  improperly  executed,  they  are  capable  of  marring 
the  whole  process  of  bandaging  :  for  if  both  the  bones  be  broken, 
or  the  lower  one  only,  and  the  patient  who  has  got  his  arm  ban- 
daged keep  it  slung  in  a  shawl,  and  that  the  shawl  is  particu- 
larly loose  at  the  fracture,  so  that  the  arm  is  not  properly  sus- 
pended at  this  end  or  that,  in  this  case  the  bone  must  necessarily 
be  found  distorted  upwards  ;  whereas,  Avhen  both  bones  are  thus 
broken,  if  the  arm  recline  in  the  shawl  at  the  wrist  and  elbow, 
but  the  rest  of  it  be  not  kept  up,  the  bone  in  this  case  will  be 

'  Galeii,  iu  his  Comraentary,  states  that  our  author,  in  his  works,  makes  mention 
of  three  modes  of  diet,  namely,  the  full,  the  ordinary,  and  the  low.  That  which  is 
here  recommended  as  applicable  in  the  case  of  fractures  is  the  ordinary,  wine  and 
flesh  being  principally  forbidden. 


51 G  FRACTURES. 

distorted  to  the  lower  side.  The  greater  part  of  the  arm  and 
the  wrist  of  the  hand  should  therefore  be  equally  suspended  in  a 
broad  soft  shawl. i 

8.  When  the  arm  is  broken,  if  one  stretch  the  fore-arm  and 
adjust  it  while  in  this  position,  the  muscle  of  the  arm  will  be 
bound  while  extended ;  but  when  the  dressing  is  over,  and  the 
patient  bends  his  arm  at  the  elbow,  the  mnscle  of  the  arm  will 
assume  a  different  shape.^  The  following,  then,  is  the  most 
natural  jA-au  of  setting  the  arm  :  having  got  a  piece  of  wood  a 
cubit  or  somewhat  less  in  length,  like  the  handles  of  spades, 
suspend  it  by  means  of  a  chain  fastened  to  its  extremities  at 
both  ends;  and  having  seated  the  man  on  some  high  ol)ject,  the 
arm  is  to  be  brought  over,  so  that  the  armpit  may  rest  on  the 
piece  of  wood,  and  the  man  can  scarcely  touch  the  seat,  being 
almost  suspended ;  then  having  brought  another  seat,  and 
placed  one  or  more  leather  pillows  under  the  arm,  so  as  to  keep 
it  at  a  moderate  height  while  it  is  bent  at  a  right  angle,  the 
best  plan  is  to  put  round  the  arm  a  broad  and  soft  skin, 
or  broad  shawl,  and  to  hang  some  great  weight  to  it,  so  as  to 
produce  moderate  extension;  or  otherwise,  while  the  arm  is  in 
the  position  I  have  described,  a  strong  man  is  to  take  hold  of 
it  at  the  elbow   and  pull   it   downwards."'      But  the  physician 

'  Galen,  in  liis  Coiumeutary,  has  sonic  very  sensible  observations  on  the  two  forms 
of  displacement  occasioned  liy  suspending  the  arm  iniproi)erly  in  the  sling,  but  they 
are  pretty  obvious,  and  are  given  in  too  dit!'use  a  style  to  suit  my  necessary  liiidts. 
The  process  of  suspending  the  arm  in  a  sling  was  called  analcpah  {avaXi]\ptg),a.  term 
for  which  we  have  no  equivalent  in  modern  nomenclature. 

'  The  muscle  of  the  arm  to  which  our  author  refers  is  evidently  the  biceps.  The 
direction  here  given  to  apply  tlie  bandages  to  a  broken  arm,  while  it  is  held  in  the 
same  position  as  it  is  to  be  kept  in  afterwards,  appears  to  me  most  important;  and 
yet  it  is  now  generally  overlooked.  Galen  expresses  himself  very  forcibly  on  the 
propriety  of  not  changing  the  position  of  the  arm  after  the  apparatus  is  adjusted. 
(Sec  note,  §  4.)  The  process  of  adjusting  the  parts  in  fracture  of  the  arm  is  minutely 
described  by  Paulus  ^Egixeta.  See  the  Commentary,  Vol.  II,  p.  45G,  Syd.  Soc. 
edition. 

'  The  description  of  this  process,  as  given  by  cm:  author,  is  remarkably  distinct 
and  easily  imderstood  when  illustrated  l)y  a  drawing,  as  is  done  in  the  Latin  edition 
of  Galen's  works  published  by  the  Juntas,  from  which  M.  Littrc  would  appear  to 
have  borrowed  the  figure  which  lie  gives  (tom.  iii,  j).  4  15).  The  following  dcscrl])- 
tion  of  the  method  of  setting  a  fractured  humerus  is  taken  from  a  modern  author, 
who  is  a  servile  copyist  from  Hippocrates  and  Galen,  and  deserves  to  be  introduced 
here  as  illustrating  the  principles  upon  which  our  author  proceeded  in  the  manage- 
ment of  this  ease :   "  Here  there  is  one  remark  to  be  made  that  is  very  necessary  in 


FRACTURES.  517 

standing  erect,   ranst  perform  the  proper  manipnlation,   having 
the  one  foot  on  some  prett}'  high  object,^  and  adjusting  the  bone 
with  the  pahiis  of  his  hands;  and  it  Avill  readily  be  adjusted, 
for  the  extension  is  good  if  properly  applied.    Then  let  him  l)ind 
the   arm,   commencing   at  the  fracture,    and   do  otherwise   as 
directed  above  ;  let  him  put  the  same  questions,  and  avail  him- 
self of  the  same  signs  to  ascertain  Avhether  the  arm  be  mode- 
rately tight  or  not ;   and   every  third  day  let  him  bind  it  anew 
and  make  it  tighter;  and  on  the  seventh  or  ninth  day  let  him 
bind  it  up  with  splints,   and  leave  it  so  until  after  the  lapse  of 
more  than  thirty  days.      xVnd  if  he  suspect  that  tlie  bone  is  not 
lying  properly,  let  him  remove  the  bandages  in  the  interval,  and 
having  adjusted  the  arm,   let  him  bind  it  up  again.      The  bone 
of  the  arm  is  generally  consolidated  in  forty  days.      AVhen  these 
are  past,  the  dressing  is  to  be  removed,  and  fewer  and  slacker 
bandages  applied  instead  of  it.     The  patient  is  to  be  kept  on  a 
stricter  diet,  and  for  a  longer  space  of  time  than  in  the  former 
case  ;  and  we  must  form  our  judgment  of  it  from  the  swelling  in 
the  hand,  looking  also  to  the  strength  of  the  patient.      This  also 
should  be  known,  that  the  arm  is  naturally  inclined  outwards; 
to  this  side,  therefore,  the  distortion  usually  takes  place,  if  not 
properly  treated ;   but  indeed,   all  the  other  bones  are  usually 
distorted  during  treatment  for  fracture  to  that  side  to  Avhicli 
they  naturally  incline.    When,  therefore,  anything  of  this  kind 
is  suspected,  the  arm  is  to  be  encircled  in  a  broad  shawl,  which 
is  to  be  carried  round  the  breast,  and  when  the  patient  goes  to 
rest,    a  compress  of  many  folds,   or  some  such  thing,  is  to  be 
folded  and  placed  between  the  elbow  and  the  side,  for  thus  the 
bending  of  the  bone  will  be  rectified,   but  care  must  be  taken 
lest  it  be  inclined  too  much  iuAvards. 

9.   The  human  foot  is  composed  of  several  small  bones  like 

the  way  of  practice,  namely,  that  in  setting  the  arm  the  patient  must  sit  on  an  un- 
armed cliair,  that  a  servant  may  emhrace  and  grasp  him  under  the  armpit  of  the 
sound  arm ;  that  another  servant  must  take  hold  of  his  arm  and  draw  it  upwards, 
without  raising  it ;  that,  at  the  same  time,  a  third  servant  is  to  pull  the  arm  down- 
wards towards  the  ground ;  and,  in  fine,  tb.at  the  arm  must  never  be  extended,  and 
that  the  elbow  must  be  always  bent  in  when  you  thus  draw  the  arm."  (Verduc, 
Treatise  on  Fractures,  &c.,  p.  352.) 

'  Galen  explains,  that  the  intention  in  directing  the  physician  to  stand  in  this  posi- 
tion is  to  give  steadiness  to  hira.  This  attitude  is  alluded  to  in  the  work  On  the 
Surgery,  as  Galen  also  remarks. 


518  FRACTURES. 

the  liand.^     These  bones  therefore  are  scarcely  ever  broken, 
unless  the  skin  at  the  same  time  be  wounded  by  some  sharp 
and  heavy   body.       The  treatment  of  such  injuries,  therefore, 
will  be  delivered  under  the  head  of  wounds.      But  if  any  bone 
be  moved  from  its  place,  or  any  joint  of  the  toes  be  luxated,  or 
any  of  the  bones  of  the  part  called  the  tarsus  be  displaced,"  it 
must  be  forced  back  again  to  its  place  as  described  with  regard 
to  the  hand  ;  and  is  to  be  treated  with  cerate,  compresses,  and 
bandages,  like  the  fractures,  with  the  exception  of  the  splints ; 
and  is  to  be  secured  tightly  in  the  same  way,  and  the  bandages 
renewed   on   the  third   day ;    and   the   patient  thus   bandaged 
should  return  the  same  answers  as  iu  fractures,  as  to  the  ban- 
dages feeling  tight  or  slack.      All  these  bones  recover  perfectly 
in  twenty  days,  except  those  that  are  connected  with  the  bones 
of  the  leg,  and  are  in  a  lii^c  with  them.    It  is  advantageous  to 
lie  in  bed  during  the  whole   of  this   time ;   but  the  patients, 
thinking  light  of  the  complaint,  have  not  perseverance  to  do  this, 
and  they  walk  about  before  they  get  Avell ;  wherefore  many  of 
these  do  not  make  a  perfect  recovery.    And  often  the  pain  puts 
them  in  mind  of  the  injury  ;  and  deservedly,  for  the  feet  sustain 
the  Aveight  of  the  mIioIc  body.       When,  therefore,  they  walk 
about  before  they  are  whole,  the  joints  which  have  been  luxated 
are  cured  incompletely ;   and,   on  that  account,  while  walking 
about,  they  have  pains  in  the  leg  from  time  to  time. 

10.  But  those  bones  which  are  connected  with  the  bones  of 
the  leg  are  larger  tlian  the  others,'^  and  the  cure  of  them  when 

'  The  analogy  between  the  construction  of  the  hand  and  the  foot  is  strikingly 
described  by  Galen  in  his  Commentary  on  this  passage.  His  description  of  the 
ankle-joint  and  the  tarsal  bones  is,  njion  the  whole,  wonderfully  accurate,  except 
that  he  makes  the  number  of  the  tarsal  bones  to  be  equal  to  those  of  the  carpal. 
How  this  mistake  originated  I  do  not  well  know.  1  need  scarcely  add  that  modern 
anatomists  count  eight  bones  of  the  carpus,  and  only  seven  of  the  tarsus. 

*  The  account  of  the  displacement  of  the  tarsal  bones  here  given  is,  on  the  whole, 
very  correct.  In  this  way  the  navicular  bone  is  sometimes  displaced  from  the  astra- 
galus, and  the  cuboid  from  the  os  calcis.  Several  cases  of  this  nature  have  been 
related  in  modern  times.  See  Sir  Astlcy  Cooper's  Lectures,  and  Bransby  Cooper's 
Lectures,  Medical  Gazette,  No.  10G9,  as  quoted  in  the  Annotations  on  the  eleventh 
paragraph. 

^  The  meaning  would  appear  to  be  this,  that  the  tarsal  bones  are  larger  than  their 
analogues  in  the  upper  extremities,  namely,  than  the  carpal.  The  accident  described 
in  this  paragraph  seems  evidently  to  be  displacement  of  the  foot,  either  complete  or 
partial  from  bones  of  the  leg,  that  is  to  say  (to  use  the  terminology  lately  intro(hiced 


FRACTURES.  519 

luxated  is  more  protracted.  The  mode  of  treatment  tlieii  is 
the  same ;  but  Ave  must  use  more  bandages  and  more  splints, 
and  the  bandage  is  to  be  carried  round  to  this  side  and  to  that, 
and  pressure  is  to  be  made  as  in  the  other  cases,  particularh'  at 
the  seat  of  the  luxation,  and  the  first  circles  of  the  bandages 
are  to  be  made  there.  And  at  each  time  the  bandages  are 
taken  off,  much  hot  water  is  to  be  used,  for  in  all  injuries  at 
joints  the  affusion  of  hot  water  in  large  quantity  is  to  be  had 
recourse  to.  And  the  same  symptoms  of  compression  and  re- 
laxation should  manifest  themselves  in  the  same  times,  as  in  the 
cases  formerly  treated  of,  and  the  subsequent  bandagings 
should  be  conducted  in  like  manner.  These  cases  get  com- 
pletely well  for  the  most  part  in  forty  days,  if  the  patients  have 
resolution  to  keep  their  bed  ;  but  if  not,  they  are  subjected  to 
the  complaints  formerly  described,  or  still  worse. 

11.  In  persons  who  jumping  from  any  high  object  pitch 
upon  their  heel  with  great  force,  the  bones  are  separated,  and 
the  veins  pour  forth  their  contents,  owing  to  the  contusion  of 
the  flesh  surrounding  the  bone,  and  hence  a  swelling  and  much 
pain  supervene.^      For  this  bone  (os  calcis)  is  not  a  small  one, 

by  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper),  displacement  of  the  astragalus.  It  appears  clear  that  by 
dislocation  at  the  ankle-joint,  Hippocrates  here  meant  a  displacement  of  the  astra- 
galus along  with  the  other  tarsal  bones  from  the  ends  of  the  bones  of  the  leg. 

'  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  states  expressly  that  the  accident  here  described  con- 
sists in  a  separation  of  tlie  astragalus  from  its  connexion  with  the  navicular,  and  of 
the  OS  calcis  from  its  connexion  with  the  cuboid,  by  the  rupture  of  tlie  ligaments 
which  unite  them.  The  following  description  of  this  accident  was  lately  given  by 
Mr.  Bransby  Cooper, in  one  of  his  Lectures  published  in  the  Medical  Gazette,  No.  1069 : 
"  Dislocation  of  the  navicular  bone  from  the  astragalus  and  the  cuboid  from  the  os 
calcis. — This  is,  in  fact,  a  lUslocation  of  '  Chopart's  tarsal  joint.'  I  once  saw  it  in 
the  case  of  a  man  who  was  admitted  into  Guy's  Hospital.  The  toes,  metatarsus,  and 
anterior  part  of  the  tarsus  were  twisted  inwards  ;  the  anterior  articulatory  surface  of 
the  astragalus  and  os  calcis  formed  a  projection  on  the  outer  side  of  the  foot,  the 
astragalus  being  so  tightly  pressed  against  the  skin  as  to  threaten  momentary 
laceration ;  and  a  deep  hollow,  evidently  resulting  from  the  chsplacement  of  the 
cuboid  bone,  could  be  felt  just  in  front  of  the  os  calcis.  Reduction  was  accomplished 
by  the  usual  extension  and  counter-extension,  and  by  forcing  the  metatarsus  outwards, 
while  pressiu-e  on  the  bones  of  the  leg  in  the  opposite  direction  guided  the  displaced 
tarsal  bones  into  their  proper  situation."  This  accident  is  obscurely  described  in 
Liston's  Practical  Surgery.  It  is  not  noticed  in  the  elaborate  work  of  Baron 
Dupuytren  On  the  Injuries  of  Bones.  The  case,  however,  which  we  are  now  treat- 
ing of  would  appear  to  be  noticed  by  Paulus  /Egineta  in  the  following  passage, 
where,  however,  the  description  is  rather  obscure :    "  If  from  a  leap,  as  commonly 


:>20  FRACTURES. 

protrudes  bej'ond  the  line  of  the  leg,  and  is  connected  with 
important  veins  and  tendons ;  for  the  back  tendon  of  the  leg 
is  inserted  into  this  bone.  Such  cases  are  to  be  treated  with 
cerate,  and  with  compresses  and  bandages ;  and  hot  water  is 
to  be  used  in  large  quantity  ;  and  they  require  many  bandages, 
which  ought  to  be  particulaidy  good  and  appropriate.  And 
if  the  patient  happen  to  have  a  tender  skin  about  the  heel, 
nothing  is  to  be  done  to  it ;  but  if,  as  some  have  it,  the  skin 
])e  thick  and  hardened,  it  is  to  be  pared  down  smoothly  and 
thinned,  but  without  wounding  it.  It  is  not  everybody  who 
can  apply  the  bandage  properly  in  such  cases ;  for  if  one  shall 
bind  the  parts,  as  in  other  accidents  about  the  ankle,  some- 
times bringing  a  fold  round  the  foot  and  sometimes  round  the 
tendon,  these  turns  leave  out  the  heel,  which  is  the  seat  of 
the  contusion,  and  thus  there  is  danger  that  the  os  calcis  may 
sphacelate ;  and  if  this  should  take  place,  the  impediment  may 
endure  for  life  ;  and  also  in  all  the  other  cases  of  sphacelus,  not 
proceeding  from  such  a  cause  as  this ;  as  when,  from  being 
carelessly  allowed  to  lie  in  a  certain  position  during  confine- 
ment to  bed,  the  heel  becomes  black,  or  when  a  serious  wound 
has  occurred  in  the  leg  and  it  is  long  of  healing,  and  is  con- 
nected with  the  heel,  or  Avlien  the  same  thing  happens  in  the 
thigh,  or  when  in  any  disease  a  protracted  decubitus  takes  place 
on  the  back,  in  all  such  cases  the  sores  are  inveterate,  trou- 
blesome, and  frequently  break  out  again,  unless  particular  at- 
tention be  paid  to  the  cure,  along  with  much  rest,  as  in  all  the 
cases  attended  witli  sphacelus.  And  cases  of  sphacelus  con- 
nected Avith  this  cause,  in  addition  to  other  inconveniences,  are 
attended  with  great  danger  to  the  whole  body.  For  they  are  apt 
to  be  attended  with  very  acute  fevers,  of  the  continual  type,  ac- 
companied with  tremblings,  hiccup,  aberration  of  intellect,  and 
which  prove  fatal  within  a  few  days  :  and  there  may  be  lividities 
of  bloody  vcins,^    with    nausea,  and  gangrene   from  pressure ; 

liii))i)ens,  the  liuiic  of  tlie  licel  is  moved  from  its  jilace,  or  if  any  inflammatory  state- 
is  liroiiglit  on,  it  is  to  be  remedied  by  gentle  extension  and  re(biction,  anti-inflam- 
matory embrocations  and  secure  bandages,  the  man  being  kept  also  in  a  quiet  state 
until  the  part  is  restored."  (VI,  120.)  See  the  Commentary  of  Palladius  on  this 
passage  of  onr  author,  p.  92G,  ed.  Foes. 

'  Ry  bloody  veins  is  meant  veins  of  a  large  size,  as  Galen  explains.  Contusions  of 
such  necessarily  produce  extravasation  and  hemorrhage,  and  the  other  bad  conse- 
(piences  described  by  our  author. 


FRACTURES.  521 

these  diseases  may  occur,  besides  the  sphacelus/  Those  which 
have  been  described  are  the  most  violent  contusions ;  but  in 
general  the  contusions  are  mild,  and  no  great  care  is  required 
vi'iih  regard  to  the  treatment,  and  j'ct  it  must  be  conducted 
properly.  But  when  the  contusion  appears  to  be  severe,  we 
must  do  as  described  above,  making  many  turns  of  the  bandage 
around  the  heel,  sometimes  carrying  it  to  the  extremity  of  the 
foot,  sometimes  to  the  middle,  and  sometimes  around  the  leg ; 
and,  in  addition,  all  the  surrounding  parts  are  to  be  bandaged 
in  this  direction  and  that,  as  formerly  described ;  and  the 
compression  should  not  be  made  strong,  but  we  should  make 
use  of  many  bandages,  and  it  is  better  also  to  administer  helle- 
bore the  same  day  or  on  the  morrow ;  and  the  bandages  should 
be  removed  on  the  third  day  and  reapplied.  And  these  are 
the  symptoms  by  which  we  discover  whether  the  case  will  get 
worse  or  not :  when  the  extravasated  blood,  the  lividities,  and 
the  surrounding  parts  become  red  and  hard,  there  is  danger  of 
an  exacerbation.  But  if  there  be  no  fever,  we  must  give 
emetics,  as  has  been  said,  and  administer  the  other  remedies 
which  are  applicable  when  the  fever  is  not  of  a  continual  type ; 
but  if  continual  fever  be  present,  we  must  not  give  strong  me- 
dicines, but  enjoin  abstinence  from  solid  food  and  soups,  and 
give  water  for  drink,   and   not  allow   wine  but  oxyglyhj"^   (a 

'  That  gangrene  should  have  often  supervened  in  such  a  case,  as  described  by  our 
author,  need  not  appear  surprising.  It  shows  tliat  Hippocrates  had  a  wonderful 
talent  for  original  observation  when  he  was  able  to  detect  and  describe  such  a  case ; 
and  it  ought  to  teach  our  profession  a  lesson  of  humility,  in  comparing  our  present 
state  of  knowledge  with  that  of  our  forefathers,  when  we  thus  find  that  the  "  old 
man  of  Cos,"  twenty-two  centuries  ago,  understood  the  nature  of  this  accident  better 
tliau  many  of  us  did  not  many  years  since.  We  are  all  too  apt  to  flatter  ourselves  with 
the  belief  that  we  are  possessed  of  all  the  knowledge  which  our  forefathers  had  ac- 
quked,  along  with  many  valuable  additions  of  our  own.  It  is  unfortunately  but  too 
certain  that  there  is  a  tendency  in  the  human  mind,  at  certain  times,  to  retrograde, 
as  well  as  in  others  to  advance,  both  in  knowledge  and  in  virtue. 

"  Sic  omnia  fatis 
In  pejus  ruere  et  retro  sublapsa  referri. 
Non  aliter  quam  qui  adverso  vL\  flumine  lembum 
Remigiis  subigit,  si  brachia  forte  remisit, 
Atque  ilium  in  prseceps  prono  rapit  alveus  amni." 

Virgil,  Georg.  i. 

*  Galen  states  that  if  the  oxyglyky  be  not  at  hand,  oxymel  may  be  used  in  its 
stead. 


522  FRACTURES. 

composition  from  vinegar  and  honey?).  But  if  tlie  case  be  not 
going  to  get  worse,  the  ecchymosed  and  livid  parts,  and  those 
surrounding  them  become  greenish  and  not  hard ;  for  this  is  a 
satisfactory  proof  in  all  cases  of  ecchymosis,  that  they  are  not 
to  get  worse ;  but  when  lividity  is  complicated  with  hardness, 
there  is  danger  that  the  part  may  become  blackened.  And  we 
must  so  manage  the  foot  as  that  it  may  be  generally  raised  a 
little  higher  than  the  rest  of  the  body.  Such  a  patient  will 
get  well  in  sixty  days  if  he  keep  quiet. 

12.  The  leg  consists  of  two  bones,  of  which  the  one  is  much 
more  slender  than  the  other  at  one  part,  but  not  much  more 
slender  at  another.  These  are  connected  together  at  the  foot, 
and  form  a  common  epiphysis,^  but  they  are  not  united  together 
along  the  line  of  the  leg ;  and  at  the  thigh  they  are  united 
together  and  form  an  epiphysis,  and  this  epiphysis  has  a  dia- 
pliysis;^  but  the  other  bone  in  a  line  with  the  little  toe  is  a 
little  longer.     Such  is  the  nature  of  the  bones  of  the  leg. 

13.  Sometimes  the  bones  connected  with  the  foot  are  dis- 
placed, sometimes  both  bones  with  their  epiphysis ;  sometimes 
the  whole  e})iphysis  is  slightly  moved,  and  sometimes  the  other 
bone.^    These  cases  are  less  troublesome  than  the  same  accidents 

'  Galea  stales  expressly,  that  although  the  tibia  and  fibula  arc  described  as  being 
connected  together  at  the  foot,  it  is  not  to  be  understood  that  they  form  one  bone, 
but  merely  that  they  are  in  close  contact  together.  It  would  seem,  then,  that  by  epi- 
physis our  author,  in  this  place,  meant  the  malleolus  cxteruus.  We  shall  find  many 
examples  of  its  occurring  in  this  sense  in  the  present  and  two  following  works. 

-  Galen  states  in  cxjilauation,  that  tlie  epiphysis  or  protu])erance  here  descriljcd 
belongs  priuci})ally  to  the  tibia.  I5y  diaphysin,  he  says,  is  meant  a  ligamento-car- 
tilaginous  prominence  connected  with  it;  it  appears  therefore  doubtful  whether  he 
applied  it  to  the  spinous  process  of  the  tibia,  or  to  the  semilunar  cartilages,  as 
Boscpiillon  supposes.  M.  Littre  refers  the  term  to  the  former;  but  Galen's  descrip- 
tion of  the  diuphi/sis,  as  being  of  a  liganiento-cartilaginous  nature,  and  not  being  to 
be  met  with  in  the  skeleton,  would  seem  to  exclude  this  supposition. 

^  If  by  epiphysis  we  understand  the  outer  malleolus,  the  meaning  of  this  passage 
will  be,  "  The  bones  of  the  leg  at  the  ankle  may  be  completely  dislocated  along  with 
the  outer  malleolus,  or  subluxatcd,  in  which  case  either  the  malleolus  externus  or 
the  tibia  may  be  partially  displaced."  This  is  pretty  much  the  same  interpretation 
as  is  given  to  this  passage  by  Gardeil,  as  quoted  by  M.  Littre  (CEcon.  Hip.,  torn,  iii, 
11.  393j,  who,  however,  does  not  at  all  approve  of  it,  but  enters  into  a  very  elaborate 
disquisition  on  this  passage,  yet  without  bringing  it  to  any  very  satisfactory  con- 
clusion. I  need  scarcely  mention  that  partial  dislocations  have  been  frequently 
observed  and  described  recently.  See  Sir  Charles  Bell's  Surgery,  p.  196;  and  the 
discussion  on  the  luxations  at  the  ankle  given  in  the  Argument. 


FRACTURES.  523 

at  the  wristj  if  the  patieuts  will  have  resolution  to  give  them  rest. 
The  mode  of  treatment  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  other,  for  the 
reduction  is  to  be  made,  as  of  the  other,  by  means  of  extension, 
but  greater  force  is  required,  as  the  parts  of  the  body  concerned 
are  stronger  in  this  case.  But,  for  the  most  part,  two  men  Avill  be 
sufficient,  by  making  extension  in  opposite  directions,  but,  if  they 
are  not  sufficiently  strong,  it  is  easy  to  make  more  powerful 
extension  in  the  following  way  :  having  fixed  in  the  ground  either 
the  nave  of  a  wheel,  or  any  such  object,  something  soft  is  to  be 
bound  round  the  foot,  and  then  some  broad  thongs  of  ox-skin 
being  brought  round  it,  the  heads  of  the  thongs  are  to  be  fas- 
tened to  a  pestle  or  any  other  piece  of  wood,  the  end  of  which 
is  to  be  inserted  into  the  nave,  and  it,  the  pestle,  is  to  be  pulled 
away,  while  other  persons  make  counter-extension  by  grasping 
the  shoulders  and  the  ham.  It  is  also  sometimes  necessary 
to  secure  the  upper  extremity  otherwise ;  this  if  you  desire  to 
effect,  fasten  deeply  in  the  ground  a  round,  smooth  piece  of 
wood,  and  place  the  upper  extremity  of  the  piece  of  wood  at 
the  perineum,  so  that  it  may  prevent  the  body  from  yielding  to 
the  pulling  at  the  foot,  and,  moreover,  to  preveut  the  leg  while 
stretched,  from  inclining  downwards  ;  some  person  seated  at 
his  side  should  push  back  the  hip,  so  that  the  body  may  not 
turn  round  with  the  pulling,  and  for  this  purpose,  if  you  think 
fit,  pieces  of  wood  may  be  fastened  about  the  armpits  on  each 
side,  and  they  are  to  be  stretched  by  the  hands,  and  thus 
secured,  while  another  person  takes  hold  of  the  limb  at  the 
knee,  and  aids  in  thus  making  counter-extension.  Or  thus,  if 
you  prefer  it :  having  bound  other  thongs  of  leather  about  the 
limb,  either  at  the  knee,  or  around  the  thigh,  and  having 
fastened  another  nave  of  a  wheel  in  the  ground  above  the  head, 
and  adjusted  the  thongs  to  some  piece  of  Avood  adapted  to  the 
nave,  extension  may  thus  be  made  in  the  opposite  dii'ectiou  to 
the  feet.  Or  if  von  choose,  it  mav  be  done  thus  :  instead  of 
the  naves,  lay  a  moderate-sized  beam  under  the  couch,  and 
then  having  fastened  pieces  of  wood  in  this  beam,  both  before 
and  behind  the  head,  make  counter-extension  by  means  of 
thongs,  or  place  windlasses  at  this  extremity  and  that,  and 
make  extension  by  means  of  them.  There  are  many  other 
methods  of  making  extension.  But  the  best  thing  is,  for  any 
physician  who  practises  in  a  large  city,  to  have  prepared  a 


524  FRACTURES. 

proper  wooden  machine,  with  all  the  mechanical  powers  appli- 
cable in  cases  of  fractures  and  dislocation,  either  for  making 
extension,  or  acting  as  a  lever.  For  this  purpose  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  possess  a  board  in  length,  breadth,  and  thickness, 
resembling  the  quadrangular  threshing-boards  made  of  oak.^ 

14.  When  you  have  made  proper  extension,  it  is  easy  to 
reduce  the  joint,  for  the  displaced  bone  is  thus  raised  into  a 
line  with  the  other.  And  the  bones  are  to  be  adjusted  with 
the  palms  of  the  hands_,  pressing  upon  the  projecting  bone  with 
the  one,  and  making  counter-pressure  l)elow  the  ankle  with 
the  other.  When  you  have  replaced  the  bones,  you  must 
apply  the  bandages  while  the  parts  are  upon  the  stretch,  if  you 
})Ossibly  can;  but  if  prevented  by  the  thongs,  you  must  loose 
them,  and  make  counter-extension  until  you  get  the  bandages 
applied.  The  bandage  is  to  be  applied  in  the  manner  formerly 
described,  the  heads  of  the  bandages  being  placed  on  the 
projecting  part,  and  the  first  turns  made  in  like  manner,  and 
so  also  with  regard  to  the  number  of  compresses  and  the 
compression ;  and  turns  of  the  bandages  are  to  be  brought 
frequently  round  on  this  and  on  that  side  of  the  ankle.  But 
this  joint  must  be  bound  more  tight  at  the  first  dressing  than 
in  the  case  of  the  hand.  But  when  joii  have  applied  the 
bandage,  you  must  place  the  bandaged  part  somewhat  higher 
than  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  in  such  a  position  that  the  foot 
mnj  hang  as  little  as  possible.  The  attenuation  of  the  body 
is  to  be  made  proportionate  to  the  magnitude  of  the  luxation, 
for  one  luxation  is  to  a  small,  and  another  to  a  great  extent. 
But  in  general  we  must  reduce  more,  and  for  a  longer  time,  in 
injuries  about  the  legs,  than  in  those  about  the  hands  ;  for  the 
former  parts  are  lai'ger  and  thicker  than  the  latter,  and  it  is 
necessary  that  the  body  should  be  kept  in  a  state  of  rest,  and 
in  a  recumbent  position.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  or 
require  the  limb  to  be  bandaged  anew  on  the  third  day.  And 
all  the  treatment  otherwise  is  to  be  conducted  in  like  manner, 

'  These  descriiJlions  arc  remarkably  clear  and  easily  understood  when  illiistraled 
l)y  drawings,  as  they  are  by  Vidus  Vidius  and  M.  Littre.  All  our  author's  modes  of 
making  extension  and  counter-extension  appear  to  l)e  very  judicious.  The  board  or 
1)ench  (scnnmum  Hippocratis)  is  described  in  the  work  On  the  Articulations.  The 
text  in  the  conclusion  of  the  paragraph  is  in  a  doubtful  state.  I  liave  adopted 
the  emendation  of  M.  Littre. 


FRACTURES.  52:) 

as  in  the  preceding  cases.  And  if  the  patient  have  resolution 
to  lie  quiet;,  forty  days  Avill  be  sufficient  for  this  purpose,  if 
only  the  bones  be  properly  reduced,  but  if  he  will  not  lie  quiet, 
he  will  not  be  able  to  use  the  limb  Avith  ease,  and  he  will  find 
it  necessary  to  wear  a  baiidage  for  a  long  time.  AY  hen  the 
bones  are  not  properly  replaced,  but  there  has  been  some  defect 
in  this  respect,  the  hip,  the  thigh,  and  the  leg  become  wasted, 
and  if  the  dislocation  be  inwards,  the  external  part  of  the  thigh 
is  wasted,  and  vice  versa.  But  for  the  most  part  the  dislocation 
is  inwards.^ 

15.'  And  when  both  bones  of  the  leg  are  broken  without  a 
wound  of  the  skin,  stronger  extension  is  required.  We  may 
make  extension  bv  some  of  the  methods  formerly  described, 
provided  the  bones  ride  over  one  another  to  a  considerable 
degree.  But  extension  by  men  is  also  sufficient,  and  for  the 
most  part  two  strong  men  wdll  suffice,  by  making  extension 
and  counter-extension.  Extension  must  naturally  be  made 
straight  in  a  line  with  the  leg  and  thigh,  w^hether  on  account 
of  a  fracture  of  the  bones  of  the  leg  or  of  the  thigh.  And 
in  both  cases  they  are  to  be  bandaged  while  in  a  state  of  ex- 
tension, for  the  same  position  does  not  suit  with  the  leg  and 
the  arm.  For  when  the  fractured  bones  of  the  arm  or  fore-arm 
are  bandaged,  the  fore-arm  is  suspended  in  a  sling,  and  if  you 
bind  them  up  while  extended,  the  figures  of  the  fleshy  parts 
will  be  changed  in  bending  the  arm  at  the  elbow,  for  the  elbow 
cannot  be  kept  long  extended,  since  persons  are  not  in  the 
custom  of  keeping  the  joint  long  in  this  form,  but  in  a  bent 
position,  and  persons  Avho  have  been  wounded  in  the  arm,  and 
are  still  able  to  w  alk  about,  require  to  have  the  arm  bent  at  the 
elbow-joint.  But  the  leg,  both  in  walking  and  standing,  is 
habitually    extended,   either   completely   or   nearly    so,   and   is 

•  According  to  Galen,  the  cause  why  dislocation  inwards  is  more  common  than 
outwards  is,  that  the  end  of  the  fibula  extends  lower  down  than  the  inner  malleolus, 
and  that  has  a  tendency  to  prevent  dislocation  outwards.  All  our  best  authorities 
at  the  present  day  are  agreed  that  dislocation  of  the  astragalus  inwards  is  the  most 
frequent  form  of  luxation  at  the  ankle-joint.  See  Bransby  Cooper's  Lectures,  where 
the  same  reason  is  assigned  for  the  greater  frequency  of  this  mode  of  displacement 
as  that  given  by  Galen :  "  This  is  the  most  frequent  luxation,  in  consequence  of  the 
malleolus  internus  not  descending  so  low  as  the  external."  (Med.  Gaz.,  1069.) 

^  The  treatment  of  fracture  of  the  bones  of  the  leg,  as  given  in  this  and  the  two 
following  paragraphs,  is  deserving  of  much  attention. 


.')26  FRACTURES. 

usually  ill  a  depending  position  from  its  construction,  and  in 
order  that  it  may  bear  the  weight  of  the  rest  of  the  body. 
Wherefore  it  readily  bears  to  be  extended  when  necessary,  and 
even  when  in  bed  the  limb  is  often  in  this  position.  And  when 
wounded,  necessity  subdues  the  understanding,  since  the  patients 
become  incapable  of  raising  themselves  up,  so  that  they  neither 
think  of  bending  the  limb  nor  of  getting  up  erect,  but  remain 
lying  in  the  same  position.  For  these  reasons,  neither  the 
same  position  nor  the  same  mode  of  bandaging  applies  to  the 
arm  and  to  the  leg.  If,  then,  extension  by  means  of  men 
be  sufficient,  Ave  should  not  have  recourse  to  any  useless  con- 
trivances, for  it  is  absurd  to  employ  mechanical  means  when 
not  required;  but  if  extension  by  men  be  not  sufficient,  you  may 
use  any  of  the  mechanical  powers  which  is  suitable.  When 
sufficiently  extended,  it  will  be  easy  to  adjust  the  bones  and 
bring  them  into  their  natural  position,  by  straightening  and 
.arranging  them  with  the  palms  of  the  hand. 

16.  When  tlie  parts  are  adjusted,  you  should  apjdy  the 
bandages  while  the  limb  is  in  a  stretched  position,  making  the 
first  turns  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  as  may  be  most  suitable ; 
and  the  end  of  the  bandage  should  be  placed  over  the  fracture, 
and  the  first  turns  made  at  that  place  ;  and  then  the  bandage 
should  be  carried  up  the  leg,  as  described  with  regard  to  the 
other  fractiu'cs.  ]?ut  the  bandages  should  be  broader  and 
longer,  and  more  numerous,  in  the  case  of  the  leg  than  in  that 
of  the  arm.  And  when  it  is  bandaged  it  should  be  laid  upon 
some  smooth  and  soft  ol)jcct,  so  that  it  may  not  be  distorted 
to  the  one  side  or  the  other,  and  that  there  may  be  no  pro- 
trusion of  the  bones  either  forwards  or  backwards ;  for  this 
purpose  nothing  is  more  convenient  than  a  cushion,  or  some- 
thing similar,  either  of  linen  or  wool,  and  not  hard  ;  it  is  to  be 
made  IioUoav  along  its  middle,  and  placed  below  the  limb.  With 
regard  to  the  canals  [gutters  ?)  usually  placed  below  fractured 
legs,  I  am  at  a  loss  whether  to  advise  that  they  should  be  used 
or   not.^       For  thev  certainly  are   l)eneficial,    but   not   to  the 

'  I  have  given  a  summary  of  all  the  information  which  I  coukl  collect  respecting 
the  canals  or  gutters,  used  hy  the  ancients  for  gi-eater  security  to  a  fractured  leg,  in 
my  annotations  On  the  Surgery,  and  in  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  yEciNETA, 
Book  VI,  lOG.  Galen  mentions,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  part,  that  the  more  ancient 
autliorities  sometimes  made  use  of  a  mechanical  apparatus  which  he  calls  glosso- 


FRACTURES.  527 

extent  which  those  who  use  them  suppose.  For  the  canals  do 
not  preserve  the  leg  at  rest  as  they  sujjpose  ;  nor,  when  the  rest 
of  tlie  body  is  turned  to  the  one  side  or  the  other,  does  the 
canal  prevent  the  leg  from  following,  unless  the  patient  himself 
pay  attention ;  neither  does  the  canal  prevent  the  limb  from 
being  moved  without  the  body  to  the  one  side  or  the  other. 
And  a  board  is  an  uncomfortable  thing  to  have  the  limb  laid 
upon,  unless  something  soft  be  placed  above  it.  But  it  is  a 
very  useful  thing  in  making  any  subsequent  arrangements  of 
the  bed  and  in  going  to  stool.  A  limb  then  may  be  well  and 
ill  treated  with  or  without  the  canal.  But  the  common  people 
have  more  confidence,  and  the  surgeon  is  more  likelj'  to  escape 
blame,  when  the  canal  is  placed  under  the  limb,  although  it  is 
not  secundum  artem.  For  the  limb  should  bv  all  means  lie 
straight  upon  some  level  and  soft  object,  since  the  bandaging 
must  necessarilv  be  overcome  bv  any  distortion  in  the  niacins: 
of  the  leg,  whenever  or  to  whatever  extent  it  may  be  inclined. 
The  patient,  when  bandaged,  should  return  the  same  answers 
as  formerly  stated,  for  the  bandaging  should  be  the  same,  and 
the  same  swellings  should  arise  in  the  extremities,  and  the 
slackening  of  the  bandages  in  like  manner,  and  the  new  ban- 
daging on  the  third  day;  and  the  bandaged  part  should  be 
found  reduced  in  swelling ;  and  the  new  bandagings  should  be 
more  tightly  put  on,  and  more  pieces  of  cloth  should  be  used ; 
and  the  bandages  should  be  carried  loosely  about  the  foot, 
unless  the  wound  be  near  the  knee.  Extension  should  be 
made  and  the  bones  adjusted  at  every  new  bandaging  ;  for,  if 
properly  treated,  and  if  the  swelling  progress  in  a  suitable 
manner,  the  bandaged  limb  will  have  become  more  slender  and 
attenuated,  and  the  bones  will  be  more  mobile,  and  yield  more 
readily  to  extension.  On  the  seventh,  the  ninth,  or  the 
eleventh  day^  the  splints  should  be  applied  as  described  in 
treating  of  the  other  fractures.  Attention  should  be  paid  to 
the  position  of  the  splints  about  the  ankles  and  along  the  tendon 
of  the  foot  which  runs  up  the  leg.      The  bones  of  the  leg  get 

comum,  a  drawing  of  which  is  given  in  the  Latin  translation  of  Galen  by  Vidus  Vidiiis 
(Venetiis  apud  Juntas,  15G5);  and  a  still  better  one  in  the  Institutiones  ChirurgiccB 
of  Tagaultius  (iv,  3).  It  would  appear  to  me  to  be  a  most  ingenious  machine,  and 
excellently  adapted  for  the  position  required.  It  is  so  constructed,  that  extension  and 
counter-extension  are  constantly  kept  up  by  a  double  set  of  pidleys. 


528  FRACTURES. 

consolidated  in  forty  days,  if  properly  treated.  But  if  you 
suspect  that  anything  is  wanting  to  the  jsroper  arrangement  of 
the  limb,  or  dread  any  ulceration,  you  should  loose  the  ban- 
dages in  the  interval,  and  having  put  everything  right,  apply 
them  again. 

17.  But  if  the  other  bone  {^bula?)  of  the  leg  be  broken, 
less  powerful  extension  is  required,  and  yet  it  must  not  be 
neglected,  nor  be  performed  slovenly,  more  especially  at  the 
first  bandaging.  For  in  all  cases  of  fracture  this  object  should 
be  attained  then  as  quickly  as  possible.  For  when  the  bandage 
is  applied  tight  while  the  bones  are  not  properly  arranged, 
the  part  becomes  more  painful.  The  treatment  otherwise  is 
the  same.^ 

18.  Of  the  bones  of  the  leg,  the  inner  one,  called  the  tibia, 
is  the  more  troublesome  to  manage,  and  requires  the  greater 
extension  ;  and  if  the  broken  bones  are  not  properly  arranged, 
it  is  impossible  to  conceal  the  distortion,  for  the  bone  is  ex- 
posed and  wholly  uncovered  with  flesh ;  and  it  is  much  longer 
before  patients  can  walk  on  the  leg  when  this  bone  is  broken. 
But  if  the  outer  bone  be  broken,  it  causes  much  less  trouble, 
and  the  deformity,  when  the  bones  are  not  properly  set,  is 
much  more  easily  concealed,  the  bone  being  well  covered  with 
flesh ;  and  the  patients  speedily  get  on  foot,  for  it  is  the  inner 
bone  of  the  leg  which  supports  the  most  of  the  \veiglit  of  the 
body.  For  along  with  the  thigh,  as  being  in  aline  with  weight 
thrown  upon  the  thigh,  the  inner  bone  has  more  Avork  to 
sustain ;  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  which 
sustains  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and  it  is  on  tlie  inner  and 
not  on  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  being  in  a  line  with  the 
tibia;  and  the  other  half  of  the  body  approximates  more  to 
this  line  than  to  the  external  one ;  and  at  the  same  time  the 
inner  bone  is  larger  than  the  outer,  as  in  the  fore-arm  the 
bone  in  the  line  of  the  little  finger  is  the  slenderer  and  longer. 
But  in  the  joint  of  the  inferior  extremity,  the  disposition  of  the 
longer  bone  is  not  alike,  for  the  elbow  and  the  ham  are  bent 
differently."       For  these   reasons   when    the   external   bone   is 

'  In  this  paragraph  fracture  of  the  fihula  is  treated  of  so  distinctly,  that  no  iUus- 
tration  of  the  text  is  needed. 

^  The  analogy  which  our  author  describes  between  the  bones  of  the  upper  and  the 
lower  extremity  is  very  striking,  and  has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion  with 


FRACTURES.  o29 

broken^  the  patients  can  soon  walk  about ;  but  in  fractures  of 
the  inner,  it  is  a  long  time  before  they  can  walk. 

19\  When  the  thigh-bone  is  broken,  particular  pains  should 
be  taken  with  regard  to  the  extension  that  it  may  not  be  in- 
sufficient, for  when  excessive,  no  great  harm  results  from  it. 
For,  if  one  should  bandage  a  limb  while  the  extremities  of  the 
bone  are  separated  to  a  distance  from  one  another  by  the  force 
of  the  extension,  the  bandaging  will  not  keep  them  separate, 
and  so  the  bones  will  come  together  again  as  soon  as  the  persons 
stretching  it  let  go  their  hold ;  for  the  fleshy  parts  {muscles  ?) 
being  thick  and  strong,  are  more  powerful  than  the  bandaging, 
instead  of  being  less  so.  In  the  case  then  which  we  are  now 
treating  of,  nothing  should  be  omitted  in  order  that  the  parts 
may  be  properly  distended  and  put  in  a  straight  line ;  for  it  is  a 
great  disgrace  and  an  injury  to  exhibit  a  shortened  thigh. 
For  the   arm,   when  shortened,  might  be   concealed,   and  the 

modern  physiologists,  especially  those  of  the  French  school,  namely,  Vicq-d'Azyr, 
Cuvier,  Cruveilhier,  and  Flourens.  M.  Littre  gives  some  very  interesting  extracts  from 
the  works  of  these  authors  in  his  Argument  to  this  treatise.  The  following  passage, 
taken  from  the  work  of  Flourens,  contains  a  very  lucid  exposition  of  what  I  regard 
as  the  most  rational  view  of  the  subject:  "  La  longue  indecision  dcs  anatomistes 
touchant  les  rapports  reels  des  membres  snperieurs  et  inferieurs  ne  tenait  done  quTi 
I'oubli,  dans  des  comparaisons  faites  sur  le  squelette,  du  mecanisme  \Tai  de  la  prona- 
tion de  la  main  par  la  rotation  du  radius ;  et  la  simple  restitution  de  ce  mecanisme 
suffit  pour  rendre,  comme  je  viens  de  le  dire,  a  toutes  les  parties  correspondantes  une 
position  semblable. — Or,  dans  cette  position  semljlable  de  toutes  les  parties  des  extre- 
mites  du  mcme  cote,  donnee  par  le  mecanisme  vrai  de  la  pronation  de  la  main,  le 
radius  repond  au  tibia,  et  le  cubitus  au  perone.  C'est  justement  le  contrau-e  de  ce 
qu'a  pense  Vicq-d'Azyr,  qui  assimile  le  cubitus  au  tibia,  et  le  radius  au  purone.  Mais, 
independamment  de  la  raison  decisive  tiree  du  vrai  mecanisme  de  la  pronation  de  la 
main,  combien  d'autres  raisons  encore  ne  se  presente-t-il  pas  contre  I'opinion  que  je 
refute,  les  unes  prises  de  I'anatomie  meme  de  I'homme  et  les  autres  de  I'anatomie 
comparue  ! — Dans  I'homme,  I'os  essentiel  de  I'avant-bras,  I'os  qui  continue  le  bras, 
I'os  qui  porte  la  main,  est  le  i-adius ;  le  cubitus  n'est  la  que  pour,  d'une  part,  elargir 
la  surface  des  insertions  musculaires,  et,  de  I'autre.preter  un  appui  solide  au  membre 
pendant  la  rotation  de  I'os  principal,  du  radius.  De  mcme  au  membre  inferieur,  I'os 
essentiel  de  la  jambe,  I'os  qui  continue  la  cuisse,  I'os  qui  porte  le  pied,  est  le  tibia. 
Plus  evidemment  encore  qu'au  membre  superieur,  le  perone  n'est  la  que  pom*  I'agran- 
dissement  des  surfaces  musculaires ;  il  neprend  aucune  part  a  I'articulation  du  femur, 
il  n'en  prend  qu'une  laterale  avec  le  pied."  (Sur  le  Parallele  des  Ext  remit  es  dans 
I'Homme  et  les  Quadi-upudes.)  The  remarks  made  by  Galen  in  his  Commentary  on 
the  points  of  analogy  between  the  elbow  and  the  knee-joints  are  very  pertinent. 

'  Fractui-e  of  the  femur  is  elaborately  treated  of  in  this  and  the  four  following 
paragraphs. 

34 


530  FRACTURES. 

mistake  would  not  be  great ;  but  a  shortened  thigli-boue  would 
exLiljit  the  man  maimed.  For  when  the  sound  limb  is  placed 
beside  it,  being  longer  than  the  other,  it  exposes  the  mistake, 
and  therefore  it  would  be  to  the  advantage  of  a  person  who 
would  be  improperly  treated  that  both  his  legs  should  be  broken, 
rather  than  either  of  them ;  for  in  this  case  the  one  would  be 
of  the  same  length  as  the  other.  When,  then,  proper  extension 
has  been  made,  you  must  adjust  the  parts  with  the  palms  of  the 
hands,  and  bandage  the  limb  in  the  manner  formerly  descri])ed, 
placing  the  heads  of  the  bandages  as  was  directed,  and  making 
the  turns  upwards.  And  the  patient  should  return  the  same 
answers  to  the  same  questions  as  formerly,  should  be  pained 
and  recover  in  like  manner,  and  should  have  the  bandaging 
renewed  in  the  same  way  ;  and  the  application  of  tlie  splints 
should  be  the  same.    The  thiiih-bone  is  consolidated  in  fifty  days. 

20.  But  this  also  should  be  known,  that  the  thigh-bone  is 
curved  rather  to  the  outside  than  to  the  inside,  and  rather  for- 
wards than  backwards ;  when  not  properly  treated,  then,  the 
distortions  are  in  these  directions  ;  and  the  bone  is  least  covered 
with  flesh  at  the  same  parts,  so  that  the  distortion  cannot  be 
concealed.  If,  therefore,  you  suspect  anything  of  this  kind, 
you  should  have  recourse  to  the  meclianical  contrivances  recom- 
mended in  distortion  of  the  arm.  And  a  few  turns  of  the  ban- 
dage should  be  brought  round  by  the  hip  and  the  loins,  so  that 
the  groin  and  the  articulation  near  the  perineum  may  be 
included  in  the  l)andage;  and  moreover,  it  is  expedient  that  the 
extremities  of  the  splints  should  not  do  mischief  by  being 
placed  on  parts  not  covered  with  the  bandages.  The  splints, 
in  fact,  should  be  carefully  kept  off  the  naked  parts  at  both 
ends  ;  and  the  arrangement  of  them  should  be  so  managed,  as 
that  they  may  not  be  placed  on  the  natural  protidjerances  of 
the  bone  at  the  knee-joint,  nor  on  the  tendon  which  is  situated 
there. 

21.  The  swellings  which  arise  in  the  ham,  at  the  foot,  or 
in  any  other  part  from  the  pressure,  should  be  well  wrapped  in 
unscoured  and  carded  wool,  washed  with  wine  and  oil,  and 
anointed  with  cerate,  before  bandaging;  and  if  the  splints  give 
pain  they  should  be  slackened.  You  may  sooner  reduce  the 
swellings,  by  laying  aside  the  splints,  and  applying  plenty  of 
bandages  to  them,  beginning  from  below  and  rolling  upwards; 


FRACTURES.  5;^  I 

for  tlius  the  swellings  will  be  most  speedily  reduced^  and  the 
hnraours  be  propelled  to  the  parts  above  the  former  bandages. 
But  this  form  of  bandaging  must  not  be  used  unless  there  be 
danger  of  vesications  or  blackening  in  the  swelling,  and  nothing 
of  the  kind  occurs  unless  the  fracture  be  bound  too  tight,  or  un- 
less the  limb  be  allowed  to  hang,  or  it  be  rubbed  with  the  hand, 
or  some  other  thing  of  an  irritant  nature  be  applied  to  the  skin.^ 
22.  ]\Iore  injury  than  good  results  from  placing  below  the 
thigh  a  canal  which  does  not  pass  farther  down  than  the  ham, 
for  it  neither  prevents  the  body  nor  the  leg  from  being  moved 
without  the  thigh.  And  it  creates  uneasiness  by  being  brought 
down  to  the  ham,  and  has  a  tendency  to  produce  what  of  all 
things  should  be  avoided,  namely,  flexion  at  the  knee,  for  this 
completely  disturbs  the  bandages ;  and  when  the  thigh  and  leg 
are  bandaged,  if  one  bend  the  limb  at  the  knee,  the  muscles 
necessarily  assume  another  shape,  and  the  broken  bones  are  also 
necessarily  moved.  Every  endeavour  then  should  be  made  to 
keep  the  ham  extended."  But  it  appears  to  me,  that  a  canal 
which  embraces  the  limb  from  the  nates  to  the  foot  is  of  use. 
And  moreover,  a  shawl  should  be  put  loosely  round  at  the  ham, 
along  with  the  canal,  as  children  are  swathed  in  bed  ;  and  then, 
if  the  thigh-bone  gets  displaced  either  upwards  or  to  the  side, 
it  can  be  more  easily  kept  in  position  by  this  means  along  with 
the  canal.'  The  canal  then  should  be  made  so  as  to  extend  all 
along  the  limb  or  not  used  at  all. 

'  The  text  of  this  paragraph,  which  is  very  corrupt  in  all  the  previous  editions,  is 
very  ingeniously  restored  by  M.  Littre,  so  as  to  afford  a  meaning  which  exactly  suits 
the  context.  No  experienced  surgeon  will  question  the  propriety  of  the  practice  here 
recommended ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  splints  are  producing  much  pain,  swelling, 
and  irritation,  to  remove  tliera  for  a  time  and  trust  entirely  to  bandages.  The  text 
of  Galen's  Commentary  is  remarkalily  corrupt.  M.  Littre  attempts  to  restore  it,  but 
whether  or  not  he  was  warranted  in  making  so  many  conjectural  emendations,  I  dare 
scarcely  venture  to  express  my  opinion. 

^  From  the  text  it  will  he  seen  how  strongly  our  author  disapproves  of  the  half 
bent  position  in  the  treatment  of  a  fractured  leg.  All  the  ancient  authorities  adopted 
his  views  in  this  case,  with  the  exception  of  Rhazes,  who  approves  of  the  limb  being 
partially  bent.  (Contin.  xxix.)     See  further  Padlus  ^-Egineta,  Book  VI,  102. 

^  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  informs  us  that  the  mode  in  which  the  shawl  or  scarf 
was  to  be  used  had  been  differently  understood,  some  supposing  that  the  shawl  was 
to  be  wrapped  round  the  canal  after  it  had  been  adjusted,  and  others  holding  tliat 
the  shawl  was  to  be  wrapped  round  the  Ihnb  at  the  ham,  so  as  to  secure  iramol)ility 
of  the  limb  at  the  knee  before  applying  the  canal. 


532  FRACTURES. 

23.  The  extremity  of  the  heel  should  be  particularly  attended 
to,  so  that  it  may  be  properly  laid,  both  in  fractures  of  the  leg 
and  of  the  thigh.  For  if  the  foot  be  placed  in  a  dependent  posi- 
tion, while  the  rest  of  the  body  is  supported,  the  limb  must 
present  a  curved  appearance  at  the  forepart  of  the  leg ;  and  if 
the  heel  be  placed  higher  than  is  proper,  and  if  the  rest  of  the 
leg  be  rather  too  low,  the  bone  at  the  forepart  of  the  leg  must 
present  a  hollow,  more  especially  if  the  heel  of  the  patient  be 
naturally  large.  But  all  the  bones  get  consolidated  more  slowly, 
if  not  laid  properly,  and  if  not  kept  steady  in  the  same  posi- 
tion, and  in  this  case  the  callus  is  more  feeble. 

24.  These  things  relate  to  cases  in  which  there  is  fracture  of 
the  bones  without  protrusion  of  the  same  or  wound  of  any  other 
kiud.^  In  those  cases  in  which  the  bones  are  simply  broken 
across,  and  are  not  comminuted,  but  protrude,  if  reduced  the 
same  day  or  next,  and  secured  in  their  place,  and  if  there  be 
no  reason  to  anticipate  that  any  splintered  bones  will  come  away; 
and  in  those  in  which  the  broken  bones  do  not  protrude,  nor  is 
the  mode  of  fracture  such  that  there  is  reason  to  expect  the 
splinters  will  come  out,  some  physicians  heal  the  sores  in  a  way 
which  neither  does  much  good  nor  harm,  by  means  of  a  cleans- 
ing application,  applying  pitch  ointment,  or  some  of  the  dressings 
for  fresh  wounds,  or  anything  else  which  they  are  accustomed 
to  do,  and  binding  al)ove  them  compresses  wetted  Avith  wine,  or 
greasy  wool,  or  something  else  of  the  like  nature.  And  when 
the  wounds  become  clean  and  are  new  healed,  thev  endeavour 
to  bind  up  the  limb  with  plenty  of  bandages,  and  keep  it  straight 
with  splints.  This  treatment  does  some  good,  and  never  much 
harm.  The  bones,  however,  can  never  be  equally  well  restored 
to  their  place,  but  the  part  is  a  little  more  swelled  than  it  should 
be  ;  and  the  limb  will  be  somewhat  shortened,  provided  l)oth 
bones  either  of  the  leg  or  fore-arm  have  l)een  fractured. 

25.  There  are  others  who  treat  such  cases  at  first  with  ban- 
dages, applying  them  on  both  sides  of  the  seat  of  the  injury,  but 

'  Our  autlior  now  proceeds  to  lay  down  the  treatment  of  fractures  complicated 
with  a  wound  of  the  skin.  In  this  paragraph  he  describes  the  lirst  plan,  whicli  he 
does  not  much  approve  of,  nor  strongly  condemns.  It  consists  in  applying  suitaltle 
dressings  to  the  wound  until  it  is  healed,  and  then  attending  to  the  fractured  bones. 
Tlte  disadvantages  of  this  system  he  has  briefly  stated,  namely,  that  the  fractured 
parts  are  apt  to  he  swelled  and  the  limb  shortened. 


FRACTURES.  533 

omit  them  tlicrc,  and  leave  the  wound  uncovered;  and  afterwards 
they  apply  to  the  wound  some  cleansing  medicine,  and  complete 
the  dressing  with  compresses  dipped  in  wine  and  greasy  wool. 
This  plan  of  treatment  is  bad,  and  it  is  clear  that  those  who 
adopt  this  mode  of  practice  are  guilty  of  great  mistakes  in  other 
cases  of  fracture  as  well  as  tliese.  For  it  is  a  most  important 
consideration  to  know  in  what  manner  the  head  of  the  bandage 
should  be  placed^  and  at  what  i)art  the  greatest  pressure  should 
be,  and  what  benefits  Avould  result  from  applying  the  end  of  the 
bandage  and  the  pressure  at  the  proper  place,  and  what  mis- 
chiefs would  result  from  applying  the  head  of  the  bandage  and 
the  pressure  otherwise  than  at  the  proper  place.  Wherefore  it 
has  been  stated  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  work  what  are  the 
results  of  either ;  and  the  practice  of  medicine  bears  witness  to 
the  truth  of  it,  for  in  a  person  thus  bandaged,  a  swelling  must 
necessarily  arise  on  the  wound.  For,  if  even  a  sound  piece  of 
skin  were  bandaged  on  either  side,  and  a  part  were  left  in  the 
middle,  the  part  thus  left  unbaudaged  would  become  most 
swelled,  and  would  assume  a  bad  colour  ;  how  then  could  it  be 
that  a  wound  would  not  suffer  in  like  manner  ?  The  Avound 
then  must  necessarily  become  discoloured  and  its  lips  everted, 
the  discharge  will  be  ichorous  and  without  pus,  and  the  bones, 
which  should  not  have  got  into  a  state  of  necrosis,  exfoliate; 
and  the  wound  gets  into  a  throbbing  and  inflamed  condition. 
And  they  are  obliged  to  apply  a  cataplasm  on  account  of  the 
swelling,  but  this  is  an  unsuitable  application  to  parts  which 
are  bandaged  on  both  sides,  for  a  useless  load  is  added  to  the 
throbbing  which  formerly  existed  in  it. .  At  last  they  loose  the 
bandages  when  matters  get  very  serious,  and  conduct  the  rest 
of  the  treatment  without  bandaging;  and  notwithstanding,  if 
they  meet  with  another  case  of  the  same  description,  they  treat 
it  in  the  same  manner,  for  they  do  not  think  that  the  appli- 
cation of  the  bandages  on  both  sides,  and  the  exposure  of  the 
wound  are  the  cause  of  what  happened,  but  some  other  unto- 
ward circumstance.  Wherefore  I  would  not  have  Avritten  so 
much  on  this  subject,  if  I  had  not  well  known  that  this  mode 
of  bandaging  is  unsuitable,  and  yet  that  many  conduct  the 
treatment  in  this  way,  whose  mistake  it  is  of  vital  importance 
to  correct,  while  Avhat  is  here  said  is  a  proof,  that  what  was 
formerly  written  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  bandasres 


534  FRACTURES. 

should  be  tightly  applied  to  fractures  or  otherwise  has  been 
correctly  written.^ 

26.  As  a  general  rule  it  may  be  said,  that  in  those  cases  in 
which  a  separation  of  bone  is  not  expected,  the  same  treatment 
should  be  applied  as  w  hen  the  fractures  are  not  complicated  with 
an  external  wound ;  for  the  extension,  adjustment  of  the  bones, 
and  the  bandaging,  are  to  be  conducted  in  the  same  manner. 
To  the  wound  itself  a  cerate  mixed  with  pitch  is  to  be  applied, 
a  thin  folded  compress  is  to  be  bound  upon  it,  and  the  parts 
around  are  to  be  anointed  with  white  cerate.  The  cloths  for 
bandages  and  the  other  things  should  be  torn  broader  than  in 
cases  in  which  there  is  no  wound,  and  the  first  turn  of  the  ban- 
dage should  be  a  good  deal  broader  than  the  w^ound.  For  a 
narrower  bandage  than  the  wound  binds  the  wound  like  a  girdle, 
which  is  not  proper,  for  the  first  turn  should  comprehend  the 
whole  wound,  and  the  bandaging  should  extend  beyond  it  on 
both  sides.  The  bandage  then  should  be  put  on  in  the  direction 
of  the  wound,  and  should  be  not  quite  so  tight  as  when  there 
is  no  wound,  but  the  bandage  should  be  otherwise  applied  in 
the  manner  described  above.  The  bandages  should  be  of  a  soft 
consistence,  and  more  especially  so  in  such  cases  than  in  those 
not  complicated  with  a  wound.  The  number  of  bandages  should 
not  be  smaller,  but  rather  greater  than  those  formerly  de- 
scribed. AVhen  ap})licd,  the  patient  should  have  the  feeling  of 
the  parts  being  properly  secured,  but  not  too  tight,  and  in  par- 
ticular he  should  be  able  to  say  that  they  are  firm  about  tlie 
wound.  And  the  intervals  of  time  during  which  the  parts  seem 
to  be  properly  adjusted,  and  those  in  which  they  get  loose, 
should  be  the  same  as  those  formerly  described.  The  bandages 
should  be  renewed  on  the  third  day,  and  the  after  treatment 

'  The  metliod  of  treating  compound  fractures,  which  our  autlior  lias  so  fullj'  de- 
scrit)ed  and  so  pointedly  condemned,  I  have  occasionally  seen  practised  hy  surgeons 
who,  I  have  uo  doubt,  thought  themselves  too  expert  in  the  art  of  bandaging  to  take 
a  lesson  from  tlic  ancients ;  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  plan  deserves  all  the 
censure  which  Hippocrates  bestows  upon  it.  As  he  represents,  by  bandaging  the 
surrounding  parts,  and  leaving  the  wound  uncovered,  or  not  equally  supported,  great 
congestion  and  swelling,  with  all  their  attendant  ill  consequences,  are  produced  in 
the  wound.  What  he  says  against  the  use  of  poultices  in  such  a  case,  I  regard  as 
being  equally  well  founded.  The  method  described  and  recommended  by  our  author 
ju  the  next  paragraph  I  believe  to  be  based  upon  most  correct  principles,  and  the 
best  that  can  possibly  be  devised. 


FRACTURES.  535 

conducted  in  the  same  manner  as  formerly  described,  except 
that  in  the  hitter  case  the  compression  should  he  somewhat  less 
than  in  the  former.  And  if  matters  go  on  properly,  the  parts 
about  the  wound  should  be  found  at  every  dressing  always  more 
and  more  free  of  swelling,  and  the  swelling  should  have  subsided 
on  the  whole  part  comprehended  by  the  bandages.  And  the 
suppurations  will  take  place  more  speedily  than  in  the  case  of 
wounds  treated  otherwise  ;  and  the  pieces  of  flesh  in  the  wound 
which  have  become  black  and  dead,  will  sooner  separate  and  fall 
off"  under  this  plan  of  treatment  than  any  other,  and  the  sore 
will  come  more  quickly  to  cicatrization  when  thus  treated  than 
otherwise.  The  reason  of  all  this  is,  that  the  parts  in  which  the 
wound  is  situated,  and  the  surrounding  parts,  are  kept  free  of 
swelling.  In  all  other  respects  the  treatment  is  to  be  conducted 
as  in  cases  of  fracture  without  a  wound  of  the  integuments. 
Splints  should  not  be  applied.  On  this  account  the  bandages 
should  be  more  numerous  than  in  the  former  case,  both  because 
they  must  be  put  on  less  tight,  and  because  the  splints  are  later 
of  being  applied.  But  if  you  do  apply  the  splints,  they  should 
not  be  applied  along  the  Avound,  and  they  are  to  be  put  on  in 
a  loose  manner,  especial  care  being  taken  that  there  may  be  no 
great  compression  from  the  splints.  This  direction  has  been 
formerly  given.  And  the  diet  should  be  more  restricted,  and 
for  a  longer  period,  in  those  cases  in  which  there  is  a  wound  at 
the  commencement,  and  w^hen  the  bones  protrude  through  the 
skin  ;  and,  in  a  word,  the  greater  the  wound,  the  more  severe 
and  protracted  should  the  regimen  be. 

27.  The  treatment  of  the  sores  is  the  same  in  those  cases  of 
fracture  in  which  there  was  no  wound  of  the  skin  at  first,  but 
one  has  formed  in  the  course  of  treatment,  owing  to  the  pressure 
of  the  splints  occasioned  l)y  the  bandages,  or  from  any  other 
cause.  In  such  cases  it  is  ascertained  that  there  is  an  ulcer, 
by  the  pain  and  throbbing ;  and  the  swelling  in  the  extremities 
becomes  harder  than  usual,  and  if  you  apply  your  finger  the 
redness  disappears,  but  speedily  returns.  If  you  suspect  any- 
thing of  the  kind  you  must  loose  the  dressing,  if  there  be  any 
itching  below  the  uuder-bandages,  or  in  any  other  part  that  is 
bandaged,  and  use  a  pitched  cerate  instead  of  the  other.  If 
there  be  nothing  of  that,  but  if  the  ulcer  be  found  in  an  irri- 


536  FRACTURES. 

table  state,  being  very  black  and  foul,  and  the  flesh}^  parts  about 
to  suppurate,  and  the  tendons  to  slough  away,  in  these  cases  no 
part  is  to  be  exposed  to  the  air,  nor  is  anything  to  be  appre- 
hended from  these  suppurations,  but  the  treatment  is  to  be  con- 
ducted in  the  same  manner  as  in  those  cases  in  which  there  was 
an  external  wound  at  first.  You  must  begin  to  apply  the  ban- 
dages loosely  at  the  swelling  in  the  extremities,  and  then 
gradually  proceed  upAvards  with  the  bandaging,  so  that  it  may 
be  tight  at  no  place,  but  particularly  firm  at  the  sore,  and  less  so 
elsewhere.  The  first  bandages  should  be  clean  and  not  narrow, 
and  the  number  of  bandages  should  be  as  great  as  in  those  cases 
in  which  the  splints  were  used,  or  somewhat  fewer.  To  the  sore 
itself  a  compress,  anointed  with  white  cerate,  will  be  sufficient, 
for  if  a  piece  of  flesh  or  nerve  [fcndon  ?)  become  black,  it  will 
fall  off;  for  such  sores  are  not  to  be  treated  with  acrid,  but  with 
emollient  applications,  like  burns.  The  bandages  are  to  be  re- 
newed every  third  day,  and  no  splints  are  to  be  applied,  but  rest 
is  to  be  more  rigidly  maintained  than  in  the  former  cases,  along 
with  a  restricted  diet.  It  should  be  known,  that  if  any  piece 
of  flesh  or  tendon  be  to  come  away,  the  mischief  will  spread 
much  less,  and  the  parts  will  much  more  speedily  drop  off,  and 
the  swelling  in  the  surrounding  parts  will  much  more  completely 
subside,  under  this  treatment,  tlian  if  any  of  the  cleansing  appli- 
cations be  put  upon  the  sore.  And  if  any  part  that  is  to  come 
away  shall  fall  off,  the  jiart  will  incarnate  sooner  when  thus 
treated  than  otherwise,  and  will  more  speedily  cicatrize.  Such 
are  the  good  effects  of  knowing  how  a  bandage  can  be  well  and 
moderately  applied.  But  a  proper  position,  the  other  parts  of 
the  regimen,  and  suitable  bandages  cooperate. 

28.  If  you  are  decei\  ed  with  regard  to  a  recent  wound,  sup- 
posing there  will  be  no  exfoliation  of  the  bones,  Avhile  they  are 
on  the  eve  of  coming  out  of  the  sore,  you  must  not  hesitate  to 
adopt  this  mode  of  treatment ;  for  no  great  mischief  will  result, 
provided  you  have  the  necessary  dexterity  to  apply  the  bandages 
well  and  without  doing  any  harm.  And  this  is  a  symptom  of 
an  exfoliation  of  bone  being  about  to  take  place  under  this  mode 
of  treatment ;  pus  runs  copiously  from  the  sore,  and  appears 
striving  to  make  its  escape.  The  bandage  must  be  renewed 
more  frequently  on  account  of  the  discharge,   since  otherwise 


FRACTURES.  537 

fevers  come  on;  if  the  sore  and  surrounding  parts  be  compressed 
by  the  bandages'  they  become  wasted.  Cases  complicated  with 
the  exfoHatiou  of  very  small  bones,  do  not  require  any  change 
of  treatment,  only  the  bandages  should  be  put  on  more  looseh', 
so  that  the  discharge  of  pus  may  not  be  intercepted,  but  left 
free,  and  the  dressings  are  to  be  frequently  renewed  until  the 
bone  exfoliate,  and  the  splints  should  not  be  applied  until 
then. 

29.  Those  cases  in  which  the  exfoliation  of  a  larger  piece  of 
bone  is  expected,  whether  you  discover  this  at  the  commence- 
ment, or  perceive  subsequently  that  it  is  to  happen,  no  longer 
require  the  same  mode  of  treatment,  only  that  the  extension  and 
arrangement  of  the  parts  are  to  be  performed  in  the  manner 
that  has  been  described ;  but  having  formed  doubled  compresses, 
not  less  than  half  a  fathom  in  breadth  (being  guided  in  this  by 
the  nature  of  the  wound),  and  considerably  shorter  than  what 
would  be  required  to  go  twice  round  the  part  that  is  wounded, 
but  considerably  longer  than  to  go  once  round,  and  in  number 
what  will  be  sufficient,  these  are  to  be  dipped  in  a  black  austere 
wine ;  and  beginning  at  the  middle,  as  is  done  in  applying  the 
double-headed  bandage,  you  are  to  wrap  the  part  ai'ound,  and 
proceed  crossing  the  heads  in  the  form  of  the  bandage  called 
"  ascia.^^"  These  things  are  to  be  done  at  the  Avound,  and  on 
both  sides  of  it ;  and  there  must  be  no  compression,  but  they 
are  to  be  laid  on  so  as  to  give  support  to  the  wound.  And  on 
the  wound  itself  is  to  be  applied  the  pitched  cerate,  or  one  of  the 
applications  to  recent  wounds,  or  any  other  medicine  which  will 
suit  with  the  embrocation.  And  if  it  be  the  summer  season, 
the  compresses  are  to  be  frequently  damped  with  wine ;  but  if 
the  winter  season,  plenty  of  greasy  wool,  moistened  with  wine 
and  oil,  should  be  applied.  And  a  goat^s  skin  should  be  spread 
below,  so  as  to  carry  off  the  fluids  which  run  from  the  wound ; 
these  must  be  guarded  against,  and  it  should  be  kept  in  mind, 

'  The  text  in  tliis  place  is  in  a  verj-  corrupt  state,  at  least  there  are  varions  read- 
ings, which  involve  considerable  diversity  of  interpretation.  I  must  own  that  I 
prefer  the  old  reading  in  the  edition  of  Foes,  and  in  the  Basle  edition  of  Galen,  to 
that  proposed  by  ^I.  Littre. 

*  These  bandages  are  described  in  the  annotations  on  the  Surgery.  See  also 
Galen,  Meth.  Med.,  vi,  and  his  Commentary  on  this  place. 


538  FRACTURES. 

that  parts  Avliicli  remain  long  in  tlie  same  position  are  subject 
to  excoriations  which  are  difficult  to  cure.' 

30.  In  such  cases  as  do  not  admit  of  bandaging  according 
to  anv  of  the  methods  Avliich  have  been  described,  or  Avhich 
will  be  described,  great  pains  should  be  taken  that  the  fractured 
part  of  the  body  be  laid  in  a  right  position,  and  attention 
should  be  paid  that  it  may  incline  upwards  rather  than  down- 
wards. But  if  one  Avould  Avish  to  do  the  thing  well  and  dex- 
terously, it  is  proper  to  have  recourse  to  some  mechanical  con- 
trivance, in  order  that  the  fractured  part  of  the  body  may 
undergo  proper  and  not  violent  extension ;  and  this  means  is 
particularly  applicable  in  fractures  of  the  leg.  There  are  certain 
physicians  who,  in  all  fractures  of  the  leg,  whether  bandages 
be  applied  or  not,  fasten  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  couch,  or 
to  some  other  piece  of  wood  which  they  have  fixed  in  the  ground 
near  the  couch.  These  persons  thus  do  all  sorts  of  mischief 
but  no  good ;  for  it  contributes  nothing  to  the  extension  that 
the  foot  is  thus  bound,  as  the  rest  of  the  body  will  no  less  sink 
down  to  the  foot,  and  thus  the  limb  will  no  longer  be  stretched, 
neither  will  it  do  any  good  towards  keeping  the  limb  in  a 
proper  position,  but  will  do  harm,  for  when  the  rest  of  the  body 
is  turned  to  this  side  or  that,  the  bandaging  will  not  prevent  the 
foot  and  the  bones  belonging  to  it  from  following  the  rest  of 
the  body.  For  if  it  had  not  been  bound  it  would  have  been 
less  distorted,  as  it  would  have  been  the  less  prevented  from 
following  the  motion  of  the  rest  of  the  body.  But  one  should 
sew  tAvo  Ijalls  of  Egyptian  leather,  such  as  are  worn  by  persons 
confined  for  a  length  of  time  in  large  shackles,  and  the  balls 
should  have  coats  on  each  side,  deeper  towards  the  wound,  but 
shorter  towards  the  joints ;  and  the  balls  should  be  well  stufted 
and  soft,  and  fit  well,  the  one  above  the  ankles,  and  the  other 
below  the  knee.  Sideways  it  should  have  below  two  append- 
ages, either  of  a  single  or  double  thong,  and  short,  like  loops, 
the  one  set  being  placed  on  either  side  of  the  ankle,  and  the 
other  on  the  knee.  And  the  other  upper  ball  should  have 
others  of  the  same  kind  in  the  same  line.      Then  taking  four 

'  Cialen,  in  illustration,  refers  to  the  ulcerations  which  occur  over  the  os  sacrum, 
and  are  often  found  very  ditficult  to  cure.  See  the  last  section  of  the  Second  Book 
of  Paulus  /Egineta. 


FRACTURES.  ^,A9 

rods,  made  of  tlic  cornel  tree,  of  equal  length,  and  of  tlic 
thickness  of  a  finger,  and  of  such  length  that  when  bent  they 
■will  admit  of  being  adjusted  to  the  appendages,  care  should  l)e 
taken  that  the  extremities  of  the  rods  bear  not  upon  the  skin, 
but  on  the  extremities  of  the  balls.  There  should  be  three 
sets  of  rods,  or  more,  one  set  a  little  longer  than  another,  and 
another  a  little  shorter  and  smaller,  so  that  they  may  produce 
greater  or  less  distension,  if  required.  Either  of  tliese  sets  of 
rods  should  be  placed  on  this  side  and  that  of  the  ankles.  If 
these  things  be  properly  contrived,  they  should  occasion  a 
proper  and  equal)le  extension  in  a  straight  line,  without  giving 
any  pain  to  the  wound  ;  for  the  pressure,  if  there  is  any,  should 
be  throw^n  at  the  foot  and  the  thigh.  And  the  rods  are  com- 
modiously  arranged  on  either  side  of  the  ankles,  so  as  not  to 
interfere  with  the  position  of  the  limb  ;  and  the  Avound  is  easily 
examined  and  easily  arranged.  And,  if  thought  proper,  there 
is  nothing  to  prevent  the  two  upper  rods  from  being  fastened 
to  one  another  ;  and  if  any  light  covering  be  thrown  over  the 
limb,  it  will  thus  be  kept  off  from  the  wound.  If,  then,  the 
balls  be  well  made,  handsome,  soft,  and  newly  stitched,  and  if 
the  extension  by  the  rods  be  properly  managed,  as  has  been 
already  described,  this  is  an  excellent  contrivance  ;  but  if  any 
of  them  do  not  fit  properly,  it  does  more  harm  than  good.^ 
And  all  other  mechanical  contrivances  should  either  be  properly 
done,  or  not  be  had  recourse  to  at  all,  for  it  is  a  disgraceful 
and  awkward  thing  to  use  mechanical  means  in  an  unmecha- 
nical  way. 

31.   Moreover,  the  greater  part  of  physicians  treat  fractures, 
both  with  and  without   an   external  wound,    during   the   first 

'  When  illustrated  l)y  a  good  drawing,  as  it  is  in  the  edition  of  M.  Littre,  the 
description  here  given  is  easily  understood,  and  the  machine  would  ai)pear  to  be  an 
ingenious  contrivance  well  adapted  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  leg  extended.  It 
evidently  consisted  of  two  pairs  of  elastic  rods  running  along  the  sides  of  the  leg, 
and  fastened  to  two  pads,  or,  rather,  air-bladders,  applied  at  the  knee  and  the  ankle. 
The  contrivance  is  distinctly  described  by  Palladius  in  his  Commentary  on  this  work. 
By  the  way,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  apprehend  exactly  the  objections  which  },[.  Littre  states 
to  the  drawings  given  by  Yidus  Vidius ;  indeed  they  appear  to  me  to  be  in  principle 
the  same  as  his  own,  except  that  they  are  more  rudely  constructed.  I  have  given 
both  drawings,  so  that  the  reader  may  judge  for  him;  elf.  Though,  as  I  liave  stated, 
the  nature  of  this  mechanical  contrivance  may  be  pretty  clearly  understood  from  the 
description,  when  compared  with  the  drawings,  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  difficulty  in  determining  certain  expiessions  contained  in  this  paragraph. 


540  FRACTURES. 

days,  h}'  means  of  imwaslicd  wool,  and  tlierc  docs  not  appear 
to  be  anvtliing  improper  in  this.  It  is  very  excusable  for  those 
who  are  called  upon  to  treat  newl}^ -received  accidents  of  this 
kind,  and y\\\o  have  no  cloth  for  bandages  at  hand,  to  do  them 
up  with  wool ;  for,  except  cloth  for  bandages,  one  could  not 
have  anything  better  than  wool  in  such  cases ;  but  a  good  deal 
should  be  used  for  this  purpose,  and  it  should  be  well  carded 
and  not  rough,  for  in  small  quantity  and  of  a  bad  quality  it 
has  little  power.  But  those  Avho  approve  of  binding  up  the 
limb  Avith  wool  for  a  day  or  two,  and  on  the  third  and  fourth 
apply  bandages,  and  make  the  greatest  compression  and  extension 
at  that  period,  such  persons  show  themselves  to  be  ignorant  of 
the  most  important  principles  of  medicine ;  for,  in  a  word,  at 
no  time  is  it  so  little  proper  to  disturb  all  kinds  of  wounds  as 
on  the  third  and  fourth  day ;  and  all  sort  of  probing  should  be 
avoided  on  these  days  in  whatever  other  injuries  are  attended 
with  irritation.  For,  generally,  the  third  and  fourth  day  in 
most  cases  of  wounds,  are  those  which  give  rise  to  exacerba- 
tions, whether  the  tendency  be  to  inflammation,  to  a  foul 
condition  of  the  sore,  or  to  fevers.  And  if  any  piece  of  infor- 
mation be  particularly  valuable  this  is  ;  to  which  of  the  most 
important  cases  in  medicine  does  it  not  apply?  and  that  not 
onlv  in  wounds  but  in  manv  other  diseases,  unless  one  should 
call  all  other  diseases  wounds.  And  this  doctrine  is  not  devoid 
of  a  certain  degree  of  plausibility,  for  they  are  allied  to  one 
another  in  many  respects.  But  those  who  maintain  that  wool 
should  be  used  until  after  the  first  seven  days,  and  then  that 
the  parts  should  be  extended  and  adjusted,  and  secured  with 
bandages,  would  appear  not  to  be  equally  devoid  of  proper 
judgment,  for  the  most  dangerous  season  for  inflammation  is 
then  past,  and  the  bones  being  loose  can  be  easily  set  after  the 
lapse  of  these  days.  But  still  this  mode  of  treatment  is  far 
inferior  to  that  with  bandages  from  the  commencement ;  for, 
the  latter  method  exhilnts  the  patient  on  the  seventli  day  free 
from  inflammation,  and  ready  for  complete  bandaging  witli 
splints ;  while  the  former  method  is  far  behind  in  this  respect, 
and  is  attended  with  many  other  bad  eff"ects  which  it  would 
be  tedious  to  describe.^ 

'  Tills  mode  of  treating  recent  fractures  and  other  injuries  would  .appear  to  be 
now  entirely  lost  sight  of,  and  yet  I  can  well  believe  that,  under  peculiar  circum- 


FRACTURES.  541 

31/  In  those  cases  of  fracture  in  whicli  the  bones  protrude 
and  cannot  be  restored  to  their  place,  the  following  mode  of 
I'cduction  may  be  practised  : — Some  small  pieces  of  iron  are  to 
be  prepared  like  the  levers  which  the  cutters  of  stone  make 
use  of,  one  being  rather  broader  and  another  narrower;  and  there 
should  be  three  of  them  at  least,  and  still  more,  so  that  you 
may  use  those  that  suit  best ;  and  then,  along  with  extension, 
we  must  use  these  as  levers,  applying  the  under  surface  of  the 
piece  of  iron  to  the  under  fragment  of  the  bone,  and  the  upper 
surface  to  the  upper  bone ;  and,  in  a  word,  we  must  operate 
powerfully  with  the  lever  as  Ave  would  do  upon  a  stone  or  a 
piece  of  wood.  The  pieces  of  iron  should  be  as  strong  as 
possible,  so  that  they  may  not  bend.  This  is  a  powerful  as- 
sistance, provided  the  pieces  of  iron  be  suitable,  and  one  use 
them  f)roperly  as  levers.  Of  all  the  mechanical  instruments 
used  by  men,  the  most  powerful  are  these  three,  the  axis  in 
peritrochio,  the  lever,  and  the  wedge."  Without  these,  one 
or  all,  men  could  not  perform  any  of  their  works  which  require 
great  force.  Wherefore,  reduction  with  the  lever  is  not  to  be 
despised,  for  the  bones  will  be  reduced  in  this  way,  or  not  at 
all.  But  if  the  upper  fragment  which  rides  over  the  other 
does  not  furnish  a  suitable  point  of  support  for  the  lever,  but 
the  protruding  part  is  sharp,  you  must  scoop  out  of  the  bone 
what  will  furnish  a  proper  place  for  the  lever  to  rest  on.  The 
lever,  along  Avith  extension,  may  be  had  recourse  to  on  the  day 
of  the  accident,  or  next  day,  but  bv  no  means  on  the  third,  the 
fourth,  and  the  fifth.      For  if  the  limb  is  disturbed  on  these 

stances,  as,  for  example,  in  military  practice,  it  might  be  often  found  a  very  advan- 
tageous and  useful  method  of  treatment  to  bind  a  limb  at  first  either,  as  our  autlioi 
mentions,  with  well-carded  wool  or  with  raw  cotton.  If  disposed  of  in  this  way,  and  laid 
in  the  half-l)oot  of  pasteboard,  which  I  have  formerly  mentioned  as  being  used  by  myself 
in  lieu  of  the  ancient  canals,  I  have  no  doubt  but  a  fractured  limb  would  lie  very 
securely,  and  the  patient  in  this  state  might  be  carried  to  a  distance  if  required. 

'  Bis. 

=  From  the  terms  in  which  our  author  expresses  himself,  it  has  been  supposed  that 
these  are  the  only  mechanical  powers  which  were  known  in  his  day.  But,  consider- 
ing the  advances  in  the  arts  which  had  then  been  made,  it  is  not  likely  that  the 
Greeks  could  have  been  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  screw,  although  our  author 
omits  to  mention  it  here  as  not  being  of  any  application  to  surgical  practice.  The 
pulley  {trochlea)  is  mentioned  in  the  work  On  the  Articulations,  ^  43,  and,  if  I  recollect 
right,  in  other  parts  of  the  Ilippocratic  treatises;  but,  as  we  have  already  stated,  it  does 
not  appear  that  it  was  used  anciently  in  the  reduction  of  dislocations. 


542  FRACTURES. 

♦ 
days,  and  yet  the  fractured  bones  not  reduced,  inflammation 
will  be  excited,  and  this  no  less  if  they  are  reduced ;  for  con- 
vulsions are  more  apt  to  occur  if  reduction  take  place,  than 
if  the  attempt  should  fail.  These  facts  should  be  well  known, 
for  if  convulsions  should  come  on  when  reduction  is  effected, 
there  is  little  hope  of  recovery ;  but  it  is  of  use  to  displace  the 
bones  again  if  this  can  be  done  without  trouble.  For  it  is 
not  at  the  time  when  the  parts  are  in  a  particularly  relaxed 
condition  that  convulsions  and  tetanus  are  apt  to  supervene, 
but  when  they  ai'c  more  than  usually  tense.  •  In  the  case  we 
are  now  treating  of,  we  should  not  disturb  the  limb  on  the 
aforesaid  days,  but  strive  to  keep  the  wound  as  free  from  iu- 
flammation  as  possil^le,  and  especially  encourage  suppuration 
in  it.  But  when  seven  days  have  elapsed,  or  rather  more,  if 
there  be  no  fever,  and  if  the  Avound  be  not  inflamed,  then  there 
will  be  less  to  prevent  an  attempt  at  reduction,  if  you  hope  to 
succeed  ;  but  otherwise  you  need  not  take  and  give  trouble 
in  vain. 

3.2.  When  you  have  reduced  the  bones  to  their  place,  the 
modes  of  treatment,  whether  you  expect  the  bones  to  exfoliate 
or  not,  have  been  idready  described.  All  those  cases  in  which 
an  exfoliation  of  bone  is  expected,  should  be  treated  by  the 
method  of  bandaging  with  cloths,  beginning  for  the  most  part 
at  the  middle  of  the  bandage,  as  is  done  with  the  double- 
headed  bandage  ;  but  particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
shape  of  the  wound,  so  that  its  lips  may  gape  or  be  distorted  as 
little  as  possible  uuder  the  bandage.  Sometimes  the  turns  of 
the  bandage  have  to  be  made  to  the  right,  and  sometimes  to 
the  left,  and  sometimes  a  double-headed  bandage  is  to  be  used. 

33.  It  should  be  kno\vn  that  bones,  which  it  has  been  found 
impossible  to  reduce,  as  well  as  those  which  are  wholly  denuded 
of  flesh,  will  become  detached.  In  some  cases  the  upper  part 
of  the  bone  is  laid  l)are,  and  in  others  the  flesh  dies  all  around; 
and,  from  a  sore  of  long  standing,  certain  of  the  bones  become 
carious,  and  some  not,  some  more,  and  some  less ;  and  in  some 
the  small,  and  in  others  the  large  bones.  From  what  has  been 
said  it  will  be  seen,  that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  in  one  word 
when  the  bones  will  separate.      Some  come  away  more  quickly, 

'  We  recognise  here  two  terms,  the  stricfuni  and  /«.«»«,  wliieh  formed  the  ground- 
work of  the  whole  system  of  the  Methodists.     See  CpcHus  Aurehanus,  passim. 


FRACTURES.  r>43 

owing  to  their  sraalliioss,  and  some  from  hcing  merely  fixed  at 
the  point ;  and  some,  from  pieces  not  separ.iting,  but  merely 
exfoliating,  become  dried  up  and  putrid ;  and  besides,  different 
modes  of  treatment  have  different  eff'ects.  For  the  most  part, 
the  bones  separate  most  quickly  in  those  cases  in  which  sup- 
puration takes  place  most  quickly,  and  when  new  flesh  is  most 
quickly  formed,  and  is  pai'ticularly  sound,  for  the  flesh  which 
grows  up  below  in  the  wound  generally  elevates  the  pieces  of 
bone.  It  will  ])e  Avell  if  the  whole  circle  of  the  bone  separate 
in  forty  days  ;  for  in  some  cases  it  is  protracted  to  sixty  days, 
and  in  some  to  more ;  for  the  more  porous  pieces  of  bone 
separate  more  quickly,  but  the  more  solid  come  away  more 
slowly ;  but  the  other  smaller  splinters  in  much  less  time,  and 
others  otherwise.  A  portion  of  bone  which  protrudes  should 
be  sawn  off"  for  the  following  reasons  :  if  it  cannot  be  reduced, 
and  if  it  appears  that  only  a  small  piece  is  required  in  order 
that  it  may  get  back  into  its  place ;  and  if  it  be  such  as  that  it 
can  be  taken  out,  and  if  it  occasions  inconvenience  and  irritates 
any  part  of  the  flesh,  and  prevents  the  limb  from  being  properly 
laid,  and  if,  moreover,  it  be  denuded  of  flesh,  such  a  piece  of 
bone  should  be  taken  off".  With  regard  to  the  others,  it  is  not 
of  much  consequence  whether  they  be  sawed  oft'  or  not.  For  it 
should  be  known  for  certain,  that  such  bones  as  are  completely 
deprived  of  flesh,  and  have  become  dried,  all  separate  com- 
pletely. Those  which  are  about  to  exfoliate  should  not  be 
sawn  off".  Those  that  will  separate  completely  must  be  judged 
of  from  the  symptoms  that  have  been  laid  down, 

34.  Such  cases  are  to  be  treated  with  compresses  and  vinous 
applications,  as  formerly  laid  down  regarding  bones  which  will 
separate.  We  must  avoid  wetting  it  at  the  beginning  with  any- 
thing cold  ;  for  there  is  danger  of  febrile  rigors,  and  also  of  con- 
vulsions ;  for  convulsions  are  induced  by  cold  things,  and  also 
sometimes  by  wounds.^  It  is  proper  to  know  that  the  members 
are  necessarily  shortened  in  those  cases  in  which  the  bones 
have  been  broken,  and  have  healed  the  one  across  the  other, 
and  in  those  cases  in  which  the  whole  circle  of  the  bone  has 
become  detached. 

35.  Those  cases  in  which  the  bone  of  the  thigh,  or  of  the 

'  See  Aphorism  v,  17,  20.    Celsus  renders  this  sentence  as  follows:  "  Frigus  onini 
ratione  vitandum,"  &c.  (viii,  10.) 


544  FRACTURES. 

arm,  protrudes,  do  not  easily  recover.  For  the  bones  are  large, 
and  contain  much  marrow;  and  many  important  nerves,  muscles, 
and  veins  arc  wounded  at  the  same  time.  And  if  you  reduce 
them,  convulsions  usually  supervene;  and,  if  not  reduced,  acute 
bilious  fevers  come  on,  with  singultus  and  mortification.^  The 
chances  of  recovery  are  not  fewer  in  those  cases  in  which  the 
parts  have  not  been  reduced,  nor  any  attempts  made  at  reduc- 
tion." Still  more  recover  in  those  cases  in  which  the  lower, 
than  those  in  which  the  upper  part  of  the  bone  protrudes;  and 
some  will  recover  when  reduction  has  been  made,  but  very 
rarely  indeed.  For  modes  of  treatment  and  peculiarity  of  con- 
stitution make  a  great  difl:erence  as  to  the  capability  of  enduring 
such  an  injury.  And  it  makes  a  great  difference  if  the  bones  of 
the  arm  and  of  the  thigh  protrude  to  the  inside ;  for  there  are 
many  and  important  vessels  situated  there,  some  of  which,  if 
wounded,  will  prove  fatal ;  there  are  such  also  on  the  outside,  but 
of  less  importance.  In  wounds  of  this  sort,  then,  one  ought 
not  to  be  ignorant  of  the  dangers,  and  should  prognosticate  them 
in  due  time.  But  if  j^ou  are  compelled  to  have  recourse  to 
reduction,  and  hope  to  succeed,  and  if  the  bones  do  not  cross 
one  another  much,  and  if  the  muscles  are  not  contracted  (for 
they  usually  are  contracted),  the  lever  in  such  cases  may  be 
advantageously  employed . 

36.  Having  effected  the  reduction,  you  must  give  an  emol- 
lient draught  of  hellebore'^  the  same  day,  provided  it  has  been 

'  Modern  experience  lias  amply  confirmed  the  opinion  here  expressed  by  our  author 
as  to  the  danger  there  is  in  all  cases  of  compound  fracture  of  the  femur  or  humerus 
from  tetanus  and  gangrene.  In  whatever  way  treated,  whether  the  parts  be  let  alone 
at  first,  or  reduced,  or  amputation  be  practised,  such  cases  commonly  prove  fatal. 

*  Paulus  yEgineta,  in  reference  to  this  passage,  says  :  "  Hippocrates,  in  fractures  of 
the  thigh  and  arm,  dissuades  from  replacing  at  once  the  protruding  bones,  predicting 
danger  from  it,  owing  to  the  inflammation,  or  perhaps  spasm  of  the  muscles  and 
nerves,  which  are  fipt  to  be  brought  on  by  the  extension.  But  time  has  shown  that 
the  attempt  will  sometimes  succeed."  (VI,  107.)  For  the  practice  of  the  other 
ancient  authorities  in  this  case,  see  the  Commentary,  1.  c. 

^  Even  Galen  confesses  himself  unable  to  determine  what  is  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  term  {^laXQciKog)  here  applied  by  our  author,  but  supposes  it  probable  tliat  he 
means  some  gentle  method  of  administering  the  hellebore.  He  mentions  that  he 
was  in  the  practice  of  giving  an  infusion  of  radishes  in  oxymel  with  a  few  brandies 
of  liellebore  in  such  cases,  and  that  when  thus  administered  the  purgative  operation 
of  the  hellebore  was  mild.  The  reader  will  remark  our  author's  partiality  to  helle- 
b(n-e  in  all  cases  of  a  spasmodic  natiuv,  such  as  tetanus. 


FRACTURES.  545 

reduced  on  the  day  of  tlic  accident,  but  otherwise  it  shouhl  not 
be  attempted.  The  wound  shouhl  be  treated  with  the  same 
things  as  are  used  in  fractures  of  the  bones  of  the  head,  and 
nothing  cokl  should  be  apphed ;  the  patient  shouhl  be  restricted 
from  food  altogether,  and  if  naturally  of  a  l)ilious  constitution, 
he  should  have  for  diet  a  little  fi'agrant  oxycjlyky  s])rinkled  on 
water;  but  if  he  is  not  bilious,  he  should  have  water  for  drink; 
and  if  fever  of  the  continual  type  come  on,  he  is  to  bo  confined 
to  this  regimen  for  fourteen  days  at  least,  but  if  he  be  free  of 
fever,  for  only  seven  davs,  and  then  you  must  bring  him  back 
by  degrees  to  a  common  diet.  To  those  cases  in  which  the 
bones  have  not  been  reduced,  a  similar  course  of  medicine 
should  be  administered,  along  with  the  same  treatment  of  the 
sores  and  regimen ;  and  in  like  manner  the  suspended  part  of 
the  body  should  not  be  stretched,  but  should  rather  be  con- 
tracted, so  as  to  relax  the  parts  about  the  wound.  The  sepa- 
ration of  the  bones  is  protracted,  as  also  was  formerly  stated. 
But  one  should  try  to  escape  from  such  cases,  provided  one 
can  do  so  honorabh^,  for  the  hopes  of  recovery  are  small,  and 
the  dangers  many;  and  if  the  physician  do  not  reduce  the 
fractured  bones  he  will  be  looked  upon  as  unskilful,  while  by 
reducing  them  he  will  bring  the  patient  nearer  to  death  than 
to  recovery. 

37.  Luxations  and  subluxations  at  the  knee  are  much  milder 
accidents  than  subluxations  and  luxations  at  the  elbow.^  For 
the  knee-joint,  in  proportion  to  its  size,  is  more  compact  than 

'  The  subject  of  dislocations  at  the  knee-  and  elbow-joints  is  so  important,  that  I 
liave  thought  it  necessary  to  enter  into  a  pretty  full  discussion  of  it  in  the  Argument. 
A  few  points,  notwithstanding,  will  require  consideration  in  this  place.  There  is  still 
great  diversity  of  opinion  respecting  the  nature  of  subluxations  at  the  knee-joint, 
even  after  all  the  investigations  which  the  suljjcct  has  received  from  Iley  of  Leeds, 
Sir  Astley  Cooper,  Mr.  Liston,  and  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper.  No  doubt,  partial  displace- 
ments of  the  femur  from  the  til)ia  do  take  place  occasionally;  but  there  appears  good 
reason  for  suspecting  that  the  accidents  generally  referred  to  this  category  have  been 
displacements  of  the  semilunar  cartilages ;  with  these  it  docs  not  appear  that 
Hippocrates  or  any  other  of  the  ancient  authorities  was  acquainted.  Partial  dislo- 
cations from  disease  I  have  frequently  seen.  I  am  acquainted  with  a  case  of  nearly 
complete  luxation  backward  of  the  tibia,  from  the  disease  usually  called  wliite 
swelling ;  and  yet,  strange  to  say,  the  limb  is  still  not  much  impaired  either  in  its 
strength  or  motions.  These  cases  of  displacement  from  disease  have  probably  been 
sometimes  confounded  with  subluxations  from  accident;  indeed  I  cannot  but  think 
that  the  ancient  surgeons  must  have  committed  this  mistake  sometimes,  otherwise 

35 


546  FRACTURES. 

that  of  the  arm,  and  has  a  more  even  conformation,  and  is 
rounded;  Avhilc  the  joint  of  tlie  arm  is  hirgc,  and  has  many 
cavities.  And  in  addition,  the  bones  of  the  leg  are  nearly  of 
the  same  length,  for  the  external  one  overtops  the  other  to  so 
small  an  extent  as  hardly  to  deserve  being  mentioned,  and  there- 
fore affords  no  great  resistance,  although  the  external  nerve 
{I'u/ anient  ?)  at  the  ham  arises  from  it ;  but  the  bones  of  the 
fore-arm  are  unequal,  and  the  shorter  is  considerably  thicker  than 
the  other,  and  the  more  slender  [iilna)  protrudes,  and  passes  up 
above  the  joint,  and  to  it  (the  olecranon  ?)  are  attached  the 
nerves  [I h/ anient s  ?)  which  go  downwards  to  the  junction  of  the 
bones ;  and  the  slender  1)one  {ntna  ?)  has  more  to  do  with  the 
insertion  of  the  ligaments  in  the  arm  than  tliethickbonc(/'af/m5.?). 
The  configuration  then  of  the  articulations,  and  of  the  bones  of 
the  elbow,  is  such  as  I  have  described.  Owing  to  their  con- 
figuration, the  bones  at  the  knee  arc  indeed  frequently  dislo- 
cated, but  they  are  easily  reduced,  for  no  great  inflammation 
follows,  nor  anv  constriction  of  the  joint.  They  are  displaced 
for  the  most  part  to  the  inside,  sometimes  to  the  outside,  and 
occasionally  into  the  ham. ^  Tlie  reduction  in  all  these  cases  is 
not  difficult,  but  in  the  dislocations  inwards  and  outwards,  the 
patient  should  be  placed  on  a  low  scat,  and  the  thigh  should  be 
elevated,  but  not  much.  Moderate  extension  for  the  most  part 
sufficeth,  extension  1)eiug  made  at  tlie  \c'^,  and  counter-exten- 
sion at  the  thigh. 

88.  Dislocations  at  the  elbow  are  more  troublesome  than 
those  at  the  knee,  and,  owing  to  the  inflammation  which  comes 
on,  and  the  configuration  of  the  joint,  are  more  difficult  to  re- 
duce if  the  bones  are  not  immediately  replaced.  For  the  bones 
at  the  elbow  arc  less  su1)ject  to  dislocation   than  those   of  the 

they  would  not  have  represented  this  accident  as  heing  of  so  frequent  occurrence  as 
they  deserihe  it  to  lie.  As  we  have  stated  elsewhere,  of  all  the  joints  of  the  human 
body  this  perhaps  is  the  one  whirh  most  rarely  meets  with  dislocation.  The  deseriji- 
tion  which  oiu-  author  gives  of  the  ligaments  connected  with  the  elhow-joint  is  so 
curious,  that  I  have  inserted  in  the  xVrgument  to  the  next  work  Beclard's  very  in- 
genious observations  on  the  subject. 

'  Tlic  Comnu'ufary  of  Galen  is  particularly  valuable  on  Ibis  passage,  as  putting  it 
beyond  a  doubt  that,  in  dislocations  at  the  knee,  our  author  represents  the  femur  as 
the  bone  which  is  displaced.  In  modern  works  the  femur  is  generally  considered  as 
the  fixed  point.  Sec  Mr.  Branshy  Cooper's  Lectures,  and  Mr.  Liston's  Practical 
Surgcrv. 


FRACTURES. 


Oii 


knee,  but  arc  more  difficult  to  reduce  and  keep  in  their  posi- 
tion, and  arc  more  apt  to  l)ecome  inHamed  and  ancylosed.^ 

39.  For  tlic  most  part  tlic  displacements  of  these  bones  are 
small,  sometimes  towards  the  ri])s,  and  sometimes  to  the  outside; 
and  the  Avhole  articulation  is  not  displaced,  but  that  part  of  the 
humerus  remains  in  place  which  is  articulated  with  the  cavity 
of  the  bone  of  the  fore-arm  that  has  a  protuberance  {ulna?). 
Such  dislocations,  to  whatever  side,  are  easily  reduced,  and  the 
extension  is  to  be  made  in  the  lino  of  the  arm,  one  person 
making  extension  at  the  wrist,  and  another  grasping  the  arm- 
pit, while  a  third,  applying  the  palm  of  his  hand  to  the  part  of 
the  joint  which  is  displaced,  pushes  it  inwards,  and  at  the  same 
time  makes  counter- pressure  on  the  opposite  side  near  the  joint 
with  the  other  hand." 

40.  The  end  of  the  humerus  at  the  elbow  gets  displaced 
{subluxated  ?)  by  leaving  the  cavity  of  the  ulna.  Such  luxations 
readily  yield  to  reduction,  if  applied  before  the  parts  get  in- 
flamed. The  displacement  for  the  most  part  is  to  the  inside, 
but  sometimes  to  the  outside,  and  they  are  readily  recognised 
by  the  shape  of  the  liml).    And  often  such  luxations  are  reduced 

'  No  person  j)ossessed  of  a  practical  aciiuaiiitanre  with  the  suhjcct  can  fail  t-o  per- 
ceive that,  in  the  following  descriptions  of  dislocation  at  the  elbow-joint,  our  author 
comprises  (and  perhaps  I  may  say  confounds  together)  simj)le  displacement  of  the 
trochlea  of  the  humerus  from  the  great  sigmoid  cavity  of  the  ulna,  and  fractures  of 
the  humerus  immediately  above  the  epiphysis,  accompanied  with  displacement  of  the 
hones  of  the  fore-arm.  See  the  Argument,  and  Dupuytrcn  on  Injuries  of  Bones, 
p.  102  &c.,  Sydenham  Society  edition.  Dupuytren  was  well  aware  of  the  occurrence 
of  abrujition  of  the  extremity  of  the  humerus  with  displacement,  although  not  with- 
out it.    See  §  4G. 

-  The  case  here  described  would  seem  to  be  dislocation  of  the  radius  at  its  upper  ex- 
tremity, an  accident  which  has  been  descril)ed  by  Duverney,Desaidt,  Sir  Astley  Cooper, 
and  many  other  modern  authorities.  It  is  distinctly  noticed  by  Oribasius  (De  Machina- 
mentis,  xiii  and  xiv).  Our  author,  upon  this  supposition,  describes  both  the  dislo- 
cations forwards  and  backwards.  This  is  the  exjjlanation  of  the  paragraph  wliich 
ApoUonius  Citiensis  would  appear  to  sanction.  (Schol.  in  Hippocrat.,  torn,  i,  p.  15.) 
Galen,  however,  in  his  Commentary  preserved  by  Cocchi,  would  seem  to  refer  it  to 
the  incomplete  lateral  luxations  of  the  arm.  A  third  interpretation  of  the  meaning 
has  been  advanced  by  Bosquillon,  and  to  it  M.  Littre  at  last  inclines,  namely,  that  it 
is  incomplete  dislocation  backwards.  His  observations  on  this  point  show  the  great 
pains  which  the  French  editor  takes  in  elucidating  the  text  of  his  author;  but  I  can- 
not say  that  I  think  he  and  his  countryman  make  out  anything  like  a  strong  case  in 
support  of  then-  opinion,  and  I  still  incline  to  agree  with  ApoUonius  in  i-eferring  the 
ease  here  described  to  dislocation  of  the  ratlins.  I  leave  the  reader,  however,  to 
judge  for  himself. 


048  FRACTURES. 

witliout  any  powerful  extension.  In  dislocations  inwards^  the 
joint  is  to  be  puslied  into  its  place,  while  the  fore-arm  is  brought 
round  to  a  state  of  pronation.  Such  are  most  of  the  dislocations 
at  the  elbow. ^ 

41.  But  if  the  articular  extremity  of  the  humerus  be  carried 
to  either  side  above  the  bone  of  the  fore-arm,  Avhich  is  promi- 
nent, into  the  hollow^  of  the  arm  (?),  this  rarely  happens;  but 
if  it  do  happen,  extension  in  the  straight  line  is  not  so  proper 
under  such  cu'cumstances ;  for  in  such  a  mode  of  extension,  the 
process  of  the  ulna  [olecranon  ?)  prevents  the  bone  of  the  arm 
{Jmmerus  ?)  from  passing  over  it.  In  dislocations  of  this  kind, 
extension  should  be  made  in  the  manner  described  when  treat- 
ing of  the  bandaging  of  fractured  bones  of  the  arm,  extension 
being  made  upwards  at  the  armpit,  while  the  parts  at  the  elbow 
are  pushed  downwards,  for  in  this  manner  can  the  humerus  be 
most  readily  raised  above  its  cavity ;  and  when  so  raised,  the 
reduction  is  easy  with  the  palms  of  the  hand,  the  one  being 
applied  so  as  to  make  pressure  on  the  protuberant  part  of  the 
arm,  and  the  other  making  counter-pressure,  so  as  to  push  the 
bone  of  the  fore-arm  into  the  joint.  This  method  answers  with 
both  cases.  And  perhaps  this  is  the  most  suitable  mode  of  re- 
duction in  such  a  case  of  dislocation.  The  parts  may  be  reduced 
by  extension  in  a  straight  line,  but  less  readily  than  thus.^ 

42.  If  the  arm  be  dislocated  forwards — this  rarely  happens, 
indeed,  but  what  would  a  sudden  shock  not  displace  ?  for 
many  other  things  are  removed  from  their  proper  place,  not- 
withstanding a  great  obstacle, — in  such  a  violent  displacement 
the  part  [plecrcmon  ?)  which  passes  above  the  prominent  part  of 
the  bones  is  large,  and  the  stretching  of  the  nerves  {J'ujaments?) 
is  intense ;  and  yet  the  parts  have  been  so  dislocated  in  certain 
cases. — The  following  is  the  symptom  of  such  a  displacement : 
the  arm  cannot  be  bent  in  the  least  degree  at  the  elbow,  and 

'  Tliis  would  certainly  appear  to  be  incomplete  lateral  luxation  of  the  fore-arm. 
See  the  Argument. 

^  This  is  evidently  meant  as  a  description  of  complete  lateral  luxation.  Such  a 
case  of  displacement  is  very  uncommon ;  indeed,  until  lately,  it  was  thought  im- 
possible. See  Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary,  p.  391,  Fifth  edition,  1825.  It  is  de- 
scribed, however,  by  Mr.  Liston  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Displacement  of  both  bones 
laterally  is  met  with,  though  rarely,  the  olecranon  process  being  placed  upon  either  the 
outer  or  inner  condyle ;  in  the  latter  case  the  head  of  the  radius  rests  in  the  fossa 
on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  humerus."  (Practical  Surgery,  p.  124,  Thuxl  edition.) 


FRACTURES.  549 

upon  feeling  the  joint  the  nature  of  tlie  accident  becomes 
obvious.  If,  tlicn^  it  is  not  speedily  reduced,  strong  and  violent 
inflammation,  attended  Avitli  fever,  "will  come  on,  but  if  one 
happen  to  be  on  the  spot  at  the  time  it  is  easily  reduced.  A 
piece  of  hard  linen  cloth  (for  a  piece  of  hard  linen,  not  very 
large,  rolled  up  in  a  ball,  will  be  sufficient)  is  to  be  placed  across 
the  bend  of  the  elbow,  and  the  arm  is  then  to  be  suddenly  bent 
at  the  elbow,  and  the  haiul  l)ronght  up  to  the  shoulder.  This 
mode  of  reduction  is  sufficient  in  such  displacements ;  and 
extension  in  the  straight  line  can  rectify  this  manner  of  dislo- 
cation,  but  we  must  use  at  the  same  time  the  palms  of  the  hands, 
applying  the  one  to  the  projecting  part  of  the  humerus  at  the 
])end  of  the  arm  for  the  purpose  of  pushing  it  back,  and  applying 
the  other  below  to  the  sharp  extremity  of  the  elbow,  to  make 
counter-pressure,  and  incline  the  parts  into  the  straight  line. 
And  one  may  use  with  advantage  in  this  form  of  dislocation  the 
method  of  extension  formerly  described,  for  the  application  of 
the  bandages  in  the  case  of  fracture  of  the  arm ;  but  when  ex- 
tension is  made,  the  parts  are  to  be  adjusted,  as  has  been  also 
described  above.^ 

43.  But  if  the  arm  be  dislocated  backwards  (but  this  very 
rarely  happens,  and  it  is  the  most  painful  of  all,  and  the  most 
subject  to  bilious  fevers  of  the  continual  type,  which  prove  fatal 
in  the  course  of  a  few  days),  in  such  a  case  the  patient  cannot 
extend  the  arm.  If  you  are  quickly  present,  by  forcible  exten- 
sion the  parts  may  return  to  their  place  of  their  own  accord ; 
but  if  fever  have  previously  come  on,  you  must  no  longer  attempt 
reduction,  for  the  pain  Avill  ])e  rendered  more  intense  by  any 
such  violent  attempt.  In  a  word,  no  joint  Avhatever  should  be 
reduced  during  the  prevalence  of  fever,  and  least  of  all  the 
elbow-joint." 

44.  There  are  also  other  troublesome  injuries  connected  with 

'  This  would  seem  to  lie  dislocation  of  the  fore-arm  forwards,  ^yhether  or  not 
it  ever  occurs  without  fracture  of  the  olecranon,  as  our  author's  description  seems  to 
infer,  I  cannot  pretend  to  determine.     Sec  the  Argument. 

-  There  can  he  no  mistake  ahout  the  nature  of  the  accident  descrihcd  in  this 
paragraph:  it  is  evidently  the  ordinary  luxation  of  the  elhow-joiiit,  namely,  displace- 
ment of  the  hones  of  the  fore-arm  hackward.  The  following  description  of  its 
leading  character  agrees  exactly  with  our  author's  account  of  it :  "  The  fore-arm  is 
in  a  state  of  half-tlexion,  and  every  attempt  to  extend  it  produces  acute  pain." 
(Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary,  p.  390,  Fifth  edition.) 


ojy 


FRACTURES. 


the  elbow-joint ;  for  example,  the  thicker  bone  {i^adius  ?)  is 
sometimes  partially  displaced  from  the  other,  and  the  patient 
can  neither  perform  extension  nor  flexion  properly.  This  acci- 
dent becomes  obvions  upon  examination  with  the  hand  at  the 
bend  of  the  arm  near  the  division  of  the  vein  that  runs  up  the 
muscle.  In  such  a  case  it  is  not  easy  to  reduce  the  parts  to 
their  natural  state,  nor  is  it  easy,  in  the  separation  of  any  two 
bones  united  by  symphysis,  to  restore  them  to  their  natural 
state,  for  there  will  necessarily  be  a  swelling  at  the  seat  of  the 
diastasis.  The  method  of  bandaging  a  joint  has  been 
already  described  in  treating  of  the  application  of  bandages  to 
the  ankle. ^ 

45.  In  certain  cases  the  process  of  the  ulna  {olecranon?) 
behind  the  humerus  is  broken  ;  sometimes  its  cartilaginous 
part,  which  gives  origin  to  the  posterior  tendon  of  the  arm,  and 
sometimes  its  fore  part,  at  the  base  of  the  anterior  coronoid  pro- 
cess ;  and  when  this  displacement  takes  place,  it  is  apt  to  be 
attended  with  malignant  fever."  The  joint,  however,  remains 
in  place,  for  its  whole  base  protrudes  at  that  point.  But  when 
the  displacement  takes  place  where  its  head  overtops  the  arm, 
the  joint  becomes  looser  if  the  bone  be  fairly  broken  across. 
To  speak  in  general  terms,  all  cases  of  fractured  bones  are  less 
dangerous  than  those  in  which  the  bones  are  not  broken,  but 
the  veins  and  important  nerves  [tendons  ?)  situated  in  these 
places  are  contused  ;  for  the  risk  of  death  is  more  immediate  in 
the  latter  class  of  cases  than  in  the  former,  if  continual  fever 
come  on.      But  fractures  of  this  nature  seldom  occur. 

46.  It  sometimes  happens  that  the  head  of  the  humerus  is 
fractured  at  its  epiphysis ;  and  this,  although  it  may  appear  to 
be  a  much  more  troublesome  accident,  is  in  fact  a  much  milder 
one  than  the  other  injuries  at  the  joint.'' 

47.  The  treatment  especially  befitting  each  particular  dislo- 
cation has  been  described ;  and  it  has  been  laid  down  as  a  rule, 
that  immediate  reduction  is  of  the  utmost  advantage,  owing  to 

'  This  speins  to  be  lateral  displacement  of  the  radius.     See  the  Argument. 

■  These  are  evidentl\  fractures  of  the  olecranon,  near  its  extremitj',  and  at  its  base, 
tluit  is  to  say,  at  its  connexion  with  the  coronoid  process.  See  Sir  Astley  Cooper's 
Lectures,  and  Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary. 

^  This,  beyond  all  doubt,  is  abruption  of  tlic  epiphysis  or  trochlea  of  the  humerus- 
See  the  Argument. 


FKACTDRI<:8.  551 

the  rapid  manner  in  which  inflammation  of  the  tendons  super- 
venes. For  even  when  tlic  hixatcd  parts  are  immediately 
reduced,  the  tendons  usuall}^  become  stiffened,  and  for  a  con- 
siderable time  prevent  extension  and  flexion  from  being  per- 
formed to  the  ordinary  extent.  All  these  cases  are  to  be  treated 
in  a  similar  wav,  whether  the  extrcniitvof  the  articulating  bone 
be  snapped  oil",  whether  the  bones  be  separated,  or  whether  they 
be  dislocated  ;  for  they  arc  all  to  be  treated  with  plenty  of  ban- 
dages, compresses,  and  cerate,  like  other  fractures.  The  posi- 
tion of  the  joint  in  all  these  cases  should  be  the  same,  as  Avhen 
a  fractured  arm  or  fore-arm  has  been  bound  up.  For  this  is  the 
most  common  position  in  all  dislocations,  displacements,  and 
fractures ;  and  it  is  the  most  convenient  for  the  subsequent 
movements,  whether  of  extension  or  flexion,  as  being  the  inter- 
mediate stage  between  both.  And  this  is  the  position  in  which 
the  patient  can  most  conveniently  carry  or  suspend  his  arm  in 
a  sling.  And  besides,  if  the  joint  is  to  be  stiffened  by  callus, 
it  were  better  that  this  should  not  take  place  when  the  arm  is 
extended,  for  this  position  will  be  a  great  impediment  and  little 
advantage ;  if  the  arm  be  wholly  bent,  it  will  be  more  useful ; 
but  it  will  be  much  more  convenient  to  have  the  joint  in  the 
intermediate  position  when  it  becomes  ancylosed.  So  much 
with  regard  to  position.^ 

48.  In  bandaging,  the  head  of  the  first  bandage  should  be 
placed  at  the  seat  of  the  injury,  whether  it  be  a  case  of  fracture, 
of  dislocation,  or  of  diastasis  {separation?),  and  the  first  turns 
should  be  made  there,  and  the  bandages  should  be  applied  most 
firmly  at  that  place,  and  less  so  on  either  side.  The  bandaging 
should  comprehend  both  the  arm  and  the  fore-arm,  and  on  both 
should  be  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  most  physicians  apply 
it,  so  that  the  swelling  may  be  expelled  from  the  seat  of  the 
injury  to  either  side.  And  the  point  of  the  fore-arm  should  be 
comprehended  in  the  bandaging,"  whether  the  injury  be  in  that 
place  or  not,  in  order  that  the  swelling  may  not  collect  there. 

'  These  rules  for  the  adjustment  of  tlie  parts  in  injuries  of  tlie  elhow-joint  are 
most  important  and  apposite.  Whether  in  dislocation,  subluxation,  abruption  of  tlie 
epiphysis  of  the  liumerus,  fracture  of  the  olecranon,  and,  in  fact,  I  l)elieve  in  all  in- 
jm-ies  at  the  elbow-joint,  the  half-bent  position  at  first  will  be  found  the  best.  See 
Sir  Astley  Cooper's  Lectures,  and  all  the  best  modern  authorities. 

'  Meaning,  no  doubt,  the  olecranon. 


;'i52  FRACTURES. 

In  applying  bandages^  ysc  must  avoid  as  much  as  possible  accu- 
mnlating  many  turns  of  the  bandage  at  the  bend  of  the  arm. 
For  the  principal  compression  should  be  at  the  seat  of  the  injury, 
and  the  same  rules  arc  to  be  observed,  aiul  at  the  same  periods, 
with  regard  to  compression  and  relaxation,  as  formerly  de- 
scribed respecting  the  treatment  of  broken  bones ;  and  the 
bandages  should  be  renewed  everv  third  dav  :  and  thev  should 
appear  loose  on  the  third  day,  as  in  the  other  case.  And  splints 
should  be  applied  at  the  proper  time  (for  there  is  nothing  un- 
suitable in  them,  whether  the  bones  be  fractured  or  not,  pro- 
vided there  is  no  fever) ;  tlicy  should  be  particular!}^  loose, 
whether  applied  to  the  arm  or  the  fore-arm/  but  they  must  not 
1)0  thick.  It  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  of  unequal  size, 
and  that  the  one  should  ride  over  the  other,  whenever  from  the 
flexion  it  is  judged  proj^.cr.  And  the  application  of  the  com- 
presses should  be  regulated  in  the  same  manner  as  has  been 
stated  with  regard  to  the  splints ;  and  they  should  be  put  on  in 
a  somewhat  more  bidky  form  at  the  seat  of  the  injury.  The 
periods  are  to  be  estimated  from  the  inflammation,  and  from 
what  has  been  written  on  them  above. 

'  The  lueaniu!;  in  (his  j)assaj;(>  is  very  douljtfu!,  owing  to  tlie  unccrlaiiily  aliout 
the  proper  reading.     See  Foiis  and  Littre. 


ON  THE  ARTICULATIONS. 


ON  THE  ARTICULATIONS. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

The  author  commences  the  work  with  an  elaborate  disser- 
tation on  dislocations  at  the  shoulder-joint,  of  which  he  de- 
cidedly recognises  only  one  form^  namely,  dislocation  downwards, 
or  into  the  armpit,  but  he  does  not  positively  deny  the  possi- 
bility of  dislocations  upwards,  outwards,  and  forwards,  only 
he  states  that  he  had  never  met  with  any  instance  of  them. 
He  concludes  §  1  with  some  general  remarks  on  this  acci- 
dent. He  then  describes  various  modes  of  reduction  : — with 
the  hand,  §  2  ; — with  the  heel,  §  3  ; — with  the  shoulder  intro- 
duced into  the  patient's  armpit,  §  4 ; — with  a  pestle  or  pole 
introduced  into  the  armpit,  §  5  ; — with  a  ladder,  §  0  ; — or 
with  the  machine  called  the  ambe,  §  7.  In  §  8  are  contained 
some  remarks  on  the  general  subject  of  luxations,  in  which 
place  mention  is  made  of  the  occurrence  of  this  accident  in 
cattle  when  in  a  lean  condition.  In  §  8  the  after-treatment 
is  accurately  laid  down.  In  §  10  some  very  important  and 
acute  remarks  are  made  on  the  method  of  avoiding  mistakes  in 
treating  these  dislocations;  and  in  §  11  the  surgical  treatment 
in  cases  which  show  a  great  tendency  to  relapse  is  minutely 
treated  of.  The  consequent  effects  on  the  limb  when  the 
reduction  is  not  accomplished  are  circumstantially  described 
in  §  12. 

In  §  13  is  given  a  description  of  abruption  of  the  acromion, 
by  which  is  probably  meant  dislocation  of  the  clavicle  from  the 
acromion,  complicated,  perhaps,  Avitli  fracture  of  the  latter. 

The  subject  of  fracture  of  the  clavicle  is  next  taken  up,  and 
it  is  treated  of  through  §§  14,  15,  16,  where  everything  relating 
to  the  symptoms  and  treatment  of  this  accident  is  given  with 
remarkable  precision. 

The  subject  of  luxations    and   subluxations   at   the   elbow. 


556  ARTICULATIONS. 

whicli  had  been  treated  of  in  tlie  work  '  On  Fractures/  is 
here  resumed,  and  is  fully  discussed  in  §§  17,  18,  19,  20,  21, 
oo    9Q    94    o?; 

Luxations  at  the  wrist,  and  their  consequences,  are  given 
in  §§  2G,  27,  28. 

Luxations  of  the  fingers  are  briefly  treated  of  in  §  29. 

Luxations  of  the  lower  jaw,  with  all  their  varieties  and  con- 
sequences, are  described  in  §§  30,  31. 

Fracture  of  the  same,  without  displacement,  is  gi^-en  in  §>  32, 
and  with  displacement,  in  §  33.  Fracture  of  the  lower  jaw,  at 
its  symphysis,  is  treated  of  in  §  34. 

Fractures  and  contusions  of  the  nose  are  elaborately  treated 
of  in  §§  35,  36,  37,  38,  39. 

Fractures  of  the  ear  are  treated  of  in  §  40. 

Incurvation  of  the  spine  is  treated  of  in  §  41,  and  the  appli- 
cation of  the  process  of  succi\ssion  by  means  of  a  ladder,  for 
the  cure  of  it,  is  minutely  described  in  §§  42,  43,  4i.  In  ^  45, 
the  spinal  vertebrae,  ligaments,  and  nerves  are  minutely  de- 
scribed. Inferences  from  their  anatomical  structure  are  given 
at  considerable  length  in  §  40.  The  methods  of  treating  in- 
curvations of  the  spine  by  a  mechanical  process  are  minutely 
described  in  '^^  47.      Curvature  forwards  is  described  in  §  48. 

Fracture  of  the  ribs  is  treated  of  in  §  49,  and  contusion  of 
them  in  §  50.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  contusions  are  held 
to  be  more  dangerous  than  fractures. 

The  symptoms  of  dislocations  at  the  hip-joint,  whether  con- 
genital or  otherwise,  and  whether  occasioned  bv  external  violence 
or  disease,  are  described  with  extraordinary  minuteness  and 
accuracy  of  detail  in  §§  51,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57,  58,  59,  60. 
In  •§>  61  are  given  some  general  reflections  on  the  subject  of 
luxations. 

In  §  62,  congenital  displacement  of  the  bones  of  the  ankle- 
joint,  that  is  to  say,  congenital  club-foot,  is  treated  of  with 
great  precision. 

Luxation  of  the  bones  of  the  ankle-joint,  with  protrusion  of 
them  through  the  skin,  that  is  to  say,  compound  luxation,  is 
treated  of  in  §  63. 

Compound  luxations  at  the  wrist  are  described  in  §  61'. 

Compound  luxations  at  the  knee  are  treated  of  in  §  65. 

Compound  luxations  at  the  elbow  are  treated  of  in  §  dij. 


ARGUMENT.  557 

Compound  luxations  of  the  bones  of  the  fingers  are  accu- 
rately treated  of  in  §  67. 

Resection  of  the  bones  of  a  joint  in  compound  luxations  is 
the  subject  treated  of  in  §  68. 

The  subject  of  gangrene  supervening  in  cases  of  fracture 
and  other  severe  accidents  is  treated  of  in  §  69. 

Reduction  of  dislocations  at  the  hip-joint  is  minutely  described 
in  §§  70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75,  7Q,  77,  78. 

In  §  79  are  given  some  general  observations  on  the  articu- 
lations and  their  dislocations. 

Simple  dislocations  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers  are  treated  of 
in  §  80. 

Some  general  rules  for  the  management  of  luxations  are 
given  in  §  81 ;  after  which  our  author  proceeds  to  the  consi- 
deration of  luxations  at  the  knee,  in  §  82. 

Luxations  at  the  ankle-joint  are  briefly  described  in  §  83. 

Luxations  of  the  bones  of  the  foot  are  noticed  in  a  succinct 
style  in  §  84. 

Luxations,  as  it  would  appear,  of  the  tarsal  bones  are  ob- 
scurely noticed  in  §  85. 

Displacement  of  the  os  calcis,  followed  by  gangrene,  with 
the  treatment  of  the  same  when  connected  with  other  causes, 
is  given  in  §  86. 

The  work  concludes  with  a  paragraph  on  the  treatment  of 
dislocations  at  the  ankle-joint,  §  87. 

From  this  statement  of  its  contents  it  will  be  readily  seen 
that  this  work,  like  the  preceding  one,  treats  both  of  luxations 
and  fractures;  but  with  this  difference,  that  as  fractures  con- 
stitute the  groundwork  of  the  other,  so  luxations  form  the 
principal  subject  of  this  treatise,  the  matter  relating  to  frac- 
tures being  introduced  most  probably  for  the  sake  of  diagnosis. 
Altogether,  there  is  not  in  all  antiquity  a  medical  treatise  which 
contains  more  interesting  materials  than  the  present  one,  or 
that  deserves  to  be  more  carefully  studied. 

Several  sections  of  the  work  are  perfect  masterpieces,  such, 
for  example,  as  the  parts  which  relate  to  dislocations  at  tlie 
shoulder  and  the  hip-joint,  and  more  especially  the  latter,  in 
Avliich,  as  it  appears  to  me,  he  has  given  a  fuller  and  more 
complete  history  of  everything  relating  to  the  subject  than  is  to 
be  found  in  any  single  work,  even  at  the  present  day.    Thus,  not 


558  ARTICULATIONS. 

only  does  lie  describe  the  four  ordinary  forms  of  dislocation 
now  recognised,  namely,  dislocation  upwards,  downwards,  for- 
wards, and  backwards,  but  lie  gives  what  is  omitted  by  all  our 
modern  authorities,  a  very  minute  description  of  the  appear- 
ances which  the  limb  presents  when  the  luxated  bone  has  been 
left  unreduced.  And,  moreover,  he  describes  congenital  lux- 
ations and  luxations  from  disease.  Now,  I  repeat,  no  sj^stc- 
matic  writer  on  surgery  has  given  so  comprehensive  a  view  of 
the  subject  of  dislocations  in  all  its  liearings  as  what  is  here 
given  by  Hippocrates.  The  reader,  however,  Avill  find  it  very 
interesting  to  compare  the  excellent  account  of  this  sid)ject 
given  in  the  recent  publication  of  Chelius,  illustrated  by  the 
valuable  notes  of  Mr.  South.  Among  the  older  of  our  modern 
authorities  on  surgery.  Pare  is  the  one  who  approaches  the 
nearest  to  Hippocrates  in  the  fuluess  with  which  he  treats  of 
luxations  at  the  hip-joint,  but  even  he  is  much  less  complete 
in  regard  to  congenital  dislocations,  and  those  connected  with 
disease.^  On  one  statistical  point  alone  do  modern  authorities 
controvert  his  opinion,  and  even  in  this  case  Hippocrates  has 
a  high  modern  authority  on  his  side — I  mean  tlie  comparative 
frequency  of  the  different  forms  of  dislocation  ;  he,  and  all  the 
ancient  authorities  after  him,  having  stated  that  dislocation  in- 
wards is  the  most  frequent,  Avhereas  Sir  A-stley  Cooper  and  all 
our  late  authorities  hold  that  dislocation  upwards  is  the  most 
frequent.  It  is  deserving  of  remark,  however,  that  if  Cooper 
be  against  Hippocrates,  Pare  is  upon  his  side,  and  I  need 
scarcely  remark  that  he  is  not  one  who  bows  servilely  to  ancient 
authority,  but  was  an  original  observer,  and  thought  for  him- 
self; and,  moreover,  his  experience  was  on  a  very  large  scale. 

'  Chelius  ranks  Pare,  along  with  Hippocrates  and  Aviccnna,  among  the  authorities 
on  congenital  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint ;  but  if  Pare  really  treats  of  congenital 
dislocations,  it  is  not  in  the  place  where  luxations  in  general  are  treated  of.  Although 
somewhat  out  of  place,  I  may  here  be  excused  in  saying  a  few  words  on  the  nature  of 
congenital  dislocations.  Some  of  our  modern  authorities  look  upon  them  as  being 
connected  with  arrested  development  of  the  hones,  but  I  must  say  that,  judging  of 
them  from  what  I  know  of  congenital  club-foot,  I  am  rather  inclined  to  consider 
them  as  being  originally  produced  by  retraction  of  the  muscles.  This  is  the  theory  of 
Gucrin  (Gazette  Medicale,  1841),  and  it  appears  to  me  most  probable.  I  should  state, 
however,  that,  although  I  have  seen  cases  of  congenital  impediment  at  the  hip-joint 
at  a  very  early  age,  I  never  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  their  nature  by  actual 
dissection. 


ARGUMENT.  559 

On  another  point  connected  with  tliis  class  of  accidents^  it  is 
M  orthy  of  remark,  that  it  was  only  the  other  day  that  an  eminent 
anatomist  in  London  decided  that  Hippocrates  was  right,  and 
that  all  our  modern  authorities  were  wrong ;  I  mean  wath  respect 
to  the  situation  of  the  head  of  the  femur  in  the  fourth  form  of 
dislocation.  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  INIr.  Liston,  Sir  Charles  Bel], 
Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  and,  in  a  word,  all  our  best  authorities  of 
late  years,  maintained  that  the  head  of  the  bone  in  this  form  is 
lodged  in  the  ischiatic  notch ;  but  ]\Ir.  Kichard  Quain  has 
lately  determined,  by  actual  dissection,  that  the  bone  is  lodged 
where  it  is  described  to  be  by  Hippocrates,  namely,  behind  the 
acetabulum  in  the  nates. — See  the  note  on  Articulations,  §  57. 

The  methods  of  reduction,  too,  which  our  author  describes, 
are  all  based  on  the  most  correct  principles,  and  some  of  them 
might,  perhaps,  be  held  preferable  to  those  now  in  use.  He 
docs  not  appear,  indeed,  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  use 
of  pulleys  in  the  treatment  of  this  accident,  but  the  axles  Avhicli 
he  describes  as  beiug  attached  to  the  bench  which  bears  his 
name  (Scamnum  Hippocratis)  must  have  been  quite  capable 
of  exercising  a  degree  of  force  fully  adequate  to  effect  the  de- 
sired purpose.^  The  method,  too,  according  to  wdiicli  the 
patient  was  placed  astride  upon  a  cross-beam,  and  with  a  weight 
attached  to  the  injured  limlj,  Avould  seem  to  be  one  admirably 
adapted  to  wear  out  the  strength  of  the  contracted  muscles, 
and  in  this  way  facilitate  the  adjustment  of  the  bone. 

But  in  all  the  works  on  ancient  surgery,  I  verily  believe  there 
is  not  a  more  wonderful  chapter  than  the  one  which  relates  to 
Club-foot,  §  63.  In  it  he  has  not  only  stated  correctly  the  true 
nature  of  this  malformation,  but  he  has  also  given  very  sensible 
directions  for  rectifying  the  deformity  in  early  life.  Now  it 
appears  to  me  a  lamentable  reflection,  as  proving  that  valuable 
knowledge  after  being  discovered  may  be  lost  again  to  the 
world  for  many  ages,  that  not  only  did  subsequent  authorities, 
down  to  a  very  recent  period,  not  add  any  thing  to  the  stock 
of  valuable  information  which  he  had  given  on  the  sul)ject,  but 
the  important  knowledge  which  he  had  revealed  to   the  pro- 

'  The  reader  will  see  the  machine  and  the  process  of  reduction  figured  in  tlie 
Armamentarium  Chirurgicum  of  Scultet,  Tah.  xxv ;  in  the  edition  of  Galen's  Works 
by  the  Juntas;  and  in  Littrc's  edition  of  Hippocrates  I  have  given  the  last  two; 
and  the  first  is  scarcely  at  all  ditferent  from  the  second. 


560  ^  ARTICULATIONS. 

fession  came  to  be  disregarded  and  lost  sight  of,  so  that,  luitil 
Avithin  these  last  few  years,  talipes  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
"  opprobria  medicine."  I  cannot  omit  this  opportunity  of 
mentioning,  however,  that  some  centuries  ago  certain  indivi- 
duals would  appear  to  have  practised  successfully  the  treatment 
of  club-foot  on  the  principles  laid  down  by  Hippocrates.  To 
give  an  instance  in  point,  Arcreus,  who,  in  his  work  '  De 
Curandis  Vulneribus,'  (Amstel.  1G58,)  has  given  a  chapter  on 
the  treatment  of  club-foot,  not  only  describes  the  process  cor- 
rectly, but  actually  gives  the  form  of  two  mechanical  con- 
trivances for  reducing  the  derangement  of  the  foot,  and  keeping- 
it  in  situ.  The  former  of  these  contrivances  is  evidently  the 
original  of  Scarpa's  apparatus,  now  very  generally  used  in  the 
adjustment  of  club-foot ;  and  the  other  is  as  evidently  the  very 
same  as  the  boot  delineated  in  Syme's  '  System  of  Surgery,' 
and  which  I  myself  have  often  used  in  the  treatment  of  club- 
foot. As  a  matter  of  curiosity,  I  shall  give  drawings  of  them. 
That  the  author  (I  mean  Arcccus)  was  veiy  successful  in  the 
treatment  of  congenital  club-foot  appears  obvious,  from  the 
terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  results  of  his  experience  in 
this  way :  '^  Stepc  accidit,  ut  infans  nascatur  aut  altero  aut 
utroque  pede  distorto,  aut  incurvo,  aut  repando,  ita  ut  aegre 
admodvun  possit  incedere.  Ea  de  causa  hoc  loco  voiui  methodum 
tradeve,  qua  pJurimos  vaJde  claudos  Uberavi,  infer  quos  unas 
curatu  difficiHiinus,"  &c.  The  whole  process  of  cure  is  most 
circumstantiallv  described,  and  the  author  concludes  with  the 
very  proper  advice,  that  the  patient  should  Ijc  made  to  wear 
the  boot  for  six  months  after  the  parts  have  been  restored. 
All  this  shows,  that  although  our  author's  excellent  instructions 
for  the  management  of  this  deformity  were  long  lost  to  the 
profession  at  large,  there  Avere  not  wanting  individuals  who 
knew  how  to  appreciate  their  value. 

With  regard  to  the  description  of  the  mode  of  bandaging  a 
distorted  limb  in  club-foot,  as  given  by  our  author,  I  have  little 
to  add  to  what  is  stated  in  my  annotations  on  the  passage. 
Though  there  be  certain  obscurities  in  some  of  the  expressions 
which  occur  in  it,  its  general  meaning  is  sufficiently  obvious ; 
and  I  can  attest  from  ample  experience  recently  acquired  in  the 
treatment  of  this  surgical  case,  that  the  rules  of  treatment  here 
laid  down  by  our  author  are  very  judicious,   and  I  have  no 


ARGUMENT.  561 

doubt  would  be  found  amply  sufficient  for  restoring  a  recent 
case  of  talipes.  The  reader  will  remark,  that  our  author  con- 
cludes his  account  of  club-foot  with  the  declaration,  that  treated 
in  this  way  it  may  be  cured  sooner  than  one  would  have  thought, 
"  without  burning  or  cutting,  or  any  other  complicated  method.'"' 
And  liere  I  cannot  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  quoting  the  very 
candid  reflections  which  Dr.  Little,  in  his  work  'On  Club-foot' 
makes  on  the  account  of  talipes  given  by  Hippocrates.  He 
says,  '^  Hippocrates  describes  the  bandages  to  which  he  resorted 
for  the  cure  of  varus,  and  his  success  may  be  estimated  from 
the  encomiums  he  bestows  on  them, — '  citius  enira  taHa  medi- 
cine obtemperant,  quam  quis  putarit.'  The  candour  displayed 
throughout  the  writings  of  the  Father  of  INIedicine  leaves  little 
doubt  that  he  has  not  exaggerated  the  success  which  he  expe- 
rienced ;  and  we  may  conclude  that,  by  commencing  the  treat- 
ment at  the  earliest  period  of  life,  aided  by  his  unremitting- 
perseverance,  many  of  these  distortions  were  remedied.  An 
observation,  which  would  have  passed  unheeded  prior  to  the 
introduction  of  the  division  of  the  tcndo  Achillis,  follows  the 
last  quotation:  'atquehfec  quidem  est  curatio,  et  neque  sectione, 
neque  ustione,  neque  alia  varietate  quicquam  opus  habet/ — 
of  the  import  of  which,  doubts  may  now  be  entertained. 
Whether  Hippocrates,  or  any  of  his  contemporaries,  had  disco- 
vered the  means  of  curing  this  distortion  by  section  of  tendons, 
but  preferring  the  application  of  bandages,  nevertheless  rejected 
it,  or  whether  he  employed  this  observation  with  a  different 
meaning,  cannot  at  the  present  day  be  decided.  It  is  possible 
that  Hippocrates,  being  accustomed  to  cure  external  disorders 
bv  the  knife  or  eauterv,  mav  have  adduced  his  treatment  of  this 
disease  as  an  exception  to  the  more  severe  methods  so  fre- 
quently resorted  to  in  other  affections  ;  whilst  it  would  not  be 
surprising  if,  by  his  great  ingenuity  and  skill,  he  had  detected 
the  possibility  of  removing  the  obstacles  to  a  cure  by  a  division 
of  the  tendons.  He  may  have  apprehended  suppurations  and 
other  unfavorable  symptoms  from  the  section  of  so  important 
a  tendon  as  that  of  Achilles ;  or,  having  been  unsuccessful  in  his 
first  attempts,  he  maj^  have  been  deterred  from  a  repetition.'' 
(Introduction,  p.  48.) 

The  description  which  our  author  gives  of  luxations  at  the 
wrist,  Articulations  §§  26,  27,  28,  and  Mocldicus  §§  16, 17,  18,  is 

36 


562  ARTICULATIONS. 

attended  with  peculiar  difficulties,  and  hence  it  has  given  rise 
to  a  good  deal  of  confusion  and  misapprehension  from  the  time 
of  Pare^  down  to  Malgaigne  and  Littre.  His  usage  of  the  terms 
''inwards"  arid  "outwards"  is  somewhat  vague;  but  it  appears 
to  me  that  we  need  have  little  hesitation  in  deciding  them  to 
apply  to  the  modern  acceptation  of  "  forwards"  and  "back- 
wards." But  the  great  puzzle  is,  does  he  mean  that  the  bones 
of  the  carpus  are  displaced  from  those  of  the  fore-arm  ?  or  does 
he  recognise  the  carpus  as  the  fixed  point  ?  His  language  would 
certainly  apply  most  naturally  to  the  interpretation  that  the 
bones  of  the  hand  were  the  parts  which  he  understood  to  be 
displaced  ;  but  yet  M.  Malgaigne  holds,  that  our  author  under- 
stood the  bones  of  the  fore- arm  to  be  the  moveable  part.  We 
shall  examine  the  question  somewhat  more  narrowly.  One  of  the 
best  of  our  recent  authorities  on  dislocations  lays  it  down  as  a 
rule,  that  in  dislocation  of  the  carpus  backwards  there  is  perma- 
nent j^ea^io^i  of  the  hand,  and  in  Ax^locniion  forivards,  that  there 
is  permanent  extensio7i.  (See  Mr.  B.  Cooper's  Lectures,  Med. 
Gaz.  10G5.)  Now,  according  to  Hippocrates,  in  luxation 
imvards  (meaning,  as  stated  ahoxe,  fonvards) ,  the  patient  cannot 
betid  his  fingers  (this,  then,  agrees  with  the  character  of  dislo- 
cation of  the  carpus /bn^«rf/6"),  and  in  luxation  outwai'ds  (mean- 
ing, in  modern  language,  backwards),  that  he  cannot  extend 
them  ;  this  case,  then,  would  seem  to  agree  with  the  characters 
of  dislocation  backwards,  agreeably  to  modern  views.  All  this 
would  lead  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  Hippocrates  agreed  with 
our  recent  authorities  in  regarding  the  bones  of  the  hand  as  the 
part  which  is  displaced.  IMoreover,  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
Celsus,  who,  it  is  probable,  translated  the  words  of  Hippocrates, 
in  any  other  sense  :  he  says,  "Manus  quoque  in  omncs  quatuor 
partes  prolabitur.  Si  in  posteriorem  partem  excidit,  porrigi 
digiti  non  possunt"  (Mr.  B.  Cooper's  description  of  dislocation  of 
the  carpus  backwards  is,  "permanent  jlcxion  of  the  hand") — 
"si  in  priorem  non  inclinatur"  (Mr.  Cooper's  description  of  dislo- 
cation forwards  is,  "it  is  characterised  by  permanent  extension  of 
the  hand")  viii.  1 7.     Still,  however,  I  believe,  that  not  only  is  the 

'  Tlie  disagieeiiieiit  between  Pare  and  the  ancient  aulhorities  (esjiccially  Hippo- 
crates and  Galen)  in  the  use  of  the  terms  which  he  applies  to  the  ])arts  in  describing 
dislocations  at  the  wrist,  is  adverted  to  in  the  marginal  notes  to  all  the  old  editions. 
See  Book  XV. 


ARGUMENT.  oG3 

literature  of  this  subject  perplexed  by  an  ill-detiued  nomencla- 
ture, but  tliat  tlie  nature  of  the  accidents  which  befall  the  bones 
of  the  wrist  is  far  from  being  satisfactorily  determined  even  at 
the  present  day.  For  my  own  part,  after  full  thirty  years' 
experience  in  treating  these  and  other  surgical  cases,  I  must  say 
that  I  never  saw  a  distinct  and  decided  case  of  dislocation  at 
the  wrist,  and  that  I  incline  with  Baron  Dupnytren'  and  Pro- 
fessor Sjaiie  in  regarding  most  of  the  accidents  which  have  been 
set  down  for  luxations  as  having  been  in  reality  fractures  of  the 
bones  of  the  fore-arm  in  the  vicinity  of  the  joint.  And  in  con- 
clusion, I  beg  leave  to  state  it  as  my  decided  opinion,  that  with 
regard  to  the  accidents  which  befall  the  elbow,  the  wrist,  and 
the  ankle-joints,  much  misapprehension  still  prevails.  While  a 
certain  creed  is  established  on  any  given  professional  subject, 
most  people  are  disposed  to  see  the  phenomena  connected  with 
it  as  they  fancy  that  they  should  see  them,  and  independent 
thought  and  original  observation  are  talents  rarely  vouchsafed 
to  any  one.  Professional  men  of  late  have  been  impressed  with 
the  idea,  that  by  entirely  renouncing  the  authority  of  the  an- 
cients, they  show  themselves  to  be  original  observers ;  but  such 
persons  are  more  the  slaves  of  established  modes  of  thought  and 
conventional  opinions,  than  if  they  were  familiarly  acquainted 
with  all  the  authorities  in  medicine  from  the  earliest  time  down 
to  the  present  day  ;  for  it  is  only  when  possessed  of  this  know- 
ledge, that  a  man  of  a  well-constituted  mind  feels  that  he  is 
fully  warranted  to  exercise  an  independent  judgment  of  his  own. 
In  literature,  as  in  warfare,  it  is  knowledge  which  confers  true 
self-reliance. 

A  very  interesting  subject  handled  by  our  author  in  this  work 
is  the  treatment  of  compound  luxations.  One  can  readily  per- 
ceive, that  he  had  correctly  estimated  the  dangers  of  this  very 
grave  class  of  accidents  ;  and  accordingly,  in  one  place,  he  makes 
it  a  consideration,  whether  or  not  the  surgeon  should  incur  the 

'  See  the  Syd.  Soc.  edition  of  his  works.  I  perceive,  from  the  note  given  on 
Chelius's  chapter  "  On  Dislocations  at  the  Wrist,"  that  tlie  opinions  of  Dupuytren 
have  been  controveiied  by  Voillemier,  who  thinks  he  has  shown  the  existence  of 
such  dislocations  by  the  most  careful  examination  of  a  complete  displacement  of  the 
wrist  backwards,  and  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  forwards.  Now  I  do  not  pre- 
tend to  deny  the  actual  possibility  of  such  an  occurrence ;  but  I  must  say  that  my 
own  experience  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that  a  case  of  dislocation  without  fracture 
must  be  extremely  rare  indeed.  • 


504  ARTICULATIONS. 

responsibility  of  undertaking  the  charge  of  them.    As  a  general 
rule,  lie  forhids  reduction,  unless  in  the  case  of  the  smaller 
joints,  such  as  those  of  the  hands  and  feet.      Now  it  is  curious 
to  remark,  that  in  the  time  of  Celsus  and  Galen,  this  rule  of 
practice  was  still  adhered  to,  hut  Paulus  ^Egineta  ventures  for 
once  to  rehel  against  the  authority  of  the  Coan  sage.      In  the 
section    "  On  dislocations  with   a   wound,"   he  says,    "Where- 
fore Hippocrates,  by  all  means,  forbids  us  to  apply  reduction 
and  strong  bandaging  to  them,  and  directs  us  to  use  only  anti- 
inflammatory and  soothing  applications   to   them  at   the  com- 
mencement ;  for  that,  by  this  treatment,  life  may  be  sometimes 
preserved.      But  what  lie  recommends  for  the  fingers  alone,  we 
would  attempt  to  do  for  all  the  other  joints  :  at  first,  and  while 
the  part  remains  free  from  inflammation,  we  would  reduce  the 
dislocated  joint  by  moderate  extension ;  and,  if  we  succeed  in 
our  object,  we  may  persist  in  using  the  anti-inflammatory  treat- 
ment only."    (vi.  121.)      All  the  Arabian  authorities  follow  the 
rule  of  practice  here  laid  down  by  Paulus  iEgineta.    See  the  Com- 
mentary, 1.  c.  Syd.  Soc.  cd.     I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  this 
mode  of  treatment  is  that  now  followed  by  the  profession.      It 
will  further  be  remarked,   that   at  §  68,   our  author  treats  of 
resection  of  the  bones  in  compound  luxation  of  the  bones  of  the 
hands,   feet,   ankle,  and  Avrist ;    and  that,  upon  the  whole,  he 
approves  of  the  practice.    In  the  annotations  on  that  section,  I 
have  briefly  adverted  to  modern  experience  in  the  application  of 
this  method  of  treatment;  and  in  this  place  I  shall  merely  add 
the  rule  of  practice  as  laid  down  by  Chelius,  which  the  reader 
Avill  find  it  interesting  to  remark,   is  very  little  different  from 
that  recommended  by  Hippocrates,  except  that  Chelius,  in  all 
cases,  approves  of  attempts  at  reduction  :  "  If  the  reduction  of 
the  head  of  the  bone,  protruded  through  the  soft  parts,  be  in  no 
way  possible,   even  after  proper  enlargement  of  the  wound  in 
the  skin,  nothing  remains  but  to  saw  oft'  the  protruding  bone, 
by  which  the  stretching  and  tearing  of  the  muscles  are  relieved, 
and  the  joint   can  be   brought  to  its   natural   position  ;   after 
which  the  symptoms,  in  general,  soon  and  considerably  diminish. 
When  the  reductionof  a  bone  protruding  through  the  soft  parts  is 
not  immediately  possible,  it  is  still  less  so  when  the  inflammation 
runs  into  suppuration ;  the  symptoms  continue  increasing,  and 
amputation  may  be  rendered   necessary  by   gangrene,  and   by 


ARGUMENT.  505 

progressive  destruction^  if  the  head  of  the  bone  have  not  liecn 
removed  at  the  proper  time."  (Vol.  i^  p.  769,  Engl,  edition.) 

In  the  brief  annotations  which  1  have  given  on  the  first 
paragraph,  I  have  bronght  forward  certain  passages  in  this  and 
the  otlier  works  of  our  author,  which  seem  to  prove  beyond  all 
doubt,  that  he  must  have  had  more  or  less  acquaintance  with 
Human  Anatomy  from  actual  dissection.  On  this  point  I  have 
long  been  confident,  and  the  more  1  become  familiar  with  his 
admired  works,  the  stronger  my  impression  is  that  his  anatomical 
knowledge  must  have  been  far  from  contemptible ;  in  fact,  I  do 
not  at  present  recollect  a  single  instance  of  mistake  committed 
by  him  in  any  of  his  anatomical  descriptions,  if  we  except  that 
with  regard  to  the  sutures  of  the  head,  and  even  in  tliat  case 
I  have  endeavoiu'cd  to  show  that  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
is  very  equivocal.  His  descriptions  of  the  vertebra?,  with  all 
their  processes  and  ligaments,  and  his  general  characters  of 
the  internal  viscera_,  would  not  have  been  so  free  from  error 
as  they  are,  if  his  knowledge  had  been  all  derived  from  the  dis- 
section of  the  inferior  animals.  Indeed,  I  am  of  opinion  that 
Hippocrates  and  the  other  medical  authorities  of  antiquity  had 
practised  inspectlones  cadaveriim  more  frequently  than  they 
durst  publicly  acknowledge,  for  fear  of  sufiering  from  popular 
prejudice  ;  but  even  that  would  appear  to  have  been  overrated, 
for,  as  it  is  proved  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt,  that  the 
human  body  was  openly  dissected  in  the  anatomical  schools  of 
Alexandiia,  considerably  less  than  100  years  after  the  death 
of  Hippocrates,!  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  practice  had  pre- 
vailed before  that  time,  although  to  an  inferior  extent.  Such 
a  taste  was  not  likely  to  have  sprung  up  all  at  once  under  the 
Ptolemies.  Indeed,  that  Aristotle,  who  was  almost  contempo- 
rary with  Hippocrates,  and  who  "v^  as  dead  before  the  distin- 
guished Alexandrian  period,  had  seen  the  human  body  dissected, 
will  not  be  questioned  by  any  one  Avho  has  read  his  admirable 
works  '  On  the  Parts  of  Animals,'  and  '  The  History  of 
Animals.'  See,  in  particular,  the  last  chapter  of  the  First 
Book  of  the  latter  work  ;  also,  ibid,  i,  11;  ii,  5  ;  de  Respiratione, 
15  ;  de  Partibus  Animalium,  iii,  4.  In  fact,  he  does  not  hesi- 
tate to  declare,  that  certain  things  must  be  learned  from  dis- 
section.  (II.  A.  i,  11,  and  vi,  10.) 

'  Sec  the  aulhoritics  quoted  iu  Marx's  Life  of  Ilerophilus. 


:i66  ARTICULATIONS. 

In  addition  to  the  observations  on  tliis  interesting  subject, 
which  will  be  found  at  the  place  above  indicated,  I  now  beg 
leave  to  quote  from  M.  Littre's  notes  on  §  37  of  the  work 
'  On  Fractures/  the  very  ingenious  remarks  of  M.  Beclard  on 
the  description  of  the  parts  connected  Avith  the  elboAV -joint,  both 
because  they  appear  to  me  very  interesting,  as  illustrating  the 
meaning  of  our  author,  and  further  as  proving  irrefragably,  that 
Hippocrates  must  have  had  considerable  acquaintance  with 
human  anatomy. 

"  Le  passage  d'llippocrate  est  tres  bref,  et  a  cause  de  cela 
il  pent  paraitre  obscur  h  ceux  qui  n'auraient  pas  presente  a 
I'esprit  la  disposition  anatomique.  La  description  suivante  de 
Farticulation  du  coude,  donnee  par  Beclard,  servira  de  com- 
plement, et  montrera  que  la  phrase  d'llippocrate  suppose  une 
conuaissance  tres  precise  de  la  disposition  de  cette  articulation: 
'  L'articulation  du  coude  est  maintenue  par  quatre  ligaments, 
un  anterieur,  un  posterieur,  un  externe,  et  un  interne.  Les 
ligaments,  quoique  tres  distincts  par  leur  disposition  les  uns  des 
autres,  se  confondent  par  Icurs  bords  voisins,  de  maniere  a 
entourer  ^articulation  circulairement.  L'anterieur  et  le  pos- 
terieur sent  membrancux  et  minces,  surtou.t  le  second ;  les 
lateraux  sont  beaiicoup  plus  forts.  Le  ligament  anterieur 
s'attache,  en  haut,  au-dessus  des  enfoncements  qui  surmontent 
la  petite  tete  et  la  poulie,  et  au  devant  des  tuberosites  de 
rhumerus ;  en  has,  a  I'apophyse  coronoide  du  cu])itus  et  au 
ligament  annulaire  du  radius ;  ses  fibres  laterales  sont  obliques, 
les  moyennes  verticales  et  scparees  en  haut,  par  des  intervalles 
celluleux  qui  les  rendent  tres  apparentes.  Le  ligament  pos- 
teiieur  fixe,  en  haut,  au  bord  de  la  cavite  oleci^rmienne  de 
rhumerus  et  a  la  partie  superieure  des  tuberosites  s^ittache,  en 
has,  au  sommet  et  au  bord  externe  de  Tolecraue ;  ses  fibres 
forment  deux  bandes  obliques  qui  se  confondent  et  se  croisent 
en  partie  en  descendcint  Tune  vers  Tautre.  Le  ligament  externe 
est  attache,  par  son  extremite  superieure,  au  bas  de  la  tuberosite 
externe  de  I'humerus  ;  ses  fibres  descendent  de  la  en  divergeant: 
les  moyennes  et  les  anterieures  s'unissent  au  ligament  annulaire 
du  radius  taudis  que  les  posterieures  passent  sur  ce  ligament,  et 
parvieuneut  au  cote  externe  du  cubitus,  oii  elles  se  fixent :  ces 
dernieres  sont  coufoudues  par  en  haut  avec  le  ligament  poste- 
rieur.     Le  ligament  interne  est  plus  large  que  le  precedent. 


ARGUMENT.  567 

auquel  il  ressemble  d'ailleurs  asscz  bicn  ;  il  natt  de  la  tnl)erosite 
iutenie,  dont  il  cmbrassc  toutc  la  partie  infericurc,  ct  sc  tcrmine, 
d^me  part,  au  cote  intcrue  de  rapophysc  coronoide  du  cubitus, 
de  Tautre,  au  bord  interne  de  rolecrfme,  en  sorte  que  les  filjres 
forment  deux  faisceaux  distincts  par  leur  situation  ct  Icur 
direction.'  On  voit  qu'en  effet  la  plus  grande  partie  des  fi1)res 
ligaraenteuses  s'attache  au  cubitus.  La  counaissance  d^ni 
detail  aussi  precis  dans  les  rapports  qu'ont  les  ligaments  avec 
Ics  OS  do  I'avant  bras  ne  pent  pas  avoir  ete,  chez  llippocrate,  Ic 
resultat  de  Tanatomie  des  animaux.  On  est  en  droit  de  la  citer 
comme  une  jiresomption  qui,  joint e  a  phisieurs  autres,  porte  a 
croire  que  les  Hippocratiques  ont  disseque  des  coiys  humains.'^" 
I  shall  only  add  further  in  conclusion,  that  RufFus  Ephesius 
and  Galen,  whose  works  that  are  still  extant  bear  undoubted 
marks  of  their  having  possessed  a  very  considerable  acquaintance 
with  hiunan  anatomy,  uniformly  refer  to  Hippocrates  Avith  great 
deference  as  one  of  the  best  of  the  ancient  authorities  on  this 
subject.  See  Ruffus  Ephesius  (de  Part.  Hom.,  pluries),  and 
Galen  (de  Dissect.  Yulv?e,  9). 

'  Dictionnaire  de  Medecine,  2^  edit,,  torn,  ix,  p.  207  ;  Paris,  ISS.'i. 
•^  Voyez  torn,  i,  p.  23G. 


568 


ON  THE  ARTICULATIONS. 

1.  I  am  acquainted  with  one  form  in  wliicli  the  shonlder- 
joiut  is  dislocated,  namely,  that  into  the  armpit ;  I  have  never 
seen  it  take  place  upwards  nor  outwards ;  and  yet  I  do  not 
positiAcly  affirm  whether  it  might  be  dislocated  in  these  directions 
or  not,  although  I  have  something  which  1  might  say  on  this 
subject.  But  neither  have  I  ever  seen  what  I  considered  to  be 
a  dislocation  forwards.^  Physicians,  indeed,  fancy  that  dislo- 
cation is  very  apt  to  occur  forwards,  and  they  are  more  particu- 
larly deceived  in  those  persons  who  have  the  fleshy  parts  about 
the  joint  and  arm  much  emaciated  ;  for,  in  all  such  cases,  the 
head  of  the  arm  appears  to  protrude  forwards.  And  I  in  one 
case  of  this  kind  having  said  that  there  was  no  dislocation, 
exposed  myself  to  censure  from  certain  physicians  and  common 
people  on  that  account,  for  they  fancied  that  I  alone  was  igno- 
rant of  what  everybody  else  was  acquainted  with,  and  I  could  not 
convince  them  but  with  difficulty,  that  the  matter  was  so.  But 
if  one  will  strip  the  point  of  the  shoulder  of  the  fleshy  parts, 
and  where  the  muscle  {deltoid  ?)  extends,  and  also  lay  bare  the 

'  Our  author,  it  will  be  remarked,  states  modestly  the  results  of  his  own  experi- 
ence regarding  the  modes  of  dislocation  at  the  shoulder ;  he  had  never  seen  any 
other  dislocation  than  that  downwards,  hut  he  does  not  positively  say  that  dislo- 
cations upwards,  forwards,  and  outwards  may  not  occur,  although  he  had  never  met 
with  them.  May  I  he  allowed  to  remark,  that  thirty  years'  practice  of  the  art  of 
surgery  in  my  locality  has  brought  me  to  the  same  conclusions  as  Hippocrates ;  I 
have  seen  many,  veiy  many  dislocations  downwards,  but  I  never  saw  what  could, 
strictly  speaking,  be  called  a  dislocation  either  forwards  or  backwards.  I  suppose, 
however,  there  can  be  no  reason  to  question  the  occurrence  of  such  displacements, 
after  the  statements  of  Galen  and  so  many  other  surgical  authorities,  both  ancient 
and  modern.  Galen  relates  that  in  the  course  of  his  life  he  had  met  with  live 
instances  of  the  two  uncommon  forms  of  dislocation,  and  accounts  for  the  different 
results  of  his  experience  and  that  of  Hippocrates  from  having  exercised  his  pro- 
fession in  a  populous  city  like  Rome,  which  Polemo  the  Rhetorician  had  pronounced 
to  be  "  the  compendium,  as  it  were,  of  the  inhabited  world,"  and  from  his  having 
been  frequently  called  in  by  his  brethren  to  see  rare  cases  in  surgery.  Most  of  the 
ancient  authorities  after  Galeu  admit  the  reahty  of  these  rarer  forms  of  luxation. 
See  Paulus  jEgineta,  B.  YI,  114.  C'elsus  describes  the  dislocation  forwards,  but 
does  not  seem  to  have  admitted  the  reality  of  dislocation  backwards,  (viii,  15.)  I 
may  mention  that,  in  the  course  of  thirty-eight  years'  practice  of  his  profession.  Sir 
Astley  Cooiter  states  that  he  had  met  with  only  two  dislocations  backwards,  but 
that  he  had  seen  several  cases  of  dislocation  forwards.     (On  Dislocations,  j).  416.) 


ARTICULATIONS.  5G9 

tendon  that  goes  from  the  armpit  and  clavicle  to  the  breast 
{pecloral  muscle  ?),  the  head  of  the  humerus  will  appear  to  pro- 
trude strongly  forwards,  although  not  dislocated,  for  the  head 
of  the  humerus  naturally  inclines  forwards,  but  the  rest  of  the 
bone  is  turned  outwards.^  The  humerus  is  connected  oliliqucly 
with  the  cavity  of  the  scapula,  when  the  arm  is  stretched  along 
the  sides ;  but  when  the  Avhole  arm  is  stretched  forwards,  then 
the  head  of  the  humerus  is  in  a  line  Avith  the  cavity  of  the 
humerus,  and  no  longer  appears  to  protrude  forwards.  And 
with  regard  to  the  variety  we  are  now  treating  of,  I  have  never 
seen  a  case  of  dislocation  forwards ;  and  yet  I  do  not  speak  de- 
cidedly respecting  it,  whether  such  a  dislocation  may  take  place 
or  not.  When,  then,  a  dislocation  into  the  armpit  takes  place, 
seeing  it  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  many  persons  know  how  to 
reduce  it,  for  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  teach  all  the  methods  by 
which  physicians  eftect  the  reductions,  and  the  best  manner  of 

'  The  language  of  our  author  in  this  place  puts  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  human 
dissection  was  practised  in  his  age.  It  maybe  interesting  to  see  Galen's  Commentary 
on  this  important  passage.  After  giving  an  accurate  description  of  the  bones  con- 
nected with  the  shoulder-joint,  he  goes  on  to  say  that  Hippocrates,  in  this  place, 
illustrates  his  views  from  anatomy,  directing  us  to  lay  the  acromion  bare  of  its  tlesh, 
that  is  to  say,  to  dissect  with  a  scalpel  down  to  the  hones  which  form  the  articulation, 
and  to  laij  bare  the  tendon  tvhich  is  situated  there,  and  to  lay  bare  the  tendon  in  the 
armpit.  He  adds,  there  are  three  muscles  situated  there :  first,  that  which  derives 
its  origin  from  the  scapula  and  clavicle,  called  the  deltoid,  the  tieshy  part  of  which 
covers  the  whole  joint,  and  the  tendon  of  which  is  inserted  down  the  arm ;  then  the 
pectoral,  inserted  near  the  situation  of  the  humeral  vein ;  and,  last,  the  biceps,  which 
arises  by  two  heads,  the  one  from  the  anchor-shaped  apophysis  of  the  scapula  (the  cora- 
coid.'),  and  the  other  from  the  high  margin  of  the  neck  of  the  scapula  (the  glenoid 
cavity  ?).  Our  author's  description  of  the  brain  in  the  treatise.  On  the  Sacred  Disease, 
is  such  as  could  not  have  been  given  by  a  person  wholly  unacquainted  with  human 
dissection.  It  is  to  this  etfect :  the  brain  in  man,  as  in  all  other  animals,  is  double,  and 
is  separated  in  the  midille  by  a  thin  membrane  (the  falx  ?). — Vol.  i,  p.  595,  ed.  Kidin. 
The  construction  of  the  human  heart  is  also  briefly  adverted  to  in  the  small  treatise, 
On  the  Heart.  Obscure  allusions  to  the  internal  structure  of  the  human  body  are  also 
to  be  met  with  in  other  of  the  Hippocratic  treatises,  such  as  De  Venis,  torn,  i,  p.  276, 
ed.  Lind. ;  de  Ossibus,  ibid.;  de  Carnibus,  tom.  i,  p.  123.  Kow,  even  if  it  were 
denied  that  these  works  are  genuine,  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  they  are  the  pro- 
ductions of  the  age  immediately  succeeding  Hippocrates,  and  preceding  the  brilliant 
epoch  of  the  famous  Alexandrian  anatomists ;  so  that  it  appears  to  me  impossible  to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  human  dissection  had  been  practised  in  the  age  of  Hip- 
pocrates;  and  if  in  his  age,  we  are  sure  it  was  not  neglected  by  him,  who  was  the 
greatest  ornament  of  the  profession  in  his  o\\n  days.  On  this  subject  sec  fiuthcr  the 
Argument. 


570  ARTICULATIONS. 

applying  them.  The  strongest  of  those  methods  shoukl  be 
used  when  the  difficulty  of  reduction  is  particularly  great.  The 
strongest  is  the  method  to  be  last  described. 

2.  Those  who  are  subject  to  frequent  dislocations  at  the 
shoulder-joint,  are  for  the  most  part  competent  to  effect  the 
reduction  themselves ;  for,  having  introduced  the  knuckles  of 
the  otlier  hand  into  the  armpit,  they  force  the  joint  upwards, 
and  bring  the  elbow  towards  the  breast.  Tlie  physician  might 
reduce  it  in  the  same  manner,  if  having  introduced  his  fingers 
into  the  armpit  on  the  inside  of  the  dislocated  joint,  he  would 
force  it  from  the  ribs,  pushing  his  own  head  against  the  acro- 
mion, in  order  to  make  counter-pressure,  and  with  his  knees 
applied  to  the  patient^s  elbow  pushing  the  arm  to  the  sides.  It 
will  be  of  advantage  if  the  operator  has  strong  hands,  or  the 
phj^sician  may  do  as  directed  with  his  head  and  hands,  while 
another  person  brings  the  elbow  towards  the  breast,  lleduction 
of  the  shoulder  may  also  be  effected  by  carrying  the  fore-arm 
backwards  to  the  spine,  and  then  with  the  one  hand  grasping 
it  at  the  elbow,  to  bend  the  arm  upwards,  and  with  the  other 
to  support  it  behind  at  the  articulation.  This  mode  of  reduction, 
aiul  the  one  formerly  described,  are  not  natural,  and  yet  by 
rotating  the  bone  of  the  joint,  they  force  it  to  return.^ 

3.  Those  who  attempt  to  perform  reduction  with  the  heel, 

'  The  methods  of  reducing  dislocations  at  the  shoulder-joint  are,  in  general,  de- 
scribed by  Hippocrates  so  clearly  and  fully,  that  no  one  who  reads  the  text  carefully  can 
have  much  difficulty  in  understanding  the  descriptions;  or  if  he  lias,  he  need  only 
refer  to  the  drawings  which  accompany  the  Latin  translation  of  Galen's  works  by 
Vidus  Vidius.  They  are  also  illustrated  by  the  very  fidl  and  sensible  Commentary  of 
Apollonius  Citiensis,  published  by  the  late  Dr.  Dietz,  Koningsburg,  1834.  I  shall 
only  make  a  few  remarks  occasionally  in  explanation  of  any  passage  which  may 
appear  somewhat  obscure,  or  in  order  to  call  attention  to  any  subject  of  peculiar 
interest.  Galen  and  Apollonius  explain  the  reason  why  our  author  calls  the  method 
described  in  this  paragraph  not  natural,  to  be,  because  the  extension  is  rotatory  and 
not  direct.  I  may  further  mention  in  this  place,  that  if  the  modern  reader  have  any 
difficulty  in  comprehending  the  application  of  the  different  modes  of  reduction  de- 
scribed by  our  author,  he  will  find  much  illustration  of  the  subject  given  by  Desault 
in  his  Surgical  Journal,  vol.  ii,  p.  134,  English  edition.  He  gives  a  very  interesting 
history  of  all  the  known  methods  of  reduction,  from  Hippocrates  down  to  his  own 
time.  The  use  of  the  pulleys,  in  this  surgical  case,  would  appear  to  be  a  modern 
invention ;  Ambrose  Pare,  according  to  Desault,  was  the  first  to  use  them.  Tlie  ap- 
plication of  them  is  certainly  distinctly  described  and  delineated  in  his  works.  Petit 
joined  the  pulley  to  the  ambe,  and  in  this  way  formed  a  very  powerful  machine  for 
reducing  dislocations. 


ARTICULATIONS.  571 

ojicrate  in  a  manner  which  is  an  approach  to  the  natural.  The 
patient  must  lie  on  the  ground  upon  liis  back,  v.liilc  the  person 
who  is  to  eflect  tlie  reduction  is  seated  on  the  ground  upon  the 
side  of  the  dislocation  ;  then  the  operator,  seizing  with  his  hand 
the  aflccted  arm,  is  to  pull  it,  while  with  his  heel  in  the  armpit 
lie  pushes  in  the  contrary  direction,  the  right  heel  being  placed 
in  the  right  armpit,  and  the  left  heel  in  the  left  armpit.  IJut 
a  round  ball  of  a  suitable  size  must  be  placed  in  the  hollow  of 
the  armpit ;  the  most  convenient  are  very  small  and  bard  balls, 
formed  from  several  pieces  of  leather  sewed  together.  For 
without  something  of  the  kind  the  heel  cannot  reach  to  the  head 
of  the  humerus,  since,  Avhen  the  arm  is  stretched,  the  armpit  be- 
comes hollow,  the  tendons  on  both  sides  of  the  armpit  making 
counter-contraction  so  as  to  oppose  the  reduction.  But  another 
person  should  be  seated  on  the  other  side  of  the  patient  to  hold 
the  sound  shoulder,  so  that  the  body  may  not  be  dragged  along 
when  the  arm  of  the  affected  side  is  pulled;  and  then,  when  the 
ball  is  placed  in  the  armpit,  a  supple  piece  of  thong  sufficiently 
broad  is  to  be  placed  round  it,  and  some  person  taking  hold  of 
its  two  ends  is  to  seat  himself  above  the  patient's  head  to  make 
counter-extension,  wdiile  at  the  same  time  he  pushes  with  his 
foot  against  the  bone  at  the  top  of  the  shoulder.  The  ball 
should  be  placed  as  much  on  the  inside  as  possible,  upon  the 
ribs,  and  not  upon  the  head  of  the  humerus.^ 

4.  There  is  another  method  of  reduction  performed  by  the 
shoulder  of  a  person  standing.  The  person  operating  in  this 
way,  who  should  be  taller  than  the  patient,  is  to  take  hold  of 
his  arm  and  place  the  sharp  point  of  his  own  shoulder  in  the 
patient's  armpit,  and  push  it  in  so  that  it  may  lodge  there,  and 
having  for  his  object  that  the  patient  may  be  suspended  at  his 
back  by  the  armpit,  he  must  raise  himself  higher  on  this  shoulder 
than  the  other;   and  he  must  bring  the  arm  of  the  suspended 

'  The  method  of  reduction  here  descrihed  is  much  commended  by  Sir  xVstley 
Cooper.  He,  however,  generally  tied  a  handkerchief  immediately  above  the  ell)ow, 
by  which  he  made  extension,  and  thereby  found  he  could  effect  his  jjurpose  with 
less  exertion  than  when  he  pulled  by  the  arm.  The  advantage  of  pulling  by  some- 
thing attached  above  the  elbow  is,  that  it  allows  the  biceps  to  be  relaxed  by  bending 
the  fore-arm  to  a  right  angle  with  the  os  humeri.  Verduc  calls  this  method  em- 
phatically "  very  good."  (A  Treatise  on  Fractures,  &c.)  Some  modern  authorities 
who  practise  this  method  still  prefer  pulling  by  the  hand. 


572  ARTICULATIONS. 

patient  as  quickly  as  possible  to  liis  own  breast.  In  this  position 
he  should  shake  the  patient  when  he  raises  him  up,  in  order  that 
the  rest  of  the  body  may  be  a  counterpoise  to  the  arm  which  is 
thus  held.  But  if  the  patient  be  very  light,  a  light  child  should 
be  suspended  behind  along  with  him.  These  methods  of 
reduction  are  all  of  easy  application  in  the  palestra,  as  they  can 
all  be  performed  without  instruments,  but  they  may  also  be  used 
elsewhere.^ 

5.  Those  who  accomplish  the  reduction  by  forcibly  bending 
it  round  a  pestle,  operate  in  a  manner  Avhich  is  nearly  natural. 
But  the  pestle  should  be  wrai)ped  in  a  soft  shawl  (for  thus  it 
will  be  less  slippery),  and  it  should  be  forced  between  the  ribs 
and  the  head  of  the  humerus.  And  if  the  pestle  be  short,  the 
patient  should  be  seated  upon  something,  so  that  his  arm  can 
with  difficulty  pass  above  the  pestle.  But  for  the  most  part  the 
pestle  should  be  longer,  so  that  the  patient  when  standing  may 
be  almost  suspended  upon  the  piece  of  wood.  And  then  the 
arm  and  fore- arm  should  be  stretched*  along  the  pestle,  whilst 
some  person  secures  the  opposite  side  of  the  body  by  throwing 
his  arms  round  the  neck,  near  the  clavicle." 

6.  But  the  method  with  a  ladder  is  another  of  the  same 
kind,  and  still  better,  since  by  it  the  body  can  be  more  safely 
counterpoised  on  this  side  ;  and  that,  while  in  the  method  with 
the  piece  of  wood  resembling  a  pestle,  there  is  danger  of  the 
body  tumbling  to  either  side.  But  some  round  thing  should 
be  tied  upon  the  step  of  the  ladder  which  may  be  fitted  to  the 
armpit,  whereby  the  head  of  the  bone  may  be  forced  into  its 
luxtural  place.^ 

'  This  metbod  is  simple,  but  cannot  have  been  very  efficacious.  It  is  not  mentioned 
ill  our  late  works  on  surgery.  It  is  described  by  Verduc,  however,  in  nearly  the  same 
terms  as  those  of  our  author,  and  therefore  I  need  not  quote  his  description  of  it. 
(A  Treatise  on  Fractures,  &c.,  p.  344.) 

-  This  metliod  consists  in  fixing  a  strong  pole,  here  called  a  pestle  {vTrepov),  in  the 
ground,  and  having  wrapped  its  upper  extremity  with  some  soft  substance,  to  apply 
it  to  the  armjiit  of  the  patient  and  pull  the  affected  arm  along  it.  It  should  be  so 
long  as  that  the  patient's  armpit  can  barely  get  into  it,  and  the  arm  is  to  be  pulled 
along  the  pole.  The  pole  or  pestle,  in  this  case,  performs  the  same  otSce  as  the  heel 
of  the  surgeon  in  the  other  case.  In  a  well-known  line  of  Ilesiod's  AVorks  and  Days, 
the  pestle  of  the  domestic  mortar  is  described  as  being  three  cidnts  in  length  (1. 421). 

^  This  is  evidently  a  very  simjjle  and  ingenious  method  of  accomplishing  the  re- 
ductiou.     Desault  thus  describes  the  methods  with  the  pestle  and  the  ladder :  "  The 


ARTICULATIONS.  573 

7.  The  following,  however,  is  the  strongest  of  all  the  methods 
of  reduction.  We  must  get  a  piece  of  wood,  five,  or  at  least 
four  inches  broad,  two  inches  in  thickness,  or  still  thinner,  and 
two  cubits  in  length,  or  a  little  less;  and  its  extremity  at  one 
end  should  be  rounded,  and  made  very  narrow  and  very  slender 
there,  and  it  should  have  a  slightly  projecting  edge  [amhc)  on 
its  round  extremity,  not  on  the  part  that  is  to  be  applied  to  the 
side,  but  to  the  head  of  the  humerus,  so  that  it  may  be  adjusted 
in  the  armpit  at  the  sides  under  the  head  of  the  humerus ;  and 
a  piece  of  soft  shawl  or  cloth  should  be  glued  to  the  end  of  the 
piece  of  wood,  so  as  to  give  the  less  pain  upon  pressure.  Then 
having  pushed  the  head  of  this  piece  of  wood  as  far  inwards  as 
possible  between  the  ribs  and  the  head  of  the  humerus,  the 
whole  arm  is  to  be  stretched  along  this  piece  of  wood,  and  is  to 
be  bound  round  at  the  arm,  the  fore-arm,  and  the  wrist,  so  that 
it  may  be  particularly  well  secured ;  but  great  pains  should  be 
taken  that  the  extremity  of  this  piece  of  wood  should  be  intro- 
duced as  far  as  possible  into  the  armpit,  and  that  it  is  carried 
past  the  head  of  the  humerus.  Then  a  cross-beam  is  to  be 
securely  fastened  Ijetw^een  two  pillars,  and  afterwards  the  arm 
with  the  piece  of  wood  attached  to  it  is  to  be  brought  over  this 
cross-beam,  so  that  the  arm  may  be  on  the  one  side  of  it  and 
the  body  on  the  other,  and  the  cross-beam  in  the  armpit ;  and 
then  the  arm  with  the  piece  of  wood  is  to  be  forced  down  on 
the  one  side  of  the  cross-beam,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  on  the 
other.  The  cross-beam  is  to  be  bound  so  high  that  the  rest  of 
the  body  may  be  raised  upon  tip-toes.  This  is  by  far  the  most 
powerful  method  of  effecting  reduction  of  the  shoulder ;  for  one 
thus  operates  with  the  lever  upon  the  most  correct  principles, 
provided  only  the  piece  of  wood  be  placed  as  much  as  possible 
within  the  •  head  of  the  humerus,  and  thus  also  the  counter- 
balancing weights  will  be  most  properly  adjusted,  and  safely 
applied  to  the  bone  of  the  arm.  Wherefore  recent  cases  in  this 
way  may  be  reduced  more  quickly  than  could  be  believed,  before 

pestle  was  nothing  else  but  the  instrument  of  that  name,  or  simply  a  stick,  one  end 
of  which  rested  on  the  ground,  or  on  a  table;  whilst  the  other,  well  guarded  witlt 
linen,  was  placed  in  the  cavity  of  the  axilla,  and  served  to  push  up  the  head  of  the 
bone ;  an  extension  was  made  on  the  arm,  while  an  assistant  kept  the  trunk  fixed, 
pushing  the  shoulder  down  at  the  same  time.  The  ladder  was  employed  on  the  same 
plan,  after  an  eminence  was  formed,  and  suttlcicutly  guarded  to  be  adapted  to  the 
cavity  of  the  axilla."  (Surgical  Joiunal,  vol.  ii,  p.  134,  English  edition.) 


574  ARTICULATIONS. 

even  extension  would  appear  to  be  applied ;  and  this  is  the  only 
mode  of  reduction  capable  of  replacing  old  dislocations,  and  this 
it  will  effect,  utdess  flesh  has  already  filled  up  the  (glenoid) 
cavity,  and  the  head  of  the  humerus  has  formed  a  socket  for 
itself  in  the  place  to  whicli  it  has  been  displaced ;  and  even  in 
such  an  old  case  of  dislocation,  it  appears  to  me  that  we  could 
effect  reduction  (for  what  object  would  a  lever  power  properly 
applied  not  move?),  but  it  would  not  remain  in  its  place^  but 
woiUd  be  again  displaced  as  formerly. ^  The  same  thing  maybe 
efiected  by  means  of  the  ladder,  by  preparing  it  in  the  same 
manner.  If  the  dislocation  be  recent,  a  large  Thessalian  chair 
may  be  sufficient  to  accomplish  this  purpose ;  the  wood,  how- 
ever, should  be  dressed  up  as  described  before ;  but  the  patient 
should  be  seated  sideways  on  the  chair,  and  then  the  arm,  with 
the  piece  of  wood  attached  to  it,  is  to  be  brought  over  the  back 
of  the  chair,  and  force  is  to  be  applied  to  the  arm,  with  the  wood 
on  the  one  side,  and  to  the  body  on  the  other  side.  The  same 
means  may  be  applied  with  a  double  door."  One  should  always 
use  what  happens  to  be  at  hand.'"' 

'  Tliis  description,  to  any  person  who  understands  the  construction  of  the  anibe, 
must  be  so  plain,  that  it  would  he  superfluous  to  attempt  any  furtlier  explanation  of  it. 
Of  late  years  the  ambe  has  fallen  completely  into  disuse,  and  none  of  the  various 
modifications  of  it  are  now  to  be  seen  but  in  the  cabinets  of  the  curious. 

^  On  the  nature  of  tl:e  double  doors  of  the  ancients,  the  curious  reader  may  find 
it  interesting  to  consult  the  annotations  of  the  editors  of  Erotian,  under  ciKXiioti;. 
See  the  edition  of  Frantzius ;  also  Galen's  Glossary. 

^  Those  methods  by  a  chair  or  a  door  are  very  simple,  and  from  a  late  trial  of  the 
former  I  can  declare  it  to  be  the  most  easy  and  effectual  plan  of  reduction  which  I 
have  ever  tried.  It  would  appear  that  this  method  of  reduction,  with  a  slight  modi- 
fication, is  still  practised  at  the  Bristol  Infirmary,  the  surgeons  of  which  declare  that 
they  have  found  it  almost  uuifoimly  successful,  as  I  can  well  beheve,  from  my  own 
experience  of  the  method  as  recommended  by  Hippocrates.  It  is  thus  described  in  a 
late  number  of  the  Provincial  .Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  July  2G,  1848  :  "  Without 
any  preliminary  treatment,  the  patient  is  seated  sideways  on  a  firm  chair,  with  his 
arm  hanging  over  the  back,  which  is  well  padded ;  one  end  of  a  double  or  reel- 
towel  is  passed  through  the  other  end,  so  as  to  form  a  noose,  whicli  is  applied  to  the 
arm  above  the  elbow.  The  loose  depending  part  of  the  towel  forms  a  stirrup,  into 
which  the  surgeon  i)laces  his  foot,  and  gradually  brings  his  whole  weight  to  bear  on 
the  towel,  as  an  extending  power.  One  or  two  assistants  are  usefid  to  press  back 
tlie  acromion,  and  keep  the  patient  firmly  in  his  seat.  The  reduction  is  effected 
almost  immediately,  and  if  due  pi'ecaution  l)e  observed  in  properly  padding  the  chair 
and  the  arm  when  the  towel  is  applied,  little  or  no  pain  is  felt,  nor  any  subsequent 
inconvenience  from  the  pressmx." 


ARTICULATIONS. 


0/0 


8.  Wherefore  it  should  be  knoAvii  that  one  constitution  diflcrs 
much  from  another  as  to  the  facility  with  which  dislocations 
in  them  may  be  reduced,  and  one  articular  cavity  difiers  much 
from  another,  the  one  being  so  constructed  that  the  bone  readily 
leaps  out  of  it,  and  another  less  so ;  but  the  greatest  difference 
regards  the  binding  together  of  the  parts  by  the  nerves  (%«- 
ments  ?)  which  are  slack  in  some  and  tight  in  others.  For  the 
Inmiidity  in  the  joints  of  men  is  connected  Avith  the  state  of 
the  hgaments,  when  they  are  slack  and  yielding  ;  for  you  may 
see  many  people  who  are  so  humid  {flabby?)  that  when  they 
choose  they  can  disarticulate  their  joints  without  pain,  and 
reduce  them  in  like  manner.  The  habit  of  the  body  also  oc- 
casions a  certain  difference,  for  in  those  Avho  are  in  a  state  of 
embonpoint  and  fleshy  the  joint  is  rarely  dislocated,  but  is 
more  difficult  to  reduce ;  but  when  they  are  more  attenuated 
and  leaner  than  usual,  then  they  are  more  subject  to  dislo- 
cations which  are  more  easily  reduced.  And  the  following 
observation  is  a  proof  that  matters  are  so;  for  in  cattle  the 
thighs  are  most  apt  to  be  dislocated  at  the  hip-joint,  when  they 
are  most  particularly  lean,  which  tliey  are  at  the  end  of  winter, 
at  which  time  then  they  are  particularly  subject  to  dislocations,^ 

•  Upon  making  inquiry,  I  find  that  it  is  still  a  popular  belief,  in  the  rural  districts 
of  Scotland,  that  cattle  are  verj-  subject  to  dislocations  at  the  hip-joint  when  first 
turned  out  to  graze  in  spring.  I  have  been  told  by  old  farmers,  who  certainly  would 
not  intentionally  have  deceived  me,  that  they  have  known  such  cases  frequently 
occur.  I  have  reason  to  think,  however,  that  what  they  took  for  dislocations  were 
most  probably  diseases  of  the  joint ;  for  an  experienced  farrier  informs  me  that  actual 
dislocation  at  the  hip-joint  is  very  rarely  met  ^vith  in  cattle.  When  cattle  are  very 
lean  and  feeble,  the  bones  at  the  hip-joint  protrude  very  much,  so  as  to  give  them 
the  appearance  of  having  slipped  out  of  the  joint.  M.  Littre's  inquiries  have  led  him 
to  nearly  the  same  conclusions ;  having  addressed  a  letter  on  the  subject  to  Dr.  Bixio, 
the  publisher  of  the  Journal  d' Agriculture  Pratique,  he  received  fi-om  him  the  fol- 
lowing answer:  "  II  arrive  souvent  que  les  auimaux  de  I'espece  bovine  sont  atteints 
d'une  claudication  des  membres  posterieurs,  qui  simule,  a  tromper  parfaitement  les 
yeux,  une  luxation  de  I'articulation  coxo-femorale.  Cette  claudication  est  due  au 
deplacement  d'un  muscle ;  on  retabUt  instantanement  la  liberte  des  mouvements  par 
la  section  de  la  branche  musculaire  deplacee.  C'est  sans  doute  cet  accident  frequent 
qu'Hippocrate  aura  observe  et  confondu  avec  la  luxation.  Je  ne  sais  rien  dans  les 
membres  anterieurs  qui  soit  semblable ;  la  luxation  de  I'articulation  scapulo-humerale 
est  tres-rare  et  n'est  simulee  par  rien.  Maintenant  la  claudication  du  membre  pos- 
terieur  est-elle  plus  piquante  chez  les  bceufs  maigres  que  chez  les  boeufs  gras  ?  Je 
ne  sais,  mais  je  suis  porte  a  le  croire ;  I'etat  de  vacuite  des  interstices  musculaires 
devant  necessairement  pcrmcttre  un  deplacement  plus  facile  de  leurs  faisceaux." 
(ffiuvr.  d'Hippocrat.,  torn,  iv,  p.  11.) 


b7&  ARTICULATIONS. 

(if  I  may  be  allowed  to  make  such  an  observation  while 
treating  of  a  medical  subject) ;  and  therefore  Homer  has  well 
remarked,  that  of  all  beasts  oxen  sufter  the  most  at  that 
season,  and  especially  those  employed  at  the  plough,  as  being 
Avorked  in  the  Avintcr  season.  In  them,  therefore,  dislocations 
happen  most  frequently,  as  being  at  that  time  most  particularly 
reduced  in  flesh.  And  other  cattle  can  crop  the  grass  when 
it  is  short,  but  the  ox  cannot  do  so  until  it  becomes  long;  for, 
in  the  others,  the  projection  of  the  lip  is  slender,  and  so  is  the 
upper  lip,  but  in  the  ox  the  projection  of  the  lip  is  thick,  and 
the  upper  jaw  is  thick  and  obtuse,  and  therefore  they  are  in- 
capable of  seizing  short  herbs.  But  the  soUdungula  as  having 
prominent  teeth  in  both  their  front  jaws,  can  crop  the  grass 
and  grasp  it  with  their  teeth  while  short,  and  delight  more  in 
short  grass  than  in  rank ;  for,  in  general,  short  grass  is  better 
and  more  substantial  than  rank,  as  having  not  yet  given  out 
its  fructification.      Wherefore  the  poet  has  the  following  line : 

"  As  when  to  horned  cattle  dear  the  vernal  season  comes,'" 

because  rank  grass  appears  to  be  most  sought  after  by  them. 
But  otherwise  in  the  ox,  this  joint  is  slacker  than  in  other 
animals,  aiul,  therefore,  this  animal  drags  his  foot  in  walking 
more  than  any  other,  and  especially  when  lank  and  old.  For 
all  these  reasons  the  ox  is  most  particularly  sul)ject  to  dislo- 
cations ;  and  I  have  made  the  more  observations  respecting 
him,  as  they  confirm  all  that  was  said  before  on  this  subject. 
With  regard,  then,  to  the  matter  on  hand,  I  say  that  dislo- 
cations occur  more  readily,  and  are  more  speedily  reduced  in 
those  who  are  lean  than  in  those  who  are  fleshy ;  and  in  those 
who  are  humid  and  lank  there  is  less  inflammation  than  in 
such  as  are  dry  and  fleshy,  and  they  are  less  compactly  knit 
hereafter,  and  there  is  more  mucosity  than  usual  in  cases  not 
attended  with  inflammation,  and  hence  the  joints  are  more 
liable  to  luxations ;  for,  in  the  main,  the  articulations  are  more 
subject  to  mucosities  in  those  who  are  lean  than  in  those  who 
are  fleshy ;  and  the  flesh  of  lean  persons  who  have  not  been 
reduced  by  a  proper  course  of  discipline   abounds  more  with 

'  It  is  certain  that  there  is  no  such  hne  in  the  works  of  Homer  as  they  have  come 
down  to  us,  and  it  is  singular  that  Galen  takes  no  notice  of  it,  so  that  it  is  impos- 
sihle  to  explain  how  our  author  came  to  use  it. 


ARTICULATIONS.  f.77 

mucosity  than  that  of  fat  persons.  But  in  those  eases  in  uliicli 
the  mucosity  is  accompanied  witli  infhimmation,  the  inilamma- 
tion  binds  {braces  ?)  the  joint,  and  hcucc  those  wlio  have  small 
collections  of  mucosities  are  not  very  subject  to  dislocations^ 
which  they  would  be  if  the  mucosity  had  not  been  accompanied 
with  more  or  less  inflammation. 

9.  In  cases  of  dislocation  those  persons  who  are  not  attacked 
with  inflammation  of  the  surrounding  parts,  can  use  the  shoulder 
immediately  without  pain,  and  do  not  think  it  necessarj^  to 
take  any  precautions  with  themselves ;  it  is  therefore  the  bu- 
siness of  the  physician  to  warn  them  beforehand  that  dislo- 
cation is  more  likelv  to  return  in  such  cases  than  when  the 
tendons  have  been  inflamed.  This  remark  applies  to  all  the 
articulations,  but  particularly  to  those  of  the  shoulder  and 
knee,  for  these  are  the  joints  most  subject  to  luxations.  But 
those  who  have  inflammation  of  the  ligaments  cannot  use  the 
shoulder,  for  the  pain  and  the  tension  induced  by  the  inflam- 
mation prevent  them.  Such  cases  are  to  be  treated  with  cerate, 
compresses,  and  plenty  of  bandages ;  but  a  ball  of  soft  clean 
wool  is  to  be  introduced  into  the  armpit,  to  fill  up  the  hollow 
of  it,  that  it  may  be  a  support  to  the  bandagiug,  and  maintain 
the  joint  in  situ.  The  arm,  in  general,  should  be  inclined 
upwards  as  much  as  possible,  for  thus  it  will  be  kept  at  the 
greatest  possible  distance  from  the  place  at  which  the  head  of 
the  humerus  escaped.  And  when  you  bandage  the  shoulder 
you  must  fasten  the  arms  to  the  sides  with  a  band,  which  is 
to  be  carried  round  the  body.  The  shoulder  should  be  rubbed 
gently  and  softly.  The  physician  ought  to  be  acquainted  with 
many  things,  and  among  others  with  friction ;  for  from  the 
same  name  the  same  results  are  not  always  obtained ;  for 
friction  could  brace  a  joint  when  unseasonably  relaxed,  and 
relax  it  Avhen  unseasonably  hard  ;  but  we  will  define  what  we 
know  respecting  fnction  in  another  place.  The  shoulder,  then, 
in  such  a  state,  shoidd  be  rubbed  with  soft  hands ;  and,  more- 
over, in  a  gentle  manner,  and  the  joint  should  be  moved  about, 
but  not  roughly,  so  as  to  excite  pain.  Things  get  restored 
sometimes  in  a  greater  space  of  time,  and  sometimes  in  a 
smaller. 

10.  A  dislocation  may  be  recognised  by  the  following 
symptoms  : — Since  the  parts  of  a  man's  body  are  proportionate 

37 


57S  ARTICULATIONS. 

to  one  anotlier,  as  tlie  arms  and  the  legs,  the  sound  shouhl 
alwaj^s  be  compared  with  the  unsound,  and  the  unsound  with 
the  sound,  not  paying  regard  to  the  joints  of  other  individuals 
(for  one  person's  joints  are  more  prominent  than  another's),  hut 
looking  to  those  of  the  patient,  to  ascertain  whether  the  sound 
joint  be  unlike  the  unsound.  This  is  a  proper  rule,  and  yet  it 
may  lead  to  much  error ;  and  on  this  account  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  know  this  art  in  theory,  but  also  by  actual  practice  ;  for  many 
persons  from  pain,  or  from  any  other  cause,  when  their  joints 
are  not  dislocated,  cannot  put  the  parts  into  the  same  positions 
as  the  sound  body  can  be  put  into  ;  one  ought  therefore  to  knoAV 
and  be  acquainted  beforehand  with  such  an  attitude.^  But  in 
a  dislocated  joint  the  head  of  the  humerus  appears  lying  much 
more  in  the  armpit  than  it  is  in  the  sound  joint ;  and  also, 
above,  at  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  the  part  appears  hollow,  and 
the  acromion  is  prominent,  owing  to  the  bone  of  the  joint  having 
sunk  into  the  part  below ;  there  is  a  source  of  error  in  this  case 
also,  as  will  be  described  afterwards,  for  it  deserves  to  be  de- 
scribed ;  and  also,  the  elljow  of  the  dislocated  arm  is  farther 
removed  from  the  ribs  than  that  of  the  other;  but  by  using  force 
it  may  be  approximated,  though  with  considerable  pain ;  and 
also  they  cannot,  with  the  elbow  extended,  raise  the  arm  to  the 
ear,  as  they  can  the  sound  arm,  nor  move  it  about  as  formerly 
in  this  direction  and  that.  These,  then,  are  the  symptoms  of 
dislocation  at  the  shoulder.  The  methods  of  reduction  and  the 
treatment  arc  as  described. 

11.  It  deserves  to  be  known  how  a  shoulder  which  is  subject 
to  frequent  dislocations  should  be  treated.  For  many  persons 
owmg  to  this  accident  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  gymnastic 
exercises,  though  otherwise  well  qualified  for  them ;  and  from 
the  same  misfortune  have  become  inept  in  warlike  practices,  and 
have  thus  perished."      And  this  subject  deserves  to  be  noticed, 

'  As  Galen  remarks  in  his  Commentary,  our  author  adverts  to  this  subject  in  liis 
work  On  Fractures.  It  is,  no  doubt,  a  very  important  practical  observation  that, 
although  inal)ility  to  place  the  limb  in  its  accustomed  attitudes  be  an  inseparable 
symptom  of  dislocations,  it  sometimes  happens  that  patients,  from  pains  or  other 
causes,  lose  this  faculty  without  there  being  any  displacement  of  the  bone.  The 
symptoms  of  dislocation  at  the  shoulder-joint,  as  given  in  the  remainder  of  the  para- 
graph, are  remarkably  accurate. 

-  Our  author,  it  will  be  recollected,  applies  this  remark  to  the  Nomadic  Scythians, 
in  his  work  On  Airs,  ^Vaters,  &c. 


AUTICULATIONS. 


o/: 


because  I  have  never  known  any  physician  treat  the  case  pro- 
perly ;   some  abandon  the  attempt  altogctlier,  and  others  hold 
opinions  and  practise  the  very  reverse  of  Avhat  is  proper.      For 
many  physicians   have  burned  the  shoulders  subject  to  dislo- 
cation, at  the  top  of  the  shoulder,   at  the  anterior  part  where 
the  head  of  the  humerus  protrudes,  and  a  little  behind  the  top 
of  the  shoulder ;   these  burnings,  if  the  dislocation  of  the  arm 
were  upwards,  or  forwards,  or  backwards,  would  have  been  pro- 
perly performed  ;  but  now,  when  the  dislocation  is  downwards, 
they  rather  promote  than  prevent  dislocations,  for  they  shut  out 
the  head  of  the  humerus  from  the  free  space  above.     The  cauteiy 
should  be  applied  thus  :   taking  hold  with  the  hands  of  the  skin 
at  the  armpit,  it  is  to  be  drawn  into  the  line,  in  which  the 
head  of  the  humerus   is   dislocated;    and  then  the  skin  thus 
drawn  aside  is  to  be  burnt  to  the  opposite  side.      The  burnings 
should  be  performed  with  irons,  which  are  not  thick  nor  much 
rounded,  but  of  an  oblong  form,  (for  thus  they  pass  the  more 
readily  through,)  and  they  are  to  be  pushed  forwards  with  the 
hand ;    the   cauteries   should  be  red-hot,    that    they  may  pass 
through   as   quickly   as  possil)le ;    for   such    as   arc  thick  pass 
through  slowly,  and  occasion  eschars  of  a  greater  breadth  than 
convenient,  and  there  is  danger  that  the  cicatrices  may  break 
into  one  another;  which,  altbough  nothing  very  bad,  is  most 
unseemly,  or  awkward.      AYhen  you  have  burnt  through,  it  will 
be  sufficient,   in  most  cases,  to  make  eschars  onh'  in  the  lower 
part ;  but  if  there  is  no  danger  of  the  ulcers  passing  into  one 
another,  and  there  is  a  considerable  piece  of  skin  between  them, 
a  thin  spatula  is  to  be  pushed  through  these  holes  which  have 
been  burned,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  skin  is   stretched, 
for  otherwise  the  instrument  could  not  pass  through  ;  but  when 
you  have  passed  it  through  you  must  let  go  the  skin,  and  then 
between    the    two    eschars    you    should    form    another   eschar 
with  a   slender  iron,    and  burn   through   until   you    come   in 
contact  with  the  spatula.      The  following  directions  will  enable 
3'ou  to  determine  how  much  of  the  skin  of  the  armpit  should 
be   grasped ;    all  men    have  glands   in   the  armpit   greater  or 
smaller,  and  also  in  many  other  parts  of  the  body.      But  I  will 
treat  in  another  work  of  the  whole  constitution  of  the  glands, 
and  explain  what  they   are,   what  they  signify,   and  what  are 


580  ARTICULATIONS. 

their  offices/  The  glands,  tlien,  nrc  not  to  be  taken  hold  of, 
nor  the  parts  internal  to  the  glands  ;  for  this  would  be  attended 
with  great  danger,  as  they  are  adjacent  to  the  most  important 
nerves.  But  the  greater  part  of  the  substances  external  to 
the  glands  are  to  be  grasped,  for  tlierc  is  110  danger  from  them. 
And  this,  also,  it  is  proper  to  hnow,  that  if  you  raise  the 
arm  mucli,  you  aa^iII  not  l)e  able  to  grasp  any  quantity  of 
skin  worth  mentioning,  for  it  is  all  taken  uj)  with  the  stretching  ; 
and  also  the  nerves,  which  bv  all  means  vou  must  avoid 
wounding,  become  exposed  and  stretched  in  this  position ;  but 
if  you  only  raise  the  arm  a  little,  you  cau  grasp  a  large  quantity 
of  skin,  and  the  nerves  which  you  ought  to  guard  against  are 
left  within,  and  at  a  distance  from  the  operation.  Should  not, 
then,  the  utmost  pains  be  taken  in  the  whole  practice  of  the 
art  to  find  out  the  proper  attitude  in  every  case  ?  So  much 
regarding  the  armpit,  and  these  contractions  will  be  sufficient, 
provided  the  eschars  be  properly  placed.  AVithout  the  armpit 
there  are  only  two  places  where  one  might  place  the  eschars 
to  obviate  this  affection ;  the  one  before  and  between  the  head 
of  the  humerus  and  the  tendon  at  the  armpit ;  and  then  the 
skin  may  be  fairly  burnt  through,  l3ut  not  to  any  great  depth, 
for  tiiere  is  a  large  vein  adjacent,  and  also  nerves,  neither  of 
which  must  be  touched  with  the  heat.  But  externally,  one 
may  form  another  eschar  considerably  alcove  the  tendon  at  the 
armpit,  but  a  little  below  the  head  of  the  humerus  ;  and  the 
skin  must  be  burnt  fairly  through,  but  it  must  not  be  made 
very  deep,  for  fire  is  inimical  to  the  nerves.  Through  the 
whole  treatment  the  sores  are  to  be  so  treated,  as  to  avoid  all 
strong  extension  of  the  arm,  and  this  is  to  be  done  moderately, 
and  only  as  far  as  the  dressing  requires ;  for  thus  they  will  be 
less   cooled    (for  it  is  of  importance  to   cover  up  all  sorts  of 

'  I  need  scarcely  remark  liere  that  tlic  work,  On  the  Glands,  which  we  now  pos- 
sess, is  not  the  promised  work  of  our  author.  Sec  an  analysis  of  the  other  work  in 
the  second  section  of  the  Preliminary  Discourse.  Galen,  in  his  Conimentaiy  on  this 
passage,  states  distinctly  that  the  work  which  is  contained  in  the  Ilippocratic  Col- 
lection is  supposititious,  and  unworthy  of  our  author.  Those,  he  adds,  who  made 
out  the  Tahles  (of  the  Hippocratic  treatises)  do  not  recognise  it.  I  may  he  allowed 
to  remark  again  in  this  place,  that  if  our  author  had  not  practised  human  dissection 
he  could  not  have  been  so  well  acquainted,  as  he  here  shows  him  to  he,  with  the 
situation  of  the  blood-vessels,  nerves,  and  glands,  situated  in  the  axillary  region. 


ARTICULATIONS.  581 

burns  if  one  would  treat  them  niildl}'),  and  tlien  tlie  lips  of 
them  will  l)e  less  turned  asid(> ;  tliere  will  be  less  hemorrhage 
and  fear  of  convnlsions,  iUit  when  the  sores  have  become 
clean,  and  are  going  on  to  cicatrization,  then  by  all  means  the 
arm  is  to  be  bound  to  the  side  night  and  da>^ ;  and  even  when 
the  ulcers  are  completely  healed,  the  arm  must  still  be  bound 
to  the  side  for  a  long  time ;  for  thus  more  especially  will  cica- 
trization take  place,  and  the  wide  space  into  which  the  humerus 
used  to  escape  will  become  contracted.' 

12.  When  attempts  to  reduce  a  dislocated  shoulder  have 
failed,  if  the  patient  be  still  growing,  the  bone  of  the  affected 
arm  will  not  increase  like  the  sound  one,  for  although  it  does 
increase  in  so  far  it  becomes  shorter  than  the  other ;  and  those 
persons  called  weasd-armedf  become  so  from  two  accidents, 
either  from  having  met  Avitli  this  dislocation  in  uterof  or  from 

'  For  the  other  aneient  autliorities  on  this  operation,  see  Paulus  .Egineta,  B.VI,  42. 

^  Galen  professes  not  to  think  it  worth  his  wliile  to  determine  whether  or  not  the 
term  whieh  is  here  translated  weasel-armed  (yaXidyKUJvtg)  he  derived  from  yaXiJ, 
(mustela  vulgaris?)  He  adds  there  can  he  no  douhtthat  it  signifies  "  short -armed." 

^  Our  author  here  evidently  alludes  to  congenital  dislocation  at  the  shoidder-joint, 
a  malformation  which  we  know  does  occur,  although  1  never  met  with  a  case  of  it.  I 
have  seen  cases,  however,  of  congenital  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint,  and  several  such 
have  heen  deserihed  of  late  years.  Dr.  Heine,  of  Stuttgart,  has  ohserved  nine  cases  iu 
female,  and  two  in  male  children.  See  Forhes's  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review, 
No.  xxxii,  p.  489.  Baron  Dupuytren  has  also  treated  of  thissubject  with  his  usual  ability, 
ill  his  work.  On  Fractures  and  Dislocations,  lately  reprinted  by  the  Sydenham  Society. 
In  this  work,  he  gives  an  interesting  case  of  congenital  dislocation  of  the  upper  ex- 
tremity of  the  radius  on  the  humerus  (p.  117).  He  makes  no  mention,  however,  of 
congenital  dislocation  at  the  shoulder-joint.  By  far  the  most  interesting  and  instruc- 
tive account  of  this  subject  which  we  possess,  is  that  given  by  Dr.  R.  W.  Smith,  in  the 
Dublin  Journal,  Vol.  xv,  p.  236.  He  notices  two  kinds  of  congenital  dislocation, 
viz.  the  siibcoracoid  and  the  subacromial  dislocation.  A  few  extracts  from  his  de- 
scription of  the  former  of  these,  will  show  how  well  it  agrees  with  that  given  by 
Hippocrates.  "  In  the  conrjcnital  subcoracoid  dislocation,  the  head  of  the  upper-arm 
hone,  when  the  arm  hangs  down  on  the  side,  is  situated  beneath  the  coracoid  pro- 
cess, and  the  outer  part  of  the  glenoid  cavity  can  he  felt  beneath  the  projecting 
acromion;  if  the  elbow  be  drawn  forward  over  the  chest,  the  head  of  the  upper-arm 
bone  shps  backwards  over  the  acromion,  and  completely  leaves  the  unnatural  part  of 
the  articular  surface,  which  can  now  be  distinctly  felt;  the  shoulder  has  not  its 
natural  rounded  form,  but  is  llatlened.  The  muscles  of  (he  shoulder  and  arm  are 
much  shrunk,  and  also  the  muscles  passing  from  the  chest  to  the  blade-hone  and 
upper-arm,  only  the  m.  Irapesius  shows  the  least  of  this,  and  seems  to  be  almost  the 
only  muscle,  which  still  acts  upon  and  moves  the  blade-bone,  the  diseased  arm  is 
nearli/  half  an  inch   shorter.      The  motions  of  the  arm  are   very  much  reduced; 


5S'J  ARTICULATIONS. 

another   accident,   >vliicli   will   be    described  afterwards.      But 
tbose  who  while  they  were  children  have  had  deep-seated  sup- 
purations abont  the  head  of  the  bone,  all  become  weasel-armed  ; 
and  this,  it  should  be  well  known,  will  be  the  issue,  whether 
the  abscess  be  opened  by  an  incision  or  cautery,  or  whether  it 
break  spontaneously.      Those  who  are  thus  afl'ected  from  birth 
ai'e  quite  able  to  use  the  arm,  yet  neither  can  they  raise  the 
arm  to  the  ear,  by  extending  the  elbow,  but  they  do  this  much 
less  efficiently  than  wdth  the  sound  arm.      But  in  those  who 
have   had  the   shoulder  dislocated  after  they  were  grown  up, 
and  when  it  has  not  been  reduced,   the  top  of  the  shoulder 
becomes  much  less  fleshy,  and  the  habit  of  body  at  that  part 
is   attenuated ;   but  when  they  cease  to   have  jiain,  whatever 
they  attempt  to  perform  by  raising  the  elbow  from  tlie  sides 
obliquely,   they   can   no   longer   accomplish   as   formerly;   but 
whatever  acts  are  performed  by  carrying  the  arm  around  by 
the  sides,   either  backwards    or  forwards,   all  those  they  can 
perform ;  for  they  can  w  ork  with  an  auger  or  a  saw,  or  with  a 
hatchet,  and  can  dig,  by  not  raising  the  elbow  too  much,  and 
do  all  other  kinds  of  work  which  are  done  in  similar  attitudes, 
13.    In  those  cases  where  the  acromion  has  been  torn  ofl", 
the   bone  which  is   thus   separated   appears  prominent.      The 
bone  is  the  bond  of  connexion  between  the  clavicle  and  scapula, 
for  in  this   rcsjiect  the    constitution  of  man  is  diflerent  from 
that  of  other  animals ;  physicians  are  particularly  liable  to  be 
deceived  in  this  accident  (for  as  the  separated  bone  protrudes, 
the  top  of  the  shoulder  appears  low  and  hollow),  so  that  they 
make  preparations  as  if  for  dislocation  of  the  shoulder ;  for  1 
have  known  many  physicians,   otherwise   not  inexpert  at  the 
art,  mIio   have   done  much  mischief  by  attempting  to   reduce 
such  shoulders,  thus   supposing  it   a  case   of  dislocation;    and 
they  did  not   desist  until  they  gave  over  hopes  of  succeeding, 

elevation  .iiul  aliduction  arc  not  possible,  and  even  tlie  forward  and  backward  motions 
cannot  be  pcrfornied  without  a  correspondent  niovcmeut  of  the  blade-bone."  See, 
further,  Chelius's  System  of  Snrgcry,  (Vol.  I,  p.  78G.)  The  same  stdjject  is  treated  of 
in  a  very  ingenions  and  interesting  manner  by  Dr.  11.  ^I.  Smith,  in  liis  recent  publica- 
tion '  A  Treatise  of  Fractures  in  the  Vicinity  of  Joints,'  Dublin,  1847.  He  gives  the 
histories  of  several  cases  of  congenital  luxation  at  the  shoulder-joint,  which,  in  the 
main,  agree  very  well  with  the  characters  of  this  abnormal  conformation  as  given 
by  Hippocrates.  M.  Guerin  has  also  recently  written  on  this  interesting  subject, 
(Recherches  sin-  Ics  Luxations  Congonitales.) 


ARTICULATIONS.  o83 

or  committed  the  mistukc  of  supposing  that  they  had  reduced 
tlie  shouhlcr.      The  treatment,  iu  these  cases,  is  similar  to  that 
uhich  is  applicable  in  others  of  a  like  kind,   namely,  cerate, 
compresses^   and   suitable  bandaging  uith   linen  cloths.      The 
projecting  part  must  be  pushed  doAvn,  and  the  greater  numljcr 
of  compresses  are  to  be  placed  on  it,   and  most  compression  is 
to  be  applied  at  that  part,   and  the  arm  being  fastened  to  the 
side  is  to  be  kept  elevated  ;  for  thus  the  parts  which  had  been 
torn    asunder    are    brought    into    closest   proximity   with    one 
another.      All   this   should  be  "well  known,  and  if  you  choose 
you   may  prognosticate   safely   that  no  impediment,  small   or 
great,  will   result   from  such   an  injury  at  the  shoulder,  only 
there  will  be  a  deformity  in  the  place,  for  the  bone  cannot  be 
properly   restored    to    its    natural    situation,    but    there   must 
necessarily  be   more    or  less    tumefaction   in   the   upper  part. 
For  neither  can  any  other  bone  be  made  exactly  as  it  was,  which 
having  become  incorporated  with   another   bone,   and   having 
grown  to  it  as  an  apophysis,  has  been  torn  from  its  natural 
situation.    If  properly  bandaged,  the  acromion  becomes  free  of 
pain  in  a  few  days.^ 

'  This   subject  has  been   so   fully   treated  of  iu  the   Commentary  ou   Paulus 
^GiNETA  (B.  VI,  113),  that  I  need  not  say  much  upon  it  in  this  place.  See,  further, 
Eustachius  (Oss.  Exam.  p.  175);  Riolanus  (Comment,  de  Oss.  p.  503).     Apparently 
the  case  must  have  been  dislocation  of  the  scapular  end  of  the  clavicle  from  the 
acromion,  which  all  our  best  authorities  on  surgery  describe  as  being  an  accident  of 
occasional  occurrence.     See  Sir  Astley  Cooper  and  Liston's  works.     It  is  marked  by 
a  projection  of  the  end  of  the  clavicle,  under  the  skin  covering  the  acromion,  and  a 
depression  of  the  shoulder.     All  our  modern  authorities  confirm  Galen's  statement, 
and  our  author's,  as  to  the  difficulty  of  treating  this  case  without  leaving  some  de- 
formity.    Mr.  Liston  says  "  the  cure  is  slow  and  imperfect.     The  bone,  however,  in 
time,  contracts  adhesions,  and  the  limb  regains  its  power  and  mobility."     See,  also, 
Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary  (p.  382),  fifth  edition.     Galen,  who  met  with  this  acci- 
dent in  his  own  person  while  wrestling  in  the  palestra,  made  a  complete  recovery 
without  deformity ;  but  he  says  he  bad  rarely  found  this  to  be  the  case  except  in 
young  persons,    (t.  v,  p.  594,  ed.  Basil.)     While  upon  this  subject,  I  shall  quote  what 
is  said  on  this  accident  which  befel  Galen,  by  Verduc,  who  may  be  called  the  Simia 
Hippocratis,   and   therefore  his   views    arc   interesting,   as    they  tend    to   confirm 
those  which  I  had  adopted  before  meeting  w  ith  his  work.     "  Though  the  chanuel- 
liones  are  articulated  with  the  acromion-process  of  the  shoidder-blade  and  the  ster- 
num by  very  close  and  tight  cartilages  and  ligaments,  yet  Galen  says  that  he  under- 
went a  dislocation  of  the  clavicula,  which  created  insufferable  pain;  that  he  bore 
such  a   tight    bandage   as  no  man  else  could  have   borne;  and  after  having    the 
bandage  u])on  him  for  a  long  while,  was  cured  at  last."     (A  Treatise  on  Fratlures, 


584  ARTICULATIONS. 

14=  When  a  fractured  clavicle  is  fairl30)roken  across  it  is 
more  easily  treated,  but  when  broken  obliquely  it  is  more 
diificult  to  manage.  Matters  are  different  in  these  cases  from 
what  one  would  have  supposed  ;  for  a  bone  fairly  broken  across 
can  1)C  more  easily  restored  to  its  natural  state,  and  with  proper 
care  the  upper  pnrt  may  be  brouii;ht  dowri  by  means  of  suitable 
position  and  proper  bandaging,  and  even,  if  not  properly  set, 
the  projecting  part  of  the  bone  is  not  very  sharp.  But  in 
oblique  fractures  the  case  is  similar  to  that  of  bones  which 
have  been  torn  away,  as  formerly  described ;  for  they  do  not 
admit  of  being  restored  to  their  place,  and  the  prominence  of 
the  bone  is  very  sharp.  For  the  most  part,  then,  it  should  be 
known,  no  harm  results  to  the  shoulder  or  to  the  rest  of  the 
l)ody  from  fracture  of  the  clavicle,  unless  it  sphacelate,  and 
this  rarely  happens.  A  deformit}^,  however,  may  arise  from 
fracture  of  the  clavicle,  and  in  these  cases  it  is  very  great  at 
first,  but  by  and  by  it  becomes  less.^  A  fractured  clavicle, 
like  all  other  spongy  bones,  gets  speedily  united ;  for  all  such 
bones  form  callus  in  a  short  time.  When,  then,  a  fracture 
has  recently  taken  place,  the  patients  attach  much  importance 
to  it,  as  supposing  the  mischief  greater  than  it  really  is,  and 
the  physicians  bestow  great  pains  in  order  that  it  may  be  pro- 
})crly  bandaged ;  but  in  a  little  time  the  patients,  having  no 
pain,  nor  finding  any  impediment  to  their  walking  or  eating, 
become  negligent  •  and  the  physicians  finding  they  cannot 
make  the  parts  look  well,  take  themselves  off,  and  are  not 
sorry  at  the  neglect  of  the  patients,  and  in  the  mean  time  the 
callus  is  quickly  formed."      The   method  of  dressing  which  is 

p.  339.)  It  remains  to  be  mentioned,  as  fiirtlicr  tending  to  illustrate  the  case  now 
muler  consideration,  that  dislocation  of  the  clavicle,  at  its  outer  extremity,  is  some- 
times complicated  with  the  fracture  of  the  acromion.  This  variety  is  described  by 
Sir  Charles  Bell,  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  and  by  Chelius,  in  his  late  publication  (Vol.  i, 
p.  r)48).     All  agree  that  it  has  a  great  resemblance  to  dislocation  of  the  humerus. 

'  As  stated  by  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  this  is  no  doubt  an  important  remark,  as 
a  person  unaccpiainted  with  this  fact  would  be  liable  to  overrate  the  deformity  on  its 
liist  appearance.  How  often  have  1  benefited  by  the  knowledge  thus  derived  from 
Uippociates,  more  especially  in  the  case  of  children,  in  being  able  to  assure  parents) 
and  otlun-s  iateresled  in  the  matter,  that  a  deformity,  which  at  the  time  was  creating 
great  uneasiness,  would  disajjpear  in  the  course  of  a  few  months  ! 

-  What  our  author  here  says  regarding  neglected  cases  of  fractured  clavich',  is 
entirely  consonant  to  my  own  experience.  1  have  known  persons  who,  having  met 
nitli  the  aceidcnl,  gave  Ihtuisclvcs  no  trouble,  ap))lied  no  bandages,  and  even  con- 


ARTICULATIONS.  585 

most  appropriate,  is  similar  to  that  used  in  ordinary  cases,  con- 
sisting of  cerate,  compresses,  and  bandages ;  and  it  should  be 
most  especially  known  in  this  operation,  that  most  compresses 
should  be  placed  on  the  projecting  bone,  and  that  the  greatest 
pressure  should  be  made  there.  There  arc  certain  physicians 
\\  ho  make  a  show  of  superior  skill  by  binding  a  heavy  piece  of 
lead  on  the  part  in  order  to  depress  the  projecting  bone ;  but 
this  mode  of  treatment  does  not  apply  to  the  clavicle,  for  it  is 
impossible  to  depress  the  projecting  part  to  any  extent  wortli 
mentioning.  There  are  others  who,  knowing  the  fact  tliat 
the  bandages  are  apt  to  slip  oft",  and  that  they  do  not  keep  the 
projecting  parts  in  their  place,  apply  compresses  and  bandages 
like  the  others,  and  then  having  girt  the  patient  Avith  a  girdle, 
where  it  is  usually  applied  with  most  effect,  they  make  a  heap 
of  the  compresses  upon  the  projecting  bone  when  they  apply 
them,  and  having  fastened  the  head  of  the  bandage  to  the 
girdle  in  front,  they  apply  it  so  as  to  bring  the  turns  of  it  into 
the  line  of  the  clavicle,  carrying  them  to  the  back,  and  then 
bringing  them  around  the  girdle  they  carry  them  to  the  fore  part 
and  again  backwards.  There  are  others  who  do  not  apply  the 
bandage  round  the  girdle,  but  carry  the  rounds  of  it  by  the 
perineum  and  anus,  and  along  the  spine,  so  as  to  compress  the 
fracture.  To  an  inexperienced  person  these  methods  will  appear 
not  far  from  natural,  but  when  tried,  they  will  be  found  of  no 
service;  for  they  do  not  remain  firm  any  length  of  time,  even  if 
the  patient  keep  his  bed,  although  in  this  position  they  answer 
best ;  and  yet  even  when  lying  in  bed,  should  he  bend  his  leg, 
or  should  his  trunk  be  bent,  all  the  bandages  will  be  displaced  ; 
and,  moreover,  the  bandaging  is  inconvenient,  inasmuch  as  the 

tinued  their  work  as  agricultural  labourers,  and  yet  it  was  surprising  how  well  tlicy 
got  round.  Having  stated  this  to  the  late  Mr.  Liston,  he  confirmed  what  I  said,  by 
mentioning  similar  cases  which  he  had  known.  M.  Yelpeau,  in  like  manner,  holds 
that  the  fears  generally  entertained  of  the  pieces  of  bone  not  uniting  regularly,  arc 
quite  unfounded.  Our  author's  account  of  the  symptoms  and  treatment  of  fractured 
clavicle  bespeak  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  subject.  The  lapse  of  more  thau 
twenty  centuries  has  added  nothing  to  our  knowledge  of  it.  If  the  reader  will  com- 
pare the  accomit  of  this  accident  given  by  Chelius,  and  his  English  editor,  South, 
with  wliat  our  autlior  lias  written  on  tlie  subject,  be  will  admit  the  truth  of  this  re- 
mark. Yet  it  is  lamentaltlc,  even  at  the  preseiu  day,  to  see  how  some  fashionabli^ 
doctors  torment  their  patients,  in  cases  of  fractured  clavicle,  with  tight  bandages, 
which,  after  all,  have  little  or  no  power  in  keeping  the  bones  in  situ. 


586  ArxTICULATIONS. 

RHUS  is  comprcliendcd  by  it,  and  many  turns  of  the  bandage 
are  crowded  there  in  a  narrow  space.  And  in  the  method  witli 
the  girdle,  the  girdle  cannot  be  so  firmly  girt  around,  but  that 
the  turns  of  the  bandage  force  tlie  girdle  to  ascend,  and  hence 
of  necessity  all  the  other  bandages  must  be  slackened.  He 
would  seem  to  me  to  come  nearest  his  purpose,  although  after 
all  he  eftccts  but  little,  who  would  take  a  few  turns  round  the 
girdle,  but  woidd  use  the  bandage  principally  to  secure  the 
former  bandaging;  for  in  this  manner  the  bandages  would  be 
most  secure,  and  Avould  mutually  assist  one  another.  Every- 
thing now  almost  has  been  said  which  applies  to  fracture  of 
the  clavicle.  But  this  also  should  be  known,  that  in  fractures 
of  the  clavicle,  it  is  the  part  attached  to  the  breast  which  is 
uppermost,  and  that  the  piece  attached  to  the  acromion  is  the 
lowermost.  The  cause  of  this  is,  that  for  the  most  part  the 
breast  can  neither  be  depressed  nor  raised,  there  being  but  a 
slight  movement  of  the  joirit  at  the  breast,  for  the  sternum  is 
connected  together  on  both  sides  with  the  spine.  The  clavicle 
admits  of  most  motion  at  the  joint  of  the  shoulder,  and  this 
arises  from  its  connexion  with  the  acromion.  And,  moreover, 
when  broken,  the  part  which  is  connected  with  the  sternum 
flies  upwards,  and  is  not  easily  forced  downwards ;  for  it  is 
naturally  light,  and  there  is  more  room  for  it  above  than  below. 
But  the  shoidder,  the  arm,  and  the  parts  connected  with  them, 
are  easily  moved  from  the  sides  and  breast,  and,  on  that  account, 
they  admit  of  being  considerably  elevated  and  depressed.  When, 
therefore,  the  clavicle  is  broken,  the  fragment  attached  to  the 
shoulder  inclines  downwards,  for  it  inclines  much  more  readily 
Avith  the  shoulder  and  arm  downwards  than  upwards.  Matters 
being  as  I  have  stated,  they  act  imprudently  who  think  to 
depress  the  projecting  end  of  the  bone.  But  it  is  clear  that 
the  under  part  ought  to  be  brought  to  the  upper,  for  the  former 
is  the  moveal^le  part,  and  that  which  has  been  displaced  from 
its  natural  position.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  there  is  no 
other  way  of  applying  force  to  it  (for  the  bandages  no  more 
force  it  to  than  they  force  it  from)  ;  but  if  one  will  push  the 
arm  when  at  the  sides  as  much  as  possible  upwards,  so  that 
the  shoulder  may  appear  as  sharp  as  possible,  it  is  clear  that 
in  this  way  it  Avill  be  adjusted  to  the  fragment  of  the  bone 
connected  with   the    breast    from  which  it  was  torn.      If  one 


ARTICULATIONS.  587 

tlion  will  apply  a  bandage,  secundum  artem,  for  tlic  purpose  of 
pi'omoting  a  sj)cc(ly  cure,  and  will  rcclcou  everything  else  of  no 
value,  except  the  position  as  described,  he  will  form  a  correct 
opinion  of  the  case,  and  will  effect  a  cure  in  the  speediest  and 
most  appropriate  manner.  It  is  of  great  importance,  however, 
that  the  patient  should  lie  in  a  recumbent  posture.  Fourteen 
days  will  be  suflicient  if  he  keep  quiet,  and  twenty  at  most. 

15.  But  if  the  clavicle  be  fractured  in  the  opposite  manner 
(which  does  not  readily  happen),  so  that  the  fragment  of  bone 
connected  with  the  breast  is  depressed,  while  the  piece  con- 
nected with  the  acromion  is  raised  up  and  rides  over  the 
other,  this  case  does  not  require  much  management,  for  if 
the  shoulder  and  arm  be  let  go,  the  fi'agments  of  the  bone 
will  be  adjusted  to  one  another,  and  an  ordinary  bandage  will 
sufHce,  and  the  callus  will  be  formed  in  the  course  of  a  few  davs. 

16.  If  the  fracture  be  not  thus,  but  if  it  incline  either  for- 
wards or  backwards,  it  may  be  restored  to  its  natural  position, 
by  raising  the  shoulder  Avith  the  arm  as  formerly  described, 
and  brought  back  to  its  natural  place,  when  the  cure  will  be 
speedily  accomplished.  INIost  of  the  varieties  of  displacement 
may  be  rectified  by  raising  the  arm  upwards.  When  the  upper 
bone  is  displaced  laterally  or  downwards,  it  wouhl  favour  the 
adaptation  of  the  parts  if  the  patient  vrould  he  on  his  back, 
and  if  some  elevated  substance  were  phiced  between  the  shoulder- 
blades,  so  that  the  breast  may  be  depressed  as  much  as  possible 
upon  the  two  sides  ;  and  if,  while  another  person  raised  the 
arm  extended  along  the  sides,  the  })hysician,  applying  the  palm 
of  the  one  hand  to  the  head  of  the  bone,  would  push  it  away, 
and  with  the  other  would  adjust  the  broken  bones,  he  would 
thus  reduce  the  parts  most  readily  to  their  natural  position. 
But,  as  formerly  stated,  the  upper  bone  {sternal  fragment  ?)  is 
rarely  depressed  downwards.  In  most  cases,  after  the  bandages 
have  been  applied,  that  position  is  beneficial  in  which  the  elbow 
is  fixed  to  the  same  side,  and  the  shoulder  is  kept  elevated ; 
but  in  certain  cases,  the  shoulder  is  to  be  raised,  as  has  been 
directed,  and  the  elbow*  is  to  be  brought  forward  to  the  breast, 
and  the  hand  laid  on  the  acromion  of  the  sound  side.  If  the 
patient  has  the  resolution  to  lie  in  bed,  something  should  be 
placed  so  as  to  support  the  shoulder,  and  keep  it  as  much  elevated 
as  possible.      But  if  he  walk  about,  the  arm  should  be  slung 


588  ARTICULATIONS. 

in  a  shawl,   wliicli  embraces  the  point  of  the  clbow^  and  is 
passed  round  the  neck. 

17.  When  the  elbow-joint  is  displaced  or  dislocated  to  tlic 
side  or  outwards^  wliile  its  sliavp  point  {olecranon  ?)  remains 
in  the  cavity  of  the  humerus,  extension  is  to  be  made  in  a 
straight  line,  and  the  projecting  part  is  to  be  pushed  back- 
wards and  to  the  side.^ 

18.  In  complete  dislocations  towards  either  side,  extension 
is  to  be  made  as  in  bandaging  fracture  of  the  arm ;  for  thus 
the  rounded  part  of  the  elbow  will  not  form  an  obstacle  to  it. 
Dislocation,  for  the  most  part,  takes  place  towards  the  sides 
{imoardly  ?).  lleduction  is  to  be  effected  by  separating  (the 
bones)  as  much  as  possible,  so  that  the  end  (of  the  humerus) 
may  not  come  in  contact  with  the  olecranon,  and  it  is  to  be 
carried  up,  and  turned  round,  and  not  forced  in  a  straight 
line,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  opposite  sides  are  to  be  pushed 
together,  ami  propelled  into  their  proper  place.  It  will  further 
assist  if  rotation  of  the  fore-arm  be  made  at  the  elbow,  some- 
times turning  it  into  a  supine  position,  and  sometimes  into  a 
prone.  The  position  for  the  treatment  consists  in  keeping  the 
hand  a  little  higher  than  the  elbow,  and  the  arm  at  the  sides  ; 
then  it  may  either  be  suspended  or  laid  at  rest,  for  either 
position  will  answer;  and  nature  and  the  usage  of  common 
means  will  accomplish  the  cure,  if  the  callus  docs  not  form 
improperly :  it  is  formed  quickly.  The  treatment  is  to  be 
conducted  with  bandages  according  to  the  rule  for  bandaging 
articulations,  and  the  point  of  the  elbow  is  to  be  included  in 
the  bandage." 

19.  Dislocations  at  the  elbow  give  rise  to  the  most  serious 

'  This  would  seem  to  be  partial  flislocation  of  the  elbow-joint,  with  displace- 
iiient  of  the  radius  either  to  the  side  or  behind.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that 
our  author  always  supposes  the  arm  in  a  state  intermediate  between  pronation  and 
sni>inatiou.  Outwards,  then,  with  liiin,  lias  tlie  same  sense  as  backwards  in  tlie 
modern  interpretation,  where  the  arm  is  supposed  to  be  in  a  state  of  supination.  The 
description  of  the  method  of  reduction  is  obscure,  and  the  Commentaries  of  Apollouuis 
Citiensis  and  Galen  throw  little  or  no  liglit  on  it.  There  is  a  considerable  differ- 
ence l>etweeii  M.  Littre's  mode  of  interpreting  this  passage  and  my  own,  as  I  have 
:>tated  in  uiy  Notes,  §  39  Of  Fractures. 

-  This  is  evidenti}-  complete  lateral  luxation  of  the  fore-arm.  The  same  subject  is 
resumed  in  the  §  22.  Though  there  are  some  obscurities  in  particular  expressions 
which  occur  in  t'.iis  paragraph,  the  directions,  iu  the  main,  must   be   quite   Intel- 


ARTICULATIONS.  589 

consequences,  such  as  fevers,  pain,  nausea,  vomitings  of  pure 
bile,  and  more  especially  when  the  humerus  is  displaced  l)ack- 
-wards  from  pressure  on  the  nerve,  which  occasions  numbness ; 
next  to  it  is  the  dislocation  forwards;  the  treatment  is  the 
same  :  reduction  in  dislocation  backwards  is  bv  extension  and 
adaptation  ;  the  symptom  of  this  variety — loss  of  the  power  of 
extension  ;  of  dislocation  forwards — loss  of  the  power  of  flexion, 
and  in  tliis  case  reduction  is  to  be  accomplished  by  placing  a 
hard  ball  [in  the  bend  of  the  elbow],  and  bending  the  forearm 
about  it,  along  with  sudden  extension.^ 

20.  Diastasis  of  the  bones  may  be  recognised  by  examining 
the  part  where  the  vein  that  runs  along  the  arm  divides." 

21.  In  those  cases  callus  is  quickly  formed.  In  congenital 
dislocations  the  bones  below  the  seat  of  the  injury  are  shorter 
than  natural,  and,  mostly,  those  nearest  to  the  place  ;  namely, 
the  bones  of  the  fore-arm,  next  those  of  the  hand ;  and,  third, 
those  of  the  fingers.  The  arm  and  shoulder  are  stronger, 
owing  to  the  nourishment  which  they  receive,  and  the  other 
arm,  from  the  additional  work  which  it  has  to  perform,  is  still 
more  strong.  AVasting  of  the  flesh  takes  place  on  the  inside 
if  the  dislocation  be  on  the  outside ;  or  otherwise,  on  the  side 
opposite  the  dislocation.^ 

22.  When  the  elbow  is  dislocated  either  inwards  or  out- 
wards, extension  is  to  be  made  with  the  fore-arm  at  a  right 
angle  to  the  arm  ;  the  arm,  suspended  by  means  of  a  shawl 
passed  through  the  armpit,  and  a  weight  attached  to  the  extre- 
mity of  the  elbow ;  or  force  may  be  applied  with  the  hands ; 
when  the  articular  extremity  has  been  cleared,   the  displaced 

ligible  to  any  person  who  is  acquainted  with  the  construction  of  parts  concerned  in 
the  dislocation.  The  principal  oliject  which  the  surgeon  must  keep  in  view  while  at- 
tempting to  effect  the  reduction,  evidently  is  to  prevent  the  end  of  the  ulna  from  getting 
entangled  in  the  condyle  of  the  humerus  while  passing  over  to  its  place.  See  below, 
§  22,  where  the  same  directions  are  repeated. 

'  This  would  seem  to  be  complete  luxation  of  the  fore-arm,  forwards  and  back- 
wards. The  symptoms  and  treatment,  though  apparently  laid  down  correctly,  arc 
given  with  such  bre\aty  as  to  create  considerable  obscurity.  See  On  Fractures, 
§39,40,41. 

2  This  is  evidently  an  abridgment  of  §  44  of  the  work  On  Fractures,  and  applies 
principally  to  the  separate  luxation  of  the  radius.  Apollonius  Citiensis  mentions  the 
separate  dislocation  of  the  radius,  but  throws  no  light  on  it. 

3  In  the  note  on  §  12  reference  is  made  to  an  interesting  case  of  congenital  luxa- 
tion of  the  radius,  related  by  Dupuytren.  See  p.  117  of  the  Syd.  Soc.  edition  of  his 
works. 


590  ARTICULATIONS. 

parts  are  to  bo  rectified  with  the  pahns  of  the  hand,  as  in  dis- 
locations of  the  hands.  It  is  to  be  bandaged,  suspended  in  a 
shng,  and  pLiced  while  in  this  attitude.^ 

23.  Dislocations  backwards  are  to  be  rectified  by  the  palms 
of  the  hands,  along  with  sudden  extension ;  the  two  acts  are  to 
be  performed  together,  as  in  other  cases  of  the  kind.  But  in 
dislocation  forwards  the  arm  is  to  be  bent  around  a  ball  of 
cloth  of  proper  size,  and  at  the  same  time  replaced." 

24.  But  if  the  displacement  be  on  the  other  side,  ])otli  these 
operations  are  to  be  performed  in  effecting  the  adjustment. 
For  conducting  the  treatment,  the  position  and  bandaging  are 
the  same  as  in  the  other  cases.  But  all  these  cases  may  be 
reduced  by  ordinary  distension. ^ 

25.  Of  the  methods  of  reduction,  some  operate  by  raising 
np  the  part,  some  by  extension,  and  some  by  rotation  :  the  last 
consists  in  rapidly  turning  the  fore-arm  to  tliis  side  and  that.*^ 

20.  The  joint  of  the  hand  is  dislocated  either  inwards  or 
outwards,  most  frequently  inwards.  The  symptoms  are  easily 
recognised :  if  inwards,  the  patient  cannot  at  all  bend  his 
fingers;  andif  outwards,  he  cannot  extend  them.  "With  regard 
to  the  reduction, — by  placing  the  fingers  above  a  table,  extension 
and  counter-extension  are  to  be  made  b}^  other  persons,  while 
with  the  palm  or  heel  of  the  hand  on  the  projecting  bone  one 
pushes  forward,  and  another  from  behind  on  the  other  bone  ; 
some  soft  substance  is  to  be  applied  to  it,  and  the  arm  is  to  be 
turned  to  the  prone  position  if  the  dislocation  was  forwards,  but 
to  the  supine,  if  backwards.  The  treatment  is  to  be  conducted 
with  l)andages.* 

'  Compare  §  IS.  '■^  This  is  much  the  same  as  §  10. 

^  This  is  tlie  same  as  the  accident  described  in  §  17.  This  passage  is  very  oljsciire, 
and  may  be  referred  either  to  sub-Inxations  of  the  fore-arm  l)ack\vards,  or  luxation  of 
the  radius  persisting  after  dislocation  of  the  wliole  arm  backwards,  or  luxation  of  the 
radius  forwards  or  ])ackwards.  The  last  appears  to  me  the  most  plausible  conjecture. 

■•  This  enumeration  of  the  methods  of  reduction  is  evidently  incomplete.  By 
raising  up  the  part,  he  would  appear  to  allude  to  the  j)roccss  of  raising  up  the  end  of 
the  ulna,  so  that  the  olecranon  may  not  get  entangled  with  the  extremity  of  the 
humerus.     This  process  is  jiarticularly  alluded  to  in  §  19. 

*  M.  Littru  inclines,  after  mature  consideration  of  the  subject,  to  refer  the  case 
here  described  to  sub-luxations  of  the  carpal  bones.  Now,  although  such  accidents 
have  been  desciibed,  even  in  recent  times,  I  luust  say  that  I  look  \\\)0\\  them  as  being, 
in  a  great  measure,  ideal.  Unless  by  sub-luxation  is  meant  the  lateral  subluxations, 
I  can  scarcely  conceive  how  such  an  accident  can  occui-  at  all. 


ARTICULATIONS.  r,!)I 

27.  The  whole  liand  is  dish)(:ated  cither  inwards  or  outwards, 
or  to  this  side  or  that,  but  more  especially  inwards ;  and  some- 
times the  epiphysis  is  displaced,  and  sometimes  the  other  of 
these  bones  is  separated.^  In  tliese  cases  strong  extension  is 
to  be  applied,  and  pressure  is  to  l)e  made  on  the  [)rojectin<5 
bone,  and  counter-pressure  on  the  opposite  side,  both  at  the 
same  time,  behind  and  at  the  sides,  with  the  hands  upon  a 
table,  or  with  the  heel.  These  accidents  give  rise  to  serious 
consequences  and  deformities;  but  in  the  course  of  time  the 
part  gets  strong,  and  admits  of  being  used.  The  cure  is  with 
bandages,  Avliich  ought  to  embrace  both  the  hand  and  fore-arm  ; 
and  splints  are  to  be  applied  as  far  as  the  fingers ;  and  when 
they  are  used  they  should  be  more  frequently  unloosed  than 
in  fractures,  and  more  copious  affusions  of  water  should  be  used.^ 

28.  In  congenital  dislocations  (at  the  wrist)  the  hand  be- 
comes shortened,  and  the  atrophy  of  the  flesh  occurs,  for  the 
most  part,  on  the  side  opposite  to  the  dislocation.  In  an  adult 
the  bones  remain  of  their  natural  size.'^ 

29.  Dislocation  at  the  joint  of  a  finger  is  easily  recognised. 
Reduction  is  to  be  effected  bv  making  extension  in  a  straiii;ht 
line,  and  applying  pressure  on  the  projecting  bone,  and  counter- 
pressm-e  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  other.      The  treatment  is 

'  The  case  here  treated  of,  iu  the  latter  clause  of  this  sentence,  would  appear  to 
me  to  he  dislocations  of  the  radius,  and  of  the  ulna  forwards  and  backwards.  See 
Orihasius,  de  Machin.  (xiv).  The  dislocation  forwards  is  distinctly  described  by 
Sir  Astley  Cooper,  but  he  was  unacquainted  with  the  other.  (On  Dislocations,  p.  503.) 
Dislocation  backwards  is  descril)e(l  by  Desault  (t.  i).  I  do  not  mean  to  dispute  the 
reality  of  this  accident ;  but  I  must  say,  that  judging  from  what  I  have  observed  in  my 
own  practice,  I  am  much  inclined  to  agree  with  Dupuytren  in  thiukingthat  many  of  the 
cases  which  have  been  taken  for  dislocation  of  the  radius,  or  of  the  hand,  have  been 
fractures  of  the  lower  extremity  of  the  radius.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  frac- 
ture, and  nothing  more  rare  than  dislocation,  in  that  part  of  the  body. 

^  That  complete  dislocations  of  the  hand  at  the  wrist  are  here  meant  to  be  de- 
scribed seems  quite  evident.  Most  of  the  other  ancient  authorities  only  admitted 
the  reality  of  dislocations  forwards  and  backwards.  See  the  authorities  quoted  at 
Paulus  iEciNETA  B.  VI,  116,  Syd.  Soc.  edition.  All  the  four  varieties  here  described 
by  our  author  are  recognised  by  our  latest  authorities,  but  those  to  the  side  are 
held  to  be  partial.     See  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper's  Lectures  and  the  Argument. 

"  The  most  interesting  account  which  I  have  met  with  of  congenital  dislocation  at 
the  wrist-joint,  is  that  given  by  Dr.  R.  Smith.  The  drawings  which  he  gives  of  this 
monstrosity  are  very  curious.  (On  Fractures,  &c.,p.  239.)  Nothing  can  show  more 
remarkably  the  attention  which  our  author  must  have  paid  to  this  subject,  than  his 
being  acquainted  with  a  case  of  such  rarity  as  the  present  one. 


592  ArtTICULATIONS. 

with  bandages.  When  not  reduced^  calhis  is  formed  outside 
of  the  joint.  When  the  dislocation  takes  place  at  birth,  during 
adolescence  the  bones  below  the  dislocation  are  shortened,  and 
the  flesh  is  wasted  rather  on  the  opposite  than  on  the  same 
side  with  the  dislocation.  Wlieu  it  occurs  in  an  adult  the 
bones  remain  of  their  proper  size.^ 

30.  The  jaw-bone,  in  few  cases,  is  completely  dislocated,  for 
the  zygomatic  process  formed  from  the  upper  jaw-bone  {malar  ?) 
and  the  bone  behind  the  ear  [temporal?)  shuts  up  the  heads 
of  the  under  jaw,  being  above  the  one  {condyloid  process  ?), 
and  below  the  other  [coronoid  process?).  Of  these  extremities 
of  the  lower  jaw,  the  one,  from  its  length,  is  not  much  exposed 
to  accidents,  while  the  other,  the  coronoid,  is  more  prominent 
than  the  zygoma,  and  from  both  these  heads  nervous  tendons 
arise,  with  which  the  muscles  called  temporal  and  masseter  are 
connected ;  they  have  got  these  names  from  their  actions  and 
connexions ;  for  in  eating,  speaking,  and  the  other  functional 
uses  of  the  mouth,  the  upper  jaw  is  at  rest,  as  being  con- 
nected with  the  head  by  synarthrosis,  and  not  by  diarthrosis 
[enarthrosis  ?)  :  but  the  lower  jaw  has  motion,  for  it  is  con- 
nected with  the  upper  jaw  and  the  head  by  enarthrosis.  Where- 
fore, in  convulsions  and  tetanus,  the  first  symptom  manifested  is 
rigidity  of  the  lower  jaw ;  and  the  reason  why  wounds  in  the 
temporal  region  are  fatal  and  induce  coma,  will  be  stated  in 
another  place.^  These  are  the  reasons  why  complete  dislocation 
does  not  readily  take  place,  and  this  is  another  reason,  because 
there  is  seldom  a  necessity  for  swallowing  so  large  pieces  of 
food  as  would  make  a  man  gape  more  than  he  easily  can,  and 
dislocation  could  not  take  place  in  any  other  position  than  in 
great  gaping,  by  which  the  jaw  is  displaced  to  either  side. 
This  circumstance,  however,  contributes  to  dislocation  there  ; 
of  nerves  {ligaments  ?)  and  muscles  around  joints,  or  connected 
with  joints,  such  as  are  frequently  moved  in  using  the  memljcr 
are  the   most  yielding  to   extension,  in   the  same  manner  as 

'  This  is  only  an  abridgment  of  the  fuller  exposition  of  the  subject  given  in  §  80. 
ApoUonius,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  passage,  mentions  that  Diocles,  in  comment- 
ing upon  it,  describes  four  varieties  of  dislocation  at  the  joints  of  a  finger,  and  directs 
them  to  be  reduced  by  wrapping  a  cord  or  string  round  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  and 
making  counter-extension  with  the  hand. 

•  lie  seems  to  allude  here  to  the  work,  On  Injuries  of  the  Head,  ^  13. 


ARTICULATIONS.  593 

ATcU-drcssed  hides  yield  the  most.  ^Vitll  regard,  tlien,  to  the 
iiiattcr  on  hand,  the  jaM'-l)one  is  rarely  dislocated,  Init  is  fre- 
quently slackened  {partudhj  dhplaced  ?)  in  gaping,  in  the  same 
manner  as  many  other  derangements  of  muscles  and  tendons 
arise.^  Dislocation  is  particularly  recognised  by  these  sym- 
ptoms :  the  lower  jaw  protrudes  forwards,  there  is  displacement 
to  the  opposite  side,  the  coronoid  process  appears  more  pro- 
minent than  natural  on  the  upper  jaw,  and  the  patient  cannot 
shut  his  lower  jaw  but  with  difficulty.  The  mode  of  reduction 
which  will  apply  in  such  cases  is  obvious  :  one  person  must 
secure  the  patient's  head,  and  another,  taking  hold  of  the  lower 
jaw  with  his  fingers  wdtliin  and  without  at  the  chin,  while  the 
patient  gapes  as  much  as   he   can,  first  moves  the  lower  jaw 

'  Galen,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  passage,  explains  it  as  applying  to  displace- 
ment of  the  muscles.  It  would  seem  to  be  the  species  of  incomplete  displacement 
described  by  Sir  Astley  Cooper.  M.  Berard,  however,  as  quoted  by  :\I.  Littre,  gives 
a  somewhat  different  explanation  of  the  case,  as  follows :  "  L'expression  de  luxation 
incomplete  ne  pent  jamais  s'appliquer  aux  deplacements  de  la  machoire.  II  ne  semble 
pas  possible,  en  effet,  que  le  condyle  de  la  machoire  s'arrete  sur  le  rebord  de  la  cavite 
glenoide,  c'est-a-dire  sur  la  racine  transverse  de  I'arcade  zygomatique  ;  il  doit  ou  re- 
tomber  dans  la  cavite,  ou  passer  au-devant  de  cette  saillie.  Cependaut  A.  Cooper 
{CEvvres  Chirurgicales,  traduction  de  MM.  Chassaignac  et  Michelot,  p.  127)  admet 
une  luxation  incomplete,  due  au  transport  du  condyle  au-dessous  de  la  racine  trans- 
verse, tandis  que  le  menisque  inter-art^culaire  reste  au  fond  de  la  cavite  glenoide.  Ce 
genre  de  luxation  reconnait  pour  cause  le  relichement  des  ligaments ;  les  symptumes 
en  sont :  un  ecartement  leger  des  machoires,  I'impossibilite  de  fermer  la  bouche,  qui 
survient  brusquement  et  s'accorapagne  d'une  legere  douleur  du  cote  luxe.  D'ordi- 
naire,  de  simples  efforts  musculaires  suffisent  pour  en  amener  la  reduction ;  nean- 
moins  A.  Cooper  I'a  vue  persister  trcs-longtemps  ;  et  cependant,  dit-il,  la  mobilite  de 
la  machoire,  ainsi  que  la  faculte  de  fermer  la  bouche,  ont  ete  recouvrees.  Cette  des- 
cription est  trop  peu  detaillee  pour  qu'on  puisse  se  former  une  bonne  idee  du  genre 
d'accident  dont  parle  A.  Cooper.  Mais,  comme  aucun  fait  anatomique  n'est  invoque 
en  faveur  de  la  maniere  de  voir  du  celebre  chu-urgieu  anglais,  nous  conservons  de 
tres-grands  doutes  sur  la  cause  que  A.  Cooper  assigue  aux  desordres  fonctionnels 
dont  il  parle.  Le  relachemeut  des  ligaments  est  une  chose  bien  rare,  et  qui  ne  se 
comprend  guere  a  I'articulation  temporo-maxillaire ;  quant  au  glissement  du  condyle 
sur  le  menisque  inter-articulaire,  la  chose  nous  parait  tout-a-fait  impossible.  On  sait 
que  le  tendon  du  muscle  pterygoidien  externe  se  fixe  a  la  fois  sur  le  col  du  condyle 
et  sui  le  cartilage  inter-articulaire,  de  telle  sorte  que  ces  deux  parties  se  meuvent 
toujours  simultanement  lors  des  ghssements  Tu  condyle  de  la  machoire  sur  I'os  tem- 
poral. (A.  Berard,  Diet,  de  Medecine,  art.  Mdchoire,  2^  ed.  t.  18,  p.  409.)  Both 
CheHus  and  his  English  editor,  South,  admit  a  case  "  of  subluxation  of  the  lower-jaw, 
when,  from  great  laxity  of  the  ligaments,  the  condyles  escape  over  the  edge  of  the 
inter-articular  cartilages  in  the  sockets  of  the  temporal  bones,  and  fix  the  jaw  with 
the  mouth  somewhat  open."  (Vol.  i,  p.  772.) 

38 


594  ARTICULATIONS. 

about  for  a  time,  pushing  it  to  this  side  and  that  with  the 
hand^  and  directing  the  patient  himself  to  relax  the  jaw,  to  move 
it  about,  and  yield  as  much  as  possible ;  then  all  of  a  sudden 
the  operator  must  open  the  mouth,  while  he  attends  at  the 
same  time  to  three  positions  :  for  the  lower  jaw  is  to  be  moved 
from  the  place  to  which  it  is  dislocated  to  its  natural  position ; 
it  is  to  be  pushed  backwards,  and  along  with  these  the  jaws 
are  to  be  brought  together  and  kept  shut.  This  is  the  method 
of  reduction,  and  it  cannot  be  performed  in  any  other  way. 
A  short  treatment  suffices,  a  waxed  compress  is  to  be  laid  on, 
and  bound  with  a  loose  bandage.  It  is  safer  to  operate  with 
the  patient  laid  on  his  back,  and  his  head  supported  on  a 
leather  cushion  well  filled,  so  that  it  may  yield  as  little  as 
possiljle,  but  some  person  must  hold  the  patient's  head. 

31.  When  the  jaw  is  dislocated  on  both  sides,  the  treatment 
is  the  same.  The  patients  are  less  able  to  shut  the  mouth  than 
in  the  former  variety;  and  the  jaw  protrudes  farther  in  this  case, 
but  is  not  distorted ;  the  absence  of  distortion  may  be  recognised 
by  comparing  the  corresponding  rows  of  the  teeth  in  the  upper 
and  lower  jaws.  In  such  cases  reduction  should  be  performed 
as  quickly  as  possible ;  the  method  of  reduction  has  been  de- 
scribed al)ove.  If  not  reduced,  the  patient's  life  will  be  in 
danger  from  continual  fevers,  coma  attended  with  stupor  (for 
these  muscles,  when  disordered  and  stretched  preternaturally, 
induce  coma) ;  and  there  is  usually  diarrhoea  attended  with 
bilious,  unmixed,  and  scanty  dejections ;  and  the  vomitings, 
if  any,  consist  of  pure  bile,  and  the  patients  commonly  die 
on  the  tenth  day.^ 

32.  In  fracture  of  the  lower  jaw,  when  the  bone  is  not  fairly 
broken  across,  and  is  still  partially  retained,  but  displaced,  it 
siiould  be  adjusted  by  introducing  the  fingers  at  the  side  of  the 
tongue,  and  making  suitable  counter-pressure  on  the  outside ; 
and  if  the  teeth  at  the  wound  be  distorted  and  loosened,  when 
the  bone  is  adjusted,  they  should  be  connected  together,  not 
only  two,  but  more  of  them,  Avitli  a  gold  thread,  if  possible, 
but  otherwise,  with  a  linen  thread,  until  the  bone  be  consoli- 

'  Our  Hutlior's  description  of  dislocation  of  the  lower  jaw  is  copied  bj'  all  the  su)j- 
scqucnt  aiilhoritics  iu  ancient  times.  See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  /Egineta, 
B.  ^  J,  112,  -where  I  mention  a  case  which  proved  fatal  in  conscqncncc  of  reduction 
not  being  performed  in  time. 


ARTICULATIONS.  595 

dated/  and  then  tlic  part  is  to  be  dressed  Avitli  cerate,  a  few 
ooinpresses,  and  a  few  bandages,  which  should  not  be  very 
ti<^iit,  but  rather  loose.  For  it  should  be  well  known  that  in 
fracture  of  the  jaw,  dressing  with  bandages,  if  properly  per- 
formed, is  of  little  advantage,  but  occasions  great  mischief  if 
improperly  done.  Frequent  examinations  should  be  made  about 
the  tongue,  and  prolonged  pressure  should  he  applied  with  the 
fingers,  in  order  to  rectify  the  displaced  bone."  It  would  be 
best  if  one  could  do  so  constantly^  but  that  is  impossible. 

33.  But  if  the  bone  be  fairly  broken  across  (this,  however, 
I'arely  happens),  it  is  to  be  set  in  the  manner  noAv  described. 
When  adjusted,  the  teeth  are  to  be  fastened  together  as  formerly 
described,  for  this  will  contribute  much  towards  keeping  the 
parts  at  rest,  especially  if  properly  fastened,  and  the  ends  of  the 
thread  secured  with,  knots.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  describe 
exactly  in  writing  the  whole  manipulation  of  the  case ;  but  the 
reader  must  figure  the  thing  to  himself  from  the  description 
given.  Then  one  must  take  a  piece  of  Carthaginian  leather ; 
if  the  patient  be  a  younger  person,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  use 
the  outer  skin,  but  if  an  adult,  the  whole  thickness  of  the  hide 
will  be  required ;  it  is  to  be  cut  to  the  breadth  of  about  three 
inches,  or  as  much  as  will  be  required,  and  having  smeared  the 
jaw  Avith  a  little  gum  (for  thus  it  sticks  more  pleasantly),  the 
end  of  the  skin  is  to  be  fastened  with  the  glue  near  the  fractured 
part  of  the  jaw,  at  the  distance  of  an  inch  or  a  little  more,  from 
the  wound.  This  piece  is  to  be  applied  below  the  jaw ;  but  the 
thong  should  have  a  cut  in  it,  in  the  direction  of  the  chin,  so 
that  it  may  go  over  the  sharp  point  of  the  chin.  Another 
piece  of  thong  like  this,  or  somewhat  broader,  is  to  be  glued  to 
the  upper  part  of  the  jaw,  at  about  the  same  distance  from  the 
wound,  as  the  other  thong ;  this  thong  should  be  so  cut  as  to 

'  Chcliiis  says,  respecting  this  practice :  "  Wallner  applies  (as  did  pre^-io^lsly  Hip- 
pocrates, Ryff,  and  otiiers),  in  fractnre  of  tlie  lower  jaw,  instead  of  tlie  iisnal  apparatus, 
a  silver  thread  around  the  front  teeth,  which,  without  inconveniencing  the  patient,  may 
be  continued  for  three  weeks,  till  the  divided  parts  are  perfectly  united."  (Vol.  i,  p.  530.) 
I  once  used  a  strong  silk  thread  in  a  case  of  severe  fracture  of  the  lower  jaw',  in  which 
it  was  found  difficult  to  keep  the  parts  in  situ.  In  general,  however,  these  accidents 
are  very  easily  managed  without  the  ligatm-e  or  any  complex  bandaging.  Professor 
Symc's  obsei-vations  on  the  treatment  of  this  accident  are  veiy  much  to  the  purpose. 

-  Galen,  in  his  Connnentary,  explains  that  our  author  means  all  this  is  to  be  done 
by  the  patient,  and  not  by  the  physician. 


5[)G  ARTICULATIONS. 

encircle  the  ear.  The  thongs  should  be  sharp-pointed  at  the 
part  where  they  unite^  and  in  glueing  them,  the  flesh  of  the 
thong  should  be  turned  to  the  patient's  skin,  for  in  this  way  it 
will  be  more  tenacious ;  then  we  must  stretch  this  thong,  but 
still  more  so  the  oue  at  the  chin,  in  order  to  prevent  the  frag- 
ments of  the  jaw  from  riding  over  each  other,  and  the  thongs 
are  to  be  fastened  at  the  vertex,  and  then  a  bandage  is  to  be 
bound  round  the  forehead,  and  a  proper  apparatus  is  to  be  put 
over  all,  to  prevent  the  bandages  from  being  displaced.  The 
patient  should  lie  upon  the  sound  side  of  the  jaw,  not  resting 
upon  the  jaw,  but  upon  the  head.  He  is  to  be  kept  on  a  spare 
diet  for  ten  days,  and  then  nourished  without  delay.  If  there 
be  no  inflammation  during  the  first  days,  the  jaw  is  consolidated 
in  twenty  days ;  for  callus  quickly  forms  in  this,  as  in  all  the 
other  porous  bones,  provided  there  be  no  sphacelus  [exfoliation?). 
But  much  remains  to  be  said  on  the  sphacelus  of  bones  in 
another  place.  This  method  of  distension  with  glued  substances 
is  mild,  of  eas}'  a})plication,  and  is  useful  for  many  dislocations 
in  many  parts  of  the  body.  Those  physicians  Avho  have  not 
judgment  combined  with  their  dexterity,  expose  themselves  in 
fractures  of  the  jaws,  as  in  other  cases,  for  they  apply  a  variety 
of  bandages  to  a  fractured  jaw-bone,  sometimes  properly,  and 
sometimes  improperly.  For  all  such  bandaging  of  a  fractured 
jaw-bone  has  a  tendency  rather  to  derange  the  bones  connected 
with  the  fracture,  than  to  bring  them  into  their  natural  position. 
31.  But  if  the  lower  jaw  be  disjointed  at  its  sj^mphysis  in 
the  chin  (there  is  but  one  symphysis  in  the  lower  jaw,  but  there 
are  several  in  the  upper ;  but  I  am  unwilling  to  digress  from 
the  subject,  as  these  matters  will  have  to  be  touched  upon  in 
other  kinds  of  disease) — if,  then,  the  S3'mphysis  be  separated  at 
the  chin,  it  is  the  work  which  anybody  can  perform,  to  rectify  it; 
for  the  part  which  protrudes  is  to  be  pushed  inwards  by  pressure 
with  the  fingers,  and  the  part  that  inclines  inwards  is  to  be  forced 
outwards  by  pushing  with  the  fingers  from  within.  It  is  after 
haviug  applied  extension  to  separate  the  fragments  that  this  is 
to  be  done,  for  they  will  thus  be  more  easily  restored  to  their 
natural  position,  than  if  one  should  bring  them  together  by  using 
force.  This  is  proper  to  be  known  as  applying  to  all  such  cases. 
A\  hen  you  have  set  the  parts,  you  must  fasten  the  teeth  on 
both  sides  to  oue  another,  as  formerlv  directed.    The  treatment 


I 


ARTICULATIONS.  597 

is  to  be  accoraplislicfl  with  cerate,  a  few  compresses,  and  hand- 
ages.  This  part,  in  particular,  requires  a  short  but  complex  (?) 
bandaging,  for  it  is  nearly  cylindrical,  though  not  exactly  so  ; 
l)ut  the  turn  of  the  bandage  is  to  be  made,  if  the  right  jaw  was 
dislocated,  to  the  right  hand  (that  is  said  to  be  to  the  right  hand 
when  the  right  hand  conducts  the  bandaging);  but  if  the  other 
jaw  be  the  seat  of  the  dislocation,  the  bandaging  is  to  be  made 
in  the  other  direction.  And  if  matters  be  properly  adjusted, 
and  the  patient  keep  quiet,  there  will  be  a  speedy  recovery,  and 
the  teeth  will  be  uninjured ;  but  if  not,  the  recovery  will  be 
more  protracted,  the  teeth  will  be  distorted,  will  give  trouble, 
and  become  useless. 

35.  Of  fractures  of  the  nose  there  are  more  than  one  variety, 
but  those  who,  without  judgment,  delight  in  fine  bandagings/ 
do  much  mischief,  most  especially  in  injuries  about  the  nose. 
For  this  is  the  most  complex  of  all  the  forms  of  bandaging, 
having  most  of  the  turns  of  the  bandage  called  '^ascia," 
and  rhomboidal  intervals  and  uncovered  spaces  of  the  skin." 
As  has  been  said,  those  who  practise  manipulation  without 
judgment  are  fond  of  meeting  with  a  case  of  fractured  nose, 
that  they  may  apply  the  bandage.  For  a  day  or  two,  then, 
the  physician  glories  in  his  performance,  and  the  patient  wdio 
has  been  bandaged  is  well  pleased,  but  speedily  the  patient 
complains  of  the  incumbrance  of  the  bandage,  and  the  physician 
is  satisfied,  because  he  has  had  an  opportunity  of  showing  his 
skill  in  applying  a  complex  bandage  to  the  nose.  Such  a 
bandaging  does  everything  the  very  reverse  of  what  is  proper  ; 
for,  in  the  first  place,  those  who  have  their  nose   flattened   by 

'  Galen  properly  remarks,  that  our  author  here  speaks  h-onically.  The  forms  of 
bandaging  here  noticed  are  briefly  described  in  the  work,  On  the  Surgery.  The  terms 
are  further  explained  in  the  Commentary  of  Galen.  I  need  scarcely  remark  that,  in 
the  account  which  our  author  gives  of  fracture  of  the  nose,  he  surpasses  all  the  me- 
dical authorities  ancient  and  modern.  He  had,  no  doubt,  ample  opportunities  of 
seeing  cases  of  injuries  of  the  nose  and  ears  in  the  persons  of  the  athletic,  who  boxed 
with  the  cestus.  But  why  this  account  of  fractures  of  the  bones  of  the  nose  is  in- 
serted here,  and  not  in  the  treatise  On  Fractures,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  explain.  Indeed 
why  the  subject-matters  of  these  two  works  are  so  mixed  up  together  has  always 
been  reckoned  a  puzzle.     See  the  Argument. 

^  On  the  meaning  of  the  terms  which  occur  in  this  passage,  the  reader  may  find 
it  advantageous  to  consult  the  note  of  Frantzius,  in  his  edition  of  Erotian,  under 


598  ARTICULATIONS. 

the  fracture,  will  clearly  liavc  tlie  part  rendered  still  more  flat, 
if  pressure  above  be  applied  to  it ;  and  further,  those  cases  in 
which  the  nose  is  distorted  to  either  side,  whether  at  the 
cartilage  or  higher  up,  will  eA'idently  derive  no  benefit  from 
bandaging  above  it,  but  will  rather  be  injured;  for  it  will  not 
admit  of  having  compresses  properly  arranged  on  either  side  of 
the  nose,  and  indeed,  persons  applying  this  bandage  do  not 
seek  to  do  this. 

36.  This  bandaging  would  appear  to  me  to  answer  best 
when  the  skin  surrounding  the  bone  is  contused  on  its  ridge 
near  the  middle,  or  if  the  bone  itself  have  sustained  some  injury, 
but  not  a  great  one,  in  such  cases,  redundant  callus  forms  in 
the  nose,  and  the  part  becomes  a  little  too  prominent ;  and  yet, 
even  in  these  cases,  the  bandaging  need  not  require  much 
trouble,  if,  indeed,  any  bandage  be  applied  at  all ;  for  it  is 
enough  if  one  lay  a  waxed  compress  on  the  contusion,  and 
then  apply  the  double-headed  bandage,  thus  taking  one  turn 
with  it.  The  best  application  to  such  accidents  is  a  small 
cataplasm  of  wheaten  flour,  washed,  and  mixed  up  into  a  viscid 
mass.  If  the  flour  be  made  from  good  wheat,  and  if  it  be 
glutinous,  it  should  be  used  alone  for  all  such  cases,  but  if  it 
be  not  very  glutinous,  a  little  of  the  manna  of  frankincense, 
well  pulverised,  is  to  be  moistened  with  water,  and  the  flour  is 
to  be  mixed  up  with  it,  or  a  very  little  gum  may  be  mixed  in 
like  manner.^ 

37.  In  those  cases  in  which  the  fractured  portions  are  de- 
pressed and  flattened,  if  it  is  depressed  in  front  at  the  cartilage, 
something  may  be  introduced  into  the  nostrils  to  rectify  the 
parts.  If  not,  all  such  deformities  may  be  restored  by  intro- 
ducing the  fingers  into  the  nostrils,  if  this  can  be  managed, 
but  if  not,  a  thick  spatula"  is  to  be  introduced  with  the  fingers, 

'  Galen  gives  an  interesiinp;  account  of  the  grain  here  recommended  as  an  ingre- 
dient in  the  paste  to  be  applied  to  a  fractured  nose,  and  of  the  mode  of  preparing  it 
here  described  by  our  author.  For  all  practical  purposes,  it  is  sufficient  to  know  that 
the  preparation  was  a  sort  of  glutinous  paste  made  of  flour,  with  the  addition  of  some 
fnie  frankincense  and  gum. 

-  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  informs  us  that  these  spatulas  were- of  all  shapes  and 
sizes,  to  suit  for  a  variely  of  purposes.  I  need  scarcely  remark  that  a  female  catlieler 
is  the  instrument  recommended  in  modern  works  for  this  purpose.  As  explained  by 
Galen,  an\  instrument  used  on  the  occasion  is  for  the  purpose  of  acting  as  a  lever  in 
raising  a  depressed  part  of  bone. 


ARTICULATIONS.  599 

not  to  the  fore  part  of  the  nose,  but  to  the  depressed  portion, 
and  the  ph^^siciau  is  to  take  hokl  of  the  nose  externally  on  both 
sides,  and  at  the  same  time  raise  it  up.  And  if  the  fracture 
be  much  in  the  fore  part  one  may  introduce  into  the  nostrils 
as  already  stated,  cither  caddis  scraped  from  a  linen  towel,  or 
something  such  wrapped  up  in  a  piece  of  cloth,  or  rather 
stitched  in  Carthaginian  leather,  and  moulded  into  a  shape 
suitable  to  the  place  into  which  it  is  to  be  introduced. 
But  if  the  fracture  be  at  a  greater  distance,  it  is  not  possible 
to  introduce  anything  within,  for  if  it  was  irksome  to  bear 
anything  of  the  kind  in  the  fore  part,  how  is  it  not  to  be  so 
when  introduced  farther  in  y^  At  first,  then,  by  rectifying  the 
parts  from  wdtliin,  and  sparing  no  pains  upon  them  from  with- 
out, they  are  to  be  brought  to  their  natural  position,  and  set. 
A  fractured  nose  may  be  readily  restored  to  shape,  especially 
on  the  day  of  the  accident,  or  even  a  little  later,  but  the 
physicians  act  irresolutely,  and  touch  it  more  delicately  at  first 
than  they  should  ;  for  the  fingers  should  be  applied  on  both 
sides  along  the  natiu-al  line  of  the  nose,  and  it  is  to  be  pushed 
downwards,  and  thus,  with  pressure  from  within,  the  displace- 
ment is  to  be  rectified.  But  for  these  purposes  no  physician 
is  equal  to  the  index-fingers  of  the  patient  himself,  if  he  Avill 
pay  attention  and  has  resolution,  for  they  are  the  most  natural 
means.  Either  of  the  fingers  is  to  be  placed  firmly  along  the 
whole  nose,  and  thus  it  is  to  be  gently  held,  and  steadily,  if 
possible,  until  it  become  firm,  but  if  not,  he  himself  is  to  hold 
it  for  as  long  a  time  as  possible,  in  the  manner  described ;  or 
if  he  cannot,  a  child  or  woman  should  do  it,  for  the  hands 
ought  to  be  soft.  Thus  may  a  fracture  of  the  nose,  attended 
with  depression,  and  not  with  displacement  to  the  side,  but  in 
a  straight  line,  be  most  properly  treated.  I  have  never  seen 
a  case  of  fractured  nose  Avhich  could  not  be  rectified  when 
attempted,  before  callus  is  formed,  provided  the  treatment  be 
properly  applied.      But  although  men  would  give  a  great  price 

'  I  may  mention  that  most  modern  authorities  disapprove  of  introducing  any  sub- 
stances into  the  nostrils  to  support  the  broken  bone,  as  fancying  that  they  are  a  source 
of  irritation,  and  that  they  are  not  required.  See  Bell's  Operative  Surgery,  vol.  ii, 
p.  222.  Chelius  admits  them  only  in  cases  in  which  the  broken  ends  are  again  dis- 
placed. (Surgery,  vol.  i,  p.  527.)  Like  our  author,  he  disapproves  of  bandages. 
On  the  caddis,  see  the  note  on  the  Mochlicus. 


(iOO  ARTICULATIONS. 

to  escape  being  deformed,  yet  at  tlie  same  time  they  do  not 
know  how  to  take  care,  nor  have  resolution,  if  they  do  not 
experience  pain,  nor  fear  death,  althongh  the  formation  of  callus 
in  the  nose  speedily  takes  place,  for  the  part  is  consolidated  in 
ten  days,  provided  sphacelus  do  not  take  place. 

38.  When  the  fractured  bone  is  displaced  laterally,  the 
treatment  is  the  same,  bnt  it  is  obvious  that  the  reduction  is 
to  be  made,  not  by  applying  equal  force  on  both  sides,  but  by 
pushing  the  displaced  portion  into  its  natural  position,  and 
pressing  on  it  from  without,  and  introducing  something  into 
the  nostrils,  and  boldly  rectifying  the  fragments  which  incline 
inwards,  until  the  whole  be  properly  adjusted,  well  knowing 
that  if  you  do  not  restore  the  parts  at  once,  it  is  impossible 
but  that  the  nose  must  be  distorted.  But  when  you  restore 
the  parts  to  their  natural  position,  either  the  patient  himself, 
or  some  other  person,  is  to  apply  one  finger  or  more  to  the 
part  which  protrudes,  and  keep  it  in  position  until  the  fractxire 
be  consolidated ;  but  the  little  finger  is,  from  time  to  time,  to 
be  pushed  into  the  nostril,  to  rectify  the  p.arts  which  incline 
iuAvards.  When  any  inflammation  supervenes,  dough  must  be 
used,  but  attention  must  still  be  equally  paid  to  the  application 
of  the  fingers,  although  the  dough  be  on  the  part.  But  if 
the  fracture  be  in  the  cartilage,  with  lateral  dispLicemeut,  the 
end  of  the  nose  must  necessarily  be  distorted.  In  such  cases 
some  of  the  aforementioned  means  of  reduction,  or  whatever 
suits,  is  to  be  introduced  into  tlie  nostril;  but  there  are  many 
convenient  things  to  be  found  which  have  no  smell,  and  are 
appropriate  in  other  respects;  thus,  on  one  occasion,  I  intro- 
duced a  slice  of  sheep's  lung,  as  it  happened  to  be  at  hand ; 
for  sponges,  if  introduced,  imbibe  humidities.  Then  the  outer 
skin  of  Carthaginian  leather  is  to  be  taken,  and  a  piece  of  the 
size  of  the  thuml),  or  what  will  answer,  is  to  be  cut  off  and 
glued  to  the  outside  of  the  nostril  which  is  turned  aside,  nnd 
then  this  piece  of  thong  is  to  be  stretched  to  the  proper  de- 
gree, or  rather  a  little  more  than  what  will  be  sufficient  to 
make  the  nose  straight  and  regular.^       Then  (for  the  thong 

'  The  use  of  the  piece  of  skia  in  bandaging  a  fractured  nose  is  adverted  to  by 
Paulus  /Egineta ;  but,  he  says,  it  was  not  mucli  approved  of  by  recent  authorities  in 
his  time.  (B.  VI,  92,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.)  See  the  authorities  there  quoted.  Celsus  de- 
scribes the  mode  of  treatment  recommended  by  Hippocrates  in  the  following  terms : — 


ARTICULATIONS.  riOl 

must  be  long)  it  is  to  be  brouglit  below  the  ear  and  round  the 
liead,  and  the  end  of  the  thong  may  either  be  glued  to  the 
forehead,  or  a  still  longer  one  mav  be  carried  -.ill  round  tlic 
head,  and  secured.  This  is  a  natural  mode  of  setting  the  nose, 
is  of  easy  application,  and  is  calculated  to  enable  the  counter- 
extension  on  the  nose  to  be  made  greater  or  less,  as  you  may 
incline.  In  a  case  where  the  fractured  nose  is  turned  to  the 
side,  the  treatment  is  to  be  conducted  otherwise,  as  already 
described ;  and  in  most  of  them  the  thong  ought  to  be  glued 
to  the  end  of  the  nose,  in  order  to  make  extension  in  the  oppo- 
site direction. 

39.  AVhen  the  fracture  is  complicated  with  a  wound,  one 
need  not  be  troubled  on  that  account,  but  pitch- cerate  or  any 
of  the  applications  for  fresh  wounds  is  to  be  applied  to  the 
sores ;  for,  in  general,  they  admit  of  easy  cure,  even  when 
there  is  reason  to  apprehend  that  pieces  of  bone  will  come  out. 
The  parts,  at  first,  are  to  l)e  adjusted  fearlessly,  taking  care 
that  nothing  is  omitted,  and,  subsequently,  they  are  also  to 
be  adjusted  with  the  fingers;  more  softly,  indeed,  but  still  it 
must  be  done ;  and  of  all  parts  of  the  body  the  nose  is  mo- 
delled with  the  greatest  ease.  And  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
us  from  having  recourse  to  the  practice  of  glueing  on  the 
thongs,  and  drawing  the  nose  to  the  opposite  side,  even  if  there 
be  a  Avound  or  the  parts  be  inflamed,  for  these  thongs  give 
no  pain. 

40.  In  fractures  of  the  ear  all  sorts  of  bandages  do  harm.' 
For  one  would  not  think  of  applying  it  quite  loose,  and  if 
applied  more  tightly,  it  only  does  the  more  harm,  for  even  the 
sound  ear,   when  confined  with  a  bandage,  becomes  painful, 

"  Extrinsecus  autem  circumdanda  habena  est  mollis,  medio  illita  mistis  inter  se  simila 
et  thuris  fuligine,  eaque  ultra  aures  ducenda,  et  fronti  duobus  capitibus  aggbitinaiida 
est.  Id  enim  corpori  quasi  gluten  inlircrescit,  et  cum  induruit,  nares  commode 
continet."  viii,  5. 

'  I  have  stated  under  a  former  head,  that  fractures  .of  the  nose  and  ears  were 
very  common  in  ancient  times,  as  the  necessary  results  of  the  boxinL^-matches  with 
the  formidable  cestus.  It  consisted  of  thongs  of  leather  studded  with  large  iron  nails, 
with  which  the  hands  of  the  boxers  were  firmly  bound.  That  the  combat  with  the 
cestus  was  a  favorite  amusement  of  the  ancients,  is  obvious  from  its  being  described 
by  their  greatest  and  most  po])ular  poets;  for  example,  by  Homer,  Apollonius  Rhodius, 
Theocritus,  Virgil,  and  Valerius  Flaccus.  Indeed  this  may  be  said  to  have  been  one 
of  the  loci  communes  of  the  ancient  poets.    That  a  blow  about  the  ears  was  reckoned 


602  ARTICULATIONS. 

tlirobs,  and  gets  into  a  febrile  state.  With  regard  to  cataplasms, 
the  heaviest,  on  the  whole,  are  the  worst ;  but  almost  all  kinds 
are  bad,  form  abscesses,  occasion  an  increase  of  humours,  and 
afterwards  troublesome  suppurations  ;  and  a  fractured  ear  stands 
in  less  need  of  such  applications  than  any  other  part ;  the 
most  ready,  if  required,  is  the  paste  of  meal,  but  neither  should 
it  have  weight.  It  should  touch  as  little  as  possible ;  for  it  is 
a  good  remedy  sometimes  to  apply  nothing  at  all,  both  to  the 
ear  and  to  many  other  cases.  Attention  must  be  paid  to  the 
patient^s  position  during  sleep.  And  the  body  must  be  reduced, 
more  especially  if  there  be  danger  lest  the  ear  suppurate  ;  it 
will  also  be  better  to  open  the  bowels,  and  if  the  patient  can 
be  readily  made  to  vomit,  this  may  be  accomplished  by  means 
of  the  syrma'ism}  If  the  part  come  to  suppuration,  it  should 
not  be  hastily  opened;  for  often  when  matter  appears  to  be 
formed  it  is  absorbed  again,  even  when  no  cataplasm  is  applied. 
But  if  forced  to  open  it,  the  part  will  get  soonest  well  if 
transfixed  with  a  cautery,  and  yet  it  should  be  well  understood 
that  the  ear  gets  maimed,  and  is  less  than  the  other  if  burned 
through.  If  not  burnt  through,  an  incision,  and  not  a  very 
small  one,  should  be  made  on  the  upper  side ;  for  the  pus  is 
found  to  be  surrounded  with  a  thicker  covering  than  one  would 
have  supposed ;  and  it  may  be  said,  in  general,  that  all  parts 
of  a  mucous  nature  and  which  form  mucus,  as  being  all  viscid, 
when  touched,  slip  from  below  the  fingers  to  either  side;  and 

a  master-stroke  is  evident  from  Theocritus's  description,  wlio  represents  Amyciis, 
when  he  a])pears  in  the  rinr/  with  Pollux,  as  being 

Afd'oc  lOtlp,  (TKXijpcilffi  TidXaaii'ivoQ  ovara  TTvyfuuQ.     (Idyll.  22.) 

And  Apollonins  Rhodius  describes  Amyous  as  having  received  the  fatal  stroke  at  last 
in  the  same  region  : 

K6j//«  fiiTaiyh)v  imip  ovarog  oarsa  o  ii(TM 
'Pil^ti'  6  0   lift'  oSinnj  yvi'^  ypiTTtV  o'l  S'  idxil(Tuv 
"EpcotQ  Mivvar  tvu  c  aOpooc  tKxvro  ^c/uof.     (Argonaut,  ii,  95.) 
Plato  makes  allusion  in  his  Gorgias  to  persons  with  fractured  ears,  from  the  spor/s 
of  the  palaestra. 

'  ]}y  syrmaisni  was  meant  the  process  of  producing  vomiting  by  loading  the  sto- 
mach with  heavy  thirigs,  such  as  honey  and  strong  hydromel,  along  with  radishes 
and  the  bulbous  roots  of  the  narcissus,  when  these  were  found  necessary.  The  sub- 
ject is  fully  discussed  in  the  Conuneutary  on  Paulus  ^'Egineta,  B,  I,  42.  One 
may  further  consult  the  editors  of  Erotian,  as  given  in  the  edition  of  his  works  by 
Frantzius,  under  cmb  avpiiataiiov.  All  their  learned  discussions,  however,  amount 
to  no  more  than  what  wc  have  civen  above  in  few  words. 


ARTICULATIONS.  G03 

on  that  account  the  physician,  in  snch  cases,  finds  tlmt  lie  lias 
to  pass  his  instrument  through  a  thicker  substance  than  he 
supposed ;  and  in  certain  ganglionic  cases,  when  the  skin  is 
flabby  and  raucous,  many  physicians  open  them,  expecting  to 
find  a  collection  in  thera ;  here  the  physician  forms  a  wrong 
judgment,  but  by  such  a  procedure  no  great  harm  results  to 
tlie  patient  from  having  had  the  part  opened.  But  with  regard 
to  watery  parts,  and  such  as  arc  filled  with  mucus,  and  which 
are  situated  in  regions  where  every  one  of  the  parts,  if  opened, 
will  occasion  death  or  some  other  injury,  these  will  be  treated 
of  in  another  work.  When,  therefore,  incision  is  made  in  the 
ear,  all  sorts  of  cataplasms  and  pledgets  should,  be  avoided,  and 
it  is  to  Ijc  treated  either  with  applications  for  recent  wounds, 
or  anything  else  which  is  neither  heavy  nor  will  occasion 
pain,  for  if  the  cartilage  be  laid  bare  and  abscesses  form,  the 
case  will  be  troublesome  -^  this  happens  from  such  modes  of 
treatment.  In  all  aggravated  cases,  the  most  effectual  remedy 
is  the  transfixing  of  the  part  with  a  hot  iron. 

41."  The  vert ebrse  of  the  spine  when  contracted  into  a  hump 
behind  from  disease,  for  the  most  part  cannot  be  remedied,  more 
especially  when  the  gibbosity  is  above  the  attachment  of  the 
diaphragm  to  the  spine.  Certain  of  those  below  the  diaphragm 
are  carried  ofl"  by  varices  in  the  legs,  more  especially  by  such 
as  occur  in  the  vein  at  the  ham ;  and  in  those  cases  where  the 
gibbosities  arc  removed,  the  varices  take  place  also  in  the  groin  ; 
and  some  have  been  carried.  oflT  by  a  dysentery  when  it  becomes 
chronic.'^      And  when  the  gibbosity  occurs  in  youth  before  the 

'  M.  Littre  certaiuly  improves  the  text  in  this  place.    See  the  Lectiones  variantes. 

'  111  addition  to  his  Commentary,  Galen  gives  many  important  remarks  on  the 
paragraph  relating  to  curvatures  of  the  spine  in  his  work,  De  Locis  Affectis  (iv,  0). 
As  he  remarks,  Hippocrates  divides  curvatures  of  the  spine  into  gibbosity  or  the 
posterior  projection,  the  anterior  projection,  and  the  lateral  curvature.  His  terms 
cyphoxis,  lordosis,  and  scoliosis,  are  adopted  by  modern  authorities,  as,  for  e.\ample, 
Chelius.  It  is  proper  to  remark  that  our  author,  however,  does  not  restrict  scoliosis 
to  lateral  curvature,  but  sometimes  applies  it  indiscriminately  to  the  others. 

•'  It  docs  not  appear  clear  what  has  led  our  author  to  consider  varices  in  the 
lower  extremities  as  being  a  natural  cure  of  curvature  of  the  spine.  Perhaps  his 
opinion  had  originated  in  observing  that  the  compression  of  the  veins  at  the  top  of 
the  thigh  had  given  rise  to  enlargement  of  the  veins  below.  Those  cases  in  which 
the  disease  is  said  to  be  carried  off  by  dysentery  were,  no  doubt,  of  a  rheumatic 
nature,  and  not  connected  with  organic  disease  of  the  vertebras.  Galen,  in  his  Com- 
mentary, refers  the  cure  to  metastasis  of  the  morbific  humours  to  the  veins,  in  the 
one  case,  and  to  the  intestinal  canal  in  the  other. 


G04  ARTICULATIONS. 

bod}^  lias  attained  its  full  f2;rowth,  in  these  cases  the  body  does 
not  nsnally  grow  along  the  spine,  but  the  legs  and  the  arms 
are  fully  developed,   whilst  the  parts  (about  the  back)   are  ar- 
rested in  their  development.      And  in  those  cases  where  the 
gibbosity   is    above   the   diaphragm,    the   ribs    do  not   usually 
expand  properly  in  width,  but  forwards,  and  the  chest  becomes 
sharp- pointed  and  not   broad,    and  they  become  affected  with 
difficulty  of  breathing  and  hoarseness ;  for  the  cavities  which 
inspire    and   expire   the   breath    do    not    attain    their    proper 
capacity.      And  they  are  under  the  necessity  of  keeping  the 
neck  bent  forwards  at  the  great  vertebra,^  in  order  that  their 
head    may   not    hang    downwards ;    this,  therefore,  occasions 
great   contraction   of  the  pharynx  by  its  inclination  inwards ; 
for,   even  in   those  who   are  erect  in  stature,    dyspnoea  is  in- 
duced by  this  bone  inclining  inwards,  until  it  be  restored  to 
its  place.      From  this  frame  of  body,  such  persons  appear  to 
have  more  prominent  necks  than  persons  in  good  health,  and 
they    generally  have   hard   and   unconcocted  tubercles  in  the 
lungs,"    for   the    gibbosity   and    the    distension    are    produced 
mostly  by  such  tubercles,  with  which  the  neighbouring  nerves 
communicate.      When   the  gibbosity  is  below  the  diaphragm, 
in  some  of  these  cases  nephritic  diseases  and.  affections  of  the 
bladder    supervene,    but   abscesses    of  a  chronic   nature,    and 
difficult  to  cure,  occur  in  the  loins  and  groins,  and  neither  of 
these  carries  off  the  gibbosity  f  and  iu  these  cases  the   hips 
are  more  emaciated  than  when  the  gibbosity  is  seated  higher 
up ;   but  the  whole  spine  is   more  elongated  iu  them  than  in 
those  Avho  have  the  gibbosity  seated  higher  up,  the  hair  of  the 
pubes  and  chin  is  of  slower  growth  and  less  developed,   and 
they  are  less   capable  of  genei'ation  than  those  who  have   the 
gibbosity  higher  up.''     When  the  gibbosity  seizes  persons  who 
have  already  attained  their  full  growth,  it  usually  occasions  a 

'  By  the  great  vertebra,  in  this  place,  our  author  appears  to  nicau  the  second,  or 
vertebra  denfata.     See  Galen's  Commentary. 

*  Galen  shrewdly  remarks,  that  when  tlie  curvature  is  high  up  in  the  spine,  the 
evacuation  of  matter  usually  takes  place  in  the  lungs. 

^  Tlie  reader  will  readily  remark  that  psoas  and  lumbar  al)sccsses  are  here  de- 
scribed. It  is  well  known  that,  as  represented  by  our  author,  these  cases  are  of  a 
very  intractable  nature. 

''  Galen  ascribes  these  symptoms  to  sympathy  with  the  spine.  This  may  naturally 
be  supposed  to  vary  according  to  the  se<it  of  the  disease  in  the  vertebral  column. 


ARTlCULAT10>Jy.  GO") 

crisis  of  the  tlicii  existing  disease,  but  in  the  course  of  time 
some  of  them  attack,  as  in  the  case  of  younger  persons,  to  a 
greater  or  less  degree ;  but,  for  the  most  i)art,  all  these  diseases 
are  less  malignant.  And  vet  many  have  borne  the  ad'cction 
well,  and  have  enjoyed  good  health  until  old  age,  more  especially 
those  persons  whose  l)ody  is  inclined  to  be  plump  and  fat;  and 
a  few  of  them  have  lived  to  beyond  sixty  years  of  age,  but  the 
most  of  them  are  more  short-lived.  lu  some  cases  the  cur- 
vature of  the  spine  is  lateral,  that  is  to  sa\^,  either  to  the  one 
side  or  the  other ;  the  most  of  such  cases  are  connected  with 
tidjercles  [abscesses?)  within  the  spine;  and  in  some,  the  po- 
sitions in  which  they  have  been  accustomed  to  lie  co-operate 
Avith  the  disease.^  But  these  will  be  treated  of  among  the 
chronic  affections  of  the  lungs ;"  for  these  the  most  suitable 
prognostics  of  what  will  hapj)cn  in  these  cases  are  given. 

42.  When  the  spiue  protrudes  backwards,  in  consequence 
of  a  fall,  it  seldom  happens  that  one  succeeds  in  straightening 
it.  Wherefore  suceussion  on  a  ladder  has  never  straightened 
anybody,  as  far  as  I  know,  but  it  is  principally  practised  by 
those  physicians  who  seek  to  astonish  the  mob — for  to  such 
peisons  these  things  appear  wonderful,  for  example,  if  they 
see  a  man  suspended  or  thrown  down,  or  the  like ;  and  they 
always  extol  such  practices,  and  never  give  themselves  any 
concern  whatever  may  result  from  the  expeiiment,  whether 
bad  or  good.  But  the  physicians  who  follow  such  practices, 
as  far  as  I  have  known  them,  are  all  stupid.  The  device, 
however,  is  an  old  one,  and  I  give  great  praise  to  him  who 
first  invented  this,  and  any  other  mechanical  contrivance  which 
is  according  to  nature.  For  neither  would  I  despair,  but  that 
if  suceussion  were  properly  gone  about,  the  spine,  in  certain 
cases,  might  be  thereby  rectified.  But,  indeed,  for  my  own 
part,  I  have  been  ashamed  to  treat  all  such  cases  in  this  way, 

'  It  is  now  well  ascertained  that  position  and  lial)it  have  much  to  do  with  the 
formation  of  lateral  curvature  of  the  spine.  See  Hare  on  Spinal  Disease  (c.  iv),  and 
Chelius  (vol.  ii,  p.  160).  Zint,  in  particular,  maintains  strongly  that  position  in  bed 
is  the  main  cause  of  lateral  curvature  of  the  spine.  Sec  British  and  Foreign  Medical 
Review,  vol.  xix,  p.  370. 

^  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  states  that  this  portion  of  the  work,  if  ever  written, 
had  not  been  preserved;  but  that  this  disease  is  treated  of  in  the  work.  On  the 
Affections,  and  in  the  work,  On  Diseases.  lie  docs  not  add  whether  he  regards  these 
as  genuine  or  not. 


GOG  ARTICULATIONS. 

because  such  modes  of  procedure  are   generally  practised   by 
cliarlatans. 

43.  Those  cases  in  which  the  gi])bosity  is  near  the  neck,  are 
less  likely  to  be  benefited  by  these  succussions  with  the  head 
downwards,  for  the  weight  of  the  head,  and  tops  of  the  shoulders, 
when  allowed  to  hang  down,  is  but  small ;  and  such  cases  are 
more  likely  to  be  made  straight  by  succussion  applied  with  the 
feet  hanging  down,  since  the  inclination  downwards  is  greater 
in  this  way.  When  the  hump  is  lower  down,  it  is  more  likely 
in  this  case  that  succussion  with  the  head  downwards  should 
do  good.  If  one,  then,  should  think  of  trying  succussion,  it 
may  be  applied  in  the  following  manner  : — The  ladder  is  to  be 
padded  with  leather  or  linen  cushions,  laid  across,  and  well  se- 
cured to  one  another,  to  a  somewhat  greater  extent,  both  in 
length  and  breadth,  than  the  space  which  the  man's  body  will 
occupy ;  he  is  then  to  be  laid  on  the  ladder  upon  his  back,  and 
the  feet,  at  the  ankles,  are  to  be  fastened,  at  no  great  distance 
from  one  another,  to  the  ladder,  with  some  firm  but  soft  band ; 
and  he  is  further  to  be  secured,  in  like  manner,  both  above  and 
below  the  knee,  and  also  at  the  nates ;  and  at  the  groins  and 
chest  loose  shaAvls  are  to  be  put  round  in  such  a  fashion  as 
not  to  interfere  with  the  efi'ect  of  the  succussion ;  and  his  arms 
are  to  be  fastened  along  his  sides  to  his  own  body,  and  not  to 
the  ladder.  When  you  have  arranged  these  matters  thus,  you 
must  hoist  up  the  ladder,  either  to  a  high  tower  or  to  the  gable- 
end  of  a  house ;  but  the  place  where  you  make  the  succussion 
should  be  firm,  and  those  who  perform  the  extension  should  be 
well  instructed,  so  that  they  may  let  go  their  hold  equally  to  the 
same  extent,  and  suddenh^,  and  that  the  ladder  may  neither 
tumble  to  the  ground  on  either  side,  nor  they  themselves  fall 
forwards.  But,  if  the  ladder  be  let  go  from  a  tower,  or  the 
mast  of  a  ship,  fastened  into  the  ground  with  its  cordage,  it 
will  be  still  better,  so  that  the  roj)es  run  upon  a  pulley  or  axle- 
tree.  But  it  is  disagreeable  even  to  enlarge  upon  these  mat- 
ters ;  and  yet,  by  the  contrivances  now  described,  the  proper 
succussion  may  be  made.^ 

'  The  description  of  succussion  upon  a  ladder,  bere  given,  is  remarkably  lucid, 
especially  when  compared  with  a  proper  drawing,  as  ffiveu  by  Vidus  Vidius  in  the 
Venice  edition  of  tlie  works  of  Galen.  A  copy  of  V.  Vidius's  drawing  is  gi\en  among 
F'latcs  at  tlic  end  of  this  vohnuo. 


ARTICULATIONS.  f,07 

44".  But  if  the  hump  be  situated  very  high  up,  and  if  succus- 
siou  be  by  all  means  to  be  used,  it  will  be  better  to  do  it  Avitii  the 
feet  downwards,  as  has  been  said,  for  the  force  downwards  will 
be  the  greater  in  this  case.  The  patient  is  to  be  well  fastened 
to  the  ladder  by  cords  at  the  breast,  at  the  neck  by  means  of  a 
very  loose  shawl  so  as  merely  to  keep  the  part  properly  on  the 
ladder,  and  the  head  is  to  be  fastened  to  the  ladder  at  the  forehead, 
the  arms  are  to  be  stretched  along  and  attached  to  the  patient^s 
body,  and  not  to  the  ladder,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  is  not  to  be 
bound,  except  so  as  to  keep  it  in  place  by  means  of  a  loose  shawl 
wrapped  round  it  and  the  ladder ;  attention,  moreover,  should 
be  paid  that  these  ligatures  do  not  interfere  with  the  force 
of  the  succussion,  and  the  legs  are  not  to  be  fastened  to  the 
ladder,  but  should  be  placed  near  one  another,  so  as  to  be  in 
line  with  the  spine.  These  matters  should  be  thus  arranged, 
if  recourse  is  to  be  had  at  all  to  succussion  on  a  ladder ;  for  it 
is  disgraceful  in  every  art,  and  more  especially  in  medicine, 
after  much  trouble,  much  display,  and  much  talk,  to  do  no 
good  after  all. 

45.  In  the  first  place,  the  structure  of  the  spine  should 
be  known,  for  this  knowledge  is  requisite  in  many  diseases.^ 
Wherefore,  on  the  side  turned  to  the  belly  {the  anterior?)  the 
vertebrae  are  in  a  regular  line,  and  are  united  together  by  a 
pulpy  and  nervous  band  of  connexion,  originating  from  the 
cartilages,  and  extending  to  the  spinal  marrow.^  There  are 
,  certain  other  nervous  cords  which  decussate,  are  attached  {to 
the  vertebra  ?),  and  are  extended  from  both  sides  of  tliem.^  But 
we  will  describe  in  another  work  the  connexions  of  the  veins 
and  arteries,  their  numbers,  their  qualities,  their  origins,  their 
functional  offices  in  particular  parts,  in  what  sort  of  sheaths 
the  spinal  marrow  is  inclosed,  where  they  arise,  where  they 

'  Galen,  in  bis  Commentary  on  this  passage,  inveighs  against  the  Empirics,  who 
claimed  Hippocrates  as  belonging  to  their  sect,  while  in  truth  he  avails  himself  on 
all  proper  occasions  of  logic,  and,  as  in  the  present  occasion,  of  anatomy,  to  the  study 
of  which  he  was  much  devoted. 

2  By  this  description  is  meant,  apparently,  the  intervertebral  substance,  which  is 
of  a  fibro-cartilaginous  nature,  and  retains  all  the  vertebrae  together. 

^  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  understands  by  "nervous  cords"  the  spinal  nerves. 
^I.  Littrc,  however,  understands  by  them  the  anterior  common  ligament  and  the 
posterior  common  ligament. 


608  ARTICULATIONS. 

terminate,  how  tliey  commuuicatej  and  wliat  their  uses.^  On 
the  opposite  side  {behind?)  the  vertebrae  are  connected  together 
by  a  giuglymoid  articulation.  Common  cords  {nerves?)  are  ex- 
tended to  all  parts,  both  those  within  and  without."  There  is 
an  osseous  process  from  the  posterior  part  of  all  and  each  of 
the  vertebras,  whether  greater  or  smaller ;  and  upon  these  pro- 
cesses there  are  cartilaginous  epiphyses,  and  from  them  arise 
nervous  productions  {lif/aments?),  akin  to  the  external  nerves 
{tovoi).''  The  ribs  are  uuited  to  them,  having  their  heads  in- 
clining rather  to  the  inside  than  the  out,  and  every  one  of  them 
is  articulated  with  the  vertebras ;  and  the  ribs  in  man  are  very 
curved,  and,  as  it  were,  arched."^  The  space  between  the  ribs 
and  the  processes  of  the  vertebra  is  filled  on  both  sides  by 
muscles,  which  arise  from  the  neck  and  extend  to  the  loins.  (?)^ 
The  spine,  longitudinally,  is  a  straight  line  slightly  curved  ;  from 
the  OS  sacrum  to  the  great  vertebra  which  is  connected  with  the 
articulation  of  the  femur,  the  spine  inclines  backward,  for  the 
bladder,  the  organs  of  generation,  and  the  loose  portion  of  the 
rectum,  are  situated  there. '^  From  this,  to  the  attachment  of  the 
diaphragm,  the  spine  inclines  inwards,  andthis  portion  alone,  from 
the  internal  parts,  gives  origin  to  muscles,  which  are  called  psoce. 

'  It  will  be  remarkeil,  from  this  i)assage,  that  our  author  had  devoted  an  especial 
work  to  anatomy.  IIo^Y  singular,  after  all  this,  that  he  should  have  been  represented 
as  beins;  both  i2;uorant  and  regardless  of  anatomical  science  1 

-  Ruti"us  Ephesius  divides  the  nerves  into  classes,  as  follows:  'Sti'pa  juu^,  ru  /ttj^ 
«— '  t-yKf'/jrtXoc  Kai  Vio-iaiou,  TrpciKTiKa  (c«i  aiffOijTtKa,  Kcii  7rpoatpiTii:d,  Kal  rcroi. 
(De  Part,  lloniin.)  He  makes  a  distinction,  then,  between  the  nerves  of  election 
{volunfari/  motion  ')  and  the  rovoi.  Galen,  however,  in  his  Commentary,  rather  in- 
clines to  the  opinion  tliat  they  are  the  same. 

^  Some  parts  of  this  description  are  obscure,  and  unfortunately  the  Commentary 
of  Galen  is  imperfect. 

■*  According  to  Galen,  the  ribs  in  man  are  more  curved  than  in  any  other  animal, 
and  next  to  man  those  of  the  monkey.  The  reading  in  the  latter  clause  of  this 
sentence  is  in  a  very  unsettled  state.     See  Galen,  Littre,  and  Foes. 

^  Galen  finds  considerable  dithculty  in  reconciling  this  description  with  the  actual 
appearances  on  dissection.  As  far  as  I  can  see,  after  weighing  the  remarks  of  Galen 
and  Littrc,  the  description  applies  to  the  muscles  of  the  back,  which  run  along  the 
spine. 

•^  Bv  the  sreat  vertebra  would  seem  to  be  meant  the  fifth  lumbar  vertebra.  See 
Galen's  Commentary,  and  Littru's  note  on  this  passage.  Mention  is  made  of  it  also 
in  the  Mochlicus.  On  other  matters  connected  with  this  sentence,  the  philological 
reader  may  find  it  intercbting  to  consult  Erotian,  under  yor//,  in  the  edition  of 
Frantzius. 


ARTICULATIONS.  009 

From  this  to  the  great  vertebra  {seventh  cervical?)  wliich  is 
a])ovc  the  tops  of  the  shoulders,  it  is  convex  behind  length- 
ways ;  but  it  is  more  in  appearance  tlian  it  really  is,  foi"  the 
spinous  processes  are  highest  in  the  middle,  and  less  so  above 
and  below. ^      The  region  of  the  neck  is  convex  before. 

■4G,  In  cases  of  displacement  backward  along  the  vertebrfe, 
it  does  not  often  happen,  in  fact,  it  is  veiy  rare,  that  one  or 
more  vertebrae  are  torn  from  one  another  and  displaced.  For 
such  injuries  do  not  readily  occur,  as  the  spine  could  not  easily 
be  displaced  backwards  but  by  a  severe  injury  on  the  fore  part 
throngli  the  bclly~  (which  would  prove  fatal),  or  if  a  person 
falling  from  a  height  should  pitch  on  the  nates,  or  shoulders 
(and  even  in  this  case  he  would  die,  but  not  immediately) ;  and 
it  also  would  not  readily  happen  that  such  a  displacement 
could  take  place  forwards,  unless  some  very  heavy  weight 
should  fall  upon  it  behind ;  for  each  of  the  posterior  spinal 
processes  is  so  constructed,  that  it  would  sooner  be  broken  than 
undergo  any  great  inclination  forwards  from  a  force  wliich 
would  have  to  overcome  the  ligaments  and  the  articulations 
mutually  connecting  them.  And  the  spinal  marrow  would 
suffer,  if  from  the  displacement  of  a  vertebra  it  were  to  be  bent 
even  to  a  small  extent ;  for  the  displaced  vertebra  would  com- 
press the  spinal  marrow,  if  it  did  not  break  it ;  and  if  com- 
pressed and  strangled,  it  would  induce  insensibility  of  many 
great  and  important  parts,  so  that  the  physician  need  not  give 
himself  any  concern  about  rectifying  the  displacement  of  the 
vertebra,  accompanied,  as  it  is,  by  many  other  ill  consequences 
of  a  serious  nature.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  such  a  case  could  not 
be  reduced  either  by  succussion  or  by  any  other  method,  unless 
one  were  to  cut  open  the  patient,  and  then,  having  introduced 
the  hand  into  one  of  the  great  cavities,  were  to  push  outwards 
from  within,  wliich  one  might  do  on  the  dead  body,  but  not 
at  all  on  the  living.'^  Wherefore,  then,  do  I  write  all  this? 
Because  certain  persons  fancy  that  they  have  cured  patients  in 

'  The  great  vertebra  above  the  tops  of  the  shoulders  can  mean  only  the  seventh 
cervical  vertebra. 

^  The  term  belly  {koiXu])  is  applied  by  our  author  both  to  the  thoracic  and  ab- 
dominal cavity.     Sec  Erotian,  in  voce  kuiXiii  ;  and  Th.  Bartholinus,  Anatom.  ii. 

^  From  the  manner  in  which  our  author  here  expresses  himself,  it  must  be  pretty 
obvious  that  he  had  no  repugnance  to  human  dissection. 

39 


6\{)  ARTICULATIONS. 

whom  the  vertchrahad  undergone  complete  dislocation  forwards. 
Some,  indeed,  suppose  that  this  is  the  easiest  of  all  these  dislo- 
cations to  be  recovered  from,  and  that  such  cases  do  not  stand 
in  need  of  reduction,  but  get  well  spontaneously.  Many  are 
ignorant,  and  profit  by  their  ignorance,  for  tlie}^  obtain  credit 
from  those  about  them.  These  are  deceived  in  this  way,  for 
they  suppose  the  spinous  processes  to  be  the  vertebras  themselves, 
because  every  one  of  them  appears  round  to  the  touch,  not 
knowing  that  these  bones  are  processes  from  the  vertebra,  as 
formerly  stated ;  Imt  the  vertebrae  are  at  a  considerable  distance 
before  them ;  for  of  all  animals,  man,  in  proportion  to  his 
])ulk,  has  the  heWy  {wternal  cavifi//)  the  narrowest  from  behind 
to  before,  especially  at  the  breast.  When,  therefore,  any  of 
these  processes  are  severely  fractured,  whether  one  or  more, 
the  part  there  appears  lower  than  on  either  side,  and  for  that 
reason  they  are  deceived,  supposing  that  the  vertebrae  are  dis- 
placed inwards.  And  the  attitudes  of  the  patient  contribute 
also  to  deceive  them ;  for  if  they  attempt  to  put  themselves  into 
a  bent  position,  they  are  pained,  from  the  skin  being  stretched 
at  the  seat  of  the  injury,  and  at  the  same  time  the  fragments 
(tf  the  bones  wound  the  skin  still  more ;  but  if  they  bend  for- 
wards, they  feel  easier,  for  the  skin  at  the  wound  is  thus  relaxed, 
and  the  bones  are  less  disposed  to  hurt  them  ;  and  if  touched, 
they  shrink  and  bend  forwards,  and  the  part  which  is  touched 
apj)ears  empty  and  soft.  All  the  circumstances  now  mentioned 
contribute  to  deceive  the  physician.  Such  patients  speedily 
get  well  without  any  bad  effects,  for  callus  readily  forms  in  all 
such  bones  as  are  porous.^ 

47.  There  are  many  varieties  of  curvature  of  the  spine  even 
in  persons  Avho  are  in  good  health  ;  for  it  takes  place  from 
natural  conformation  and  from  habit,  and  the  spine  is  liable  to 
be  bent  from  old  age,  and  from  pains.  Gibbosities  {or  pro- 
jections  backwards)  from  falls  generally  take  place  when  one 


'  It  is  singular  that  recent  authorities  are  divided  in  opinion  respecting  the  com- 
parative frequency  of  fracture  of  the  spinous  processes,  and  of  the  hody  of  tlie 
vertebra:.  Thus  Chelius,  like  Hippocrates,  holds  that  the  spinous  processes  arc 
most  subject  to  fracture;  while  his  English  editor,  Mr.  South,  maintains,  on  the 
other  haiul,  that  fracture  of  the  processes  alone  is  of  much  less  frequency  than  frac- 
ture of  the  body  of  the  vertebra.  I  have  seen  both,  but  cannot  pretend  to  decide  as 
to  their  comparative  frequency. 


ARTICULATIONS.  (ill 

pitches  on  the  nates,  or  fulls  on  the  shoulders.  In  this  case 
some  one  of  the  vcrtcbraj  must  necessarily  appear  hi<^licr  than 
natural,  and  those  on  either  side  to  a  less  degree ;  but  yet  no 
one  generally  has  started  out  of  the  line  of  the  others,  but  every 
one  has  yielded  a  little,  so  that  a  considerable  extent  of  them 
is  curved.  On  this  account  the  spinal  marrow  easily  bears  such 
distortions,  1)ecause  they  are  of  a  circular  shape,  and  not  angu- 
lar. The  apparatus  for  the  reduction  in  tliis  case  must  be 
managed  in  the  following  manner  :i  a  strong  and  broad  board, 
having  an  ol)long  fnrro^v  in  it,  is  to  be  fastened  in  the  ground, 
or,  in  place  of  the  board,  we  may  scoop  out  an  oblong  furrow  in 
tlic  wall,  about  a  cubit  above  the  floor,  or  at  any  suitable  height, 
and  then  something  like  an  oaken  bench,  of  a  quadrangular 
shape,  is  to  be  laid  along  (the  wall  ?)  at  a  distance  from  the  w'all, 
which  "will  admit  of  persons  to  pass  round  if  necessary,  and  the 
bench  is  to  be  covered  with  robes,  or  anything  else  which  is  soft, 
but  does  not  yield  much ;  and  the  patient  is  to  be  stoved  with 
vapour,  if  necessary,  or  bathed  with  much  hot  water,  and  then 
he  is  to  1)0  stretched  along  the  board  on  his  face,  with  his  arras 
laid  along  and  bound  to  his  body;  the  middle,  then,  of  a  thong 
which  is  soft,  sufficiently  broad  and  long,  and  composed  of  two 
cross  straps  of  leather,  is  to  be  twice  carried  along  the  middle 
of  the  patient's  breast,  as  near  the  armpits  as  possible,  then  w  hat 
is  over  of  the  thongs  at  the  armpits  is  to  be  carried  round  the 
shoulders,  and  afterwards  the  ends  of  the  thong  are  to  be 
fastened  to  a  piece  of  wood  resembling  a  pestle  ;  they  are  to  be 
adapted  to  the  length  of  the  bench  laid  below  the  patient,  and 
so  that  the  pestle-like  piece  of  wood  resting  against  this  bench 
may  make  extension.  Another  such  band  is  to  be  applied  above 
the  knees  and  the  ankles,  and  the  ends  of  the  thongs  fastened 
to  a  similar  piece  of  wood;  and  another  thong,  broad,  soft, 
and  strong,  in  the  form  of  a  swathe,  having  breadth  and  length 
sufficient,  is  to  be  bound  tightly  round  the  loins,  as  near  the 
hips  as  possible  ;  and  then  what  remains  of  this  swathe-like 
thong,  with  the  ends  of  the  thongs,  must  be  fastened  to  the 
piece  of  wood  placed  at  the  patient's  feet,  and  extension  in 
this  fashion  is  to  be  made  upwards  and  downwards,  equally  and 

'  Tlie  description  here  given  of  tlie  process  of  applying  extension  and  connter- 
extension  to  the  spine  is  remarkably  clear,  and  easily  understood  when  illustrated  by 
a  proper  drawing.    See  Vidus  Vidius  and  Littre;  also  Paulus  /Egineta,  B.  VI,  117. 


612  ARTICULATIONS. 

at  the  same  time,  in  a  straight  line.  For  extension  thus  made 
coukl  do  no  harm,  if  properly  performed,  unless  one  sought  to 
do  mischief  ])urposcly.  But  the  physician,  or  some  person  who 
is  strong,  and  not  uuinstructed,  should  apply  the  palm  of  one 
hand  to  the  hump,  and  then,  having  laid  the  other  hand  upon 
the  former,  he  should  make  pressure,  attending  whether  this 
force  should  be  applied  directly  downwards,  or  towards  the  head, 
or  towards  the  hips.  This  method  of  applying  force  is  particu- 
larly safe;  and  it  is  also  safe  for  a  person  to  sit  upon  the  hump 
while  extension  is  made,  and  raising  himself  up,  to  let  himself 
fill]  down  again  upon  the  patient.  And  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  a  person  from  placing  a  foot  on  the  hump,  and  support- 
ing his  weight  on  it,  and  making  gentle  pressure;  one  of  the 
men  who  is  practised  in  the  palestra  would  be  a  proper  person 
for  doing  this  in  a  suitable  manner.  But  the  most  powerful  of 
the  mechanical  means  is  this  :  if  the  hole  in  the  wall,  or  in  the 
piece  of  wood  fastened  into  the  ground,  be  made  as  much  below 
the  man's  back  as  may  be  judged  proper,  and  if  a  board,  made 
of  lime-tree,  or  any  other  Avood,  and  not  too  narrow,  be  put  into 
the  hole,  then  a  rag,  folded  several  times  or  a  small  leather 
cushion,  should  be  laid  on  the  hump ;  nothing  large,  however, 
should  be  laid  on  the  back,  Ijut  just  as  much  as  may  prevent 
the  board  from  giving  unnecessary  pain  by  its  hardness ;  but 
the  hump  should  be  as  much  as  possible  on  a  line  with  the  hole 
made  in  the  wall,  so  that  the  board  introduced  into  it  may  make 
pressure  more  especially  at  that  spot.  When  matters  are  thus 
adjusted,  one  person,  or  two  if  necessary,  must  press  down  the 
end  of  the  board,  whilst  otliers  at  the  same  time  make  exten- 
sion and  counter-extension  along  the  bod}^,  as  formerly  de- 
scribed. Extension  may  also  be  made  with  axles,  which  may 
either  be  fastened  in  the  ground  Ijeside  the  bench,  or  the  post 
of  the  axles  may  be  attached  to  the  bench  itself,  if  you  will 
make  them  perpendicvdar  and  overtopping  [the  bench?)  a  little 
at  both  ends,  or  at  either  end  of  the  bencli.  These  powers  are 
easily  regulated,  so  as  to  be  made  stronger  or  weaker,  and  they 
are  of  such  force,  that  if  one  were  to  have  recourse  to  them  for  a 
mischievous  purpose,  and  not  as  a  remedy,  they  would  operate 
strongly  in  this  Avay  also;  for  by  making  merely  extension  and 
counter-extension  longitudinallv,  without  any  additional  force, 
one  might  make  suthcient  extension ;   and  if,  without  making 


ARTICULATIONS.  (il3 

extension  at  all,  one  were  only  to  press  down  properly  with  the 
board,  sufficient  force  mij^lit  be  applied  iu  this  way.  Such 
})owers,  then,  are  excellent  which  admit  of  being  so  regidatcd, 
that  they  can  be  made  weaker  and  stronger  as  required.  And 
the  forces  are  applied  in  the  natural  way ;  for  the  pressure 
above  forces  the  displaced  parts  into  their  place.  Natural  ex- 
tension restores  parts  which  have  come  too  near  one  another  to 
their  natiiral  position.  I,  then,  am  acquainted  with  no  powers 
Mdiicli  are  better  or  more  appropriate  than  these ;  for  exten- 
sion along  the  spine  downwards  has  no  proper  hold  at  the 
bone  called  the  os  sacrum ;  and  extension  upwards,  along  the 
neck  and  head,  has  indeed  a  hold ;  but  extension  thus  made  is 
unseemly  to  behold,  and,  besides,  if  increased,  may  occasion 
much  mischief  otherwise.  I  once  made  trial  of  the  following 
plan.  Having  placed  the  patient  on  his  back,  I  put  below 
the  hump  a  bladder,  not  inflated,  and  afterwards  inti'oduced 
air  into  the  bladder  hj  means  of  a  brass  pipe  connected  with 
it.  But  the  experiment  did  not  succeed ;  for,  when  the  man 
was  fairly  extended,  the  bladder  yielded,  and  the  air  could 
not  be  forced  into  it ;  and,  besides,  the  hump  of  the  patient 
was  apt  to  slip  off  the  distended  bladder  when  they  were  pressed 
together.  But  when  I  did  not  extend  the  man  strongly,  the 
bladder  was  swelled  up  by  the  air,  and  the  man  became  more 
bent  forward  than  proper.  I  have  written  this  expressly ;  for 
it  is  a  valuable  piece  of  knowledge  to  learn,  what  things  have 
been  tried  and  have  proved  ineffectual,  and  wherefore  they  did 
not  succeed.^ 

48.  In  curvatures  forwards  of  the  vertebrae  from  a  fall,  or 
from  some  heavy  body  falling  upon  them,  in  general  no  one  of 
them  is  displaced  far  beyond  the  others,  but  if  one  or  more  be  so 
displaced,  the  case  proves  fatal ;  but,  as  formerly  stated,  the  dis- 
placement is  circular,  and  not  angular.  In  such  cases,  then, 
the  urine  and  fseces  are  more  apt  to  be  retained  than  in  dis- 
placement outwards,  the  feet  and  the  whole  inferior  extremities 
are  colder,  and  the  symptoms  are  more  fatal  than  in  the  former 

'  This  is  another  example  of  our  author's  great  candour  in  proclaiming  his  own 
mistakes  for  the  benefit  of  posterity.  It  puts  one  in  mind  of  our  Sydenham's  naive 
admission  m  his  treatise  on  Dropsy,  that  he,  on  one  occasion,  fairly  committed 
himself  l)y  adhering  too  exclusively  to  the  lUiamnus  catharticus  in  the  cure  of  that 
disease. 


614  ARTICULATIONS. 

case ;  and  if  tlicy  do  survive,  tliey  are  more  subject  to  re- 
tention of  the  urine,  and  to  loss  of  strength,  and  to  torpor  in 
their  legs.  But  if  the  displacement  be  in  the  upper  part,  they 
experience  loss  of  strength  and  torpor  of  tlie  whole  body.  I 
know  no  mechanical  contrivance  by  which  sucli  a  displacement 
could  be  reduced,  unless  that  one  might  be  benefited  by  succus- 
sion  on  a  ladder,  or  any  other  similar  plan  of  treatment,  such 
as  extension,  as  formerly  described.  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
mode  of  pressure  which  might  be  applied  along  with  the  ex- 
tension, like  that  of  the  board  in  displacement  backwards ;  for 
how  could  one  apply  pressure  from  before  through  the  belly? 
{internal  cavity  >')  The  thing  is  impossible.  But  neither  cough- 
ing nor  sneezing  has  any  power  so  as  to  cooperate  with  the 
extension,  nor  would  the  injection  of  air  into  the  bowels  have 
any  effect.  And  to  apply  large  cupping-instruments,  with  the 
view  of  drawing  back  the  vertebrte  Avhicli  have  protruded  for- 
wards, shows  a  great  error  of  judgment;  for  they  rather  propel 
than  attract,  and  those  who  apply  them  are  not  aware  even  of 
this  fact,  for  the  greater  will  be  the  inclination  forwards  the 
greater  the  instrument  applied,  the  skin  being  forcibly  drawn 
into  the  cupping-instrument.  I  could  tell  of  other  modes  of 
succussion  than  those  formerly  described,  which  one  might 
fancy  would  be  more  applicable  in  such  an  afiection ;  but  I 
have  no  great  confidence  in  them,  and  therefore  I  do  not  de- 
scribe them.  On  the  main,  it  should  be  known,  respecting  the 
accidents  which  I  have  briefly  described,  that  displacements 
forwards  are  of  a  fatal  and  injurious  nature ;  but  that  displace- 
ments backwards,  for  the  most  part,  do  not  prove  fatal,  nor 
occasion  retention  of  urine  nor  torpor  of  the  limbs,  for  they  do 
not  stretch  the  ducts  leading  towards  the  intestines,  nor  occa- 
sion obstruction  of  the  same  ;  but  displacements  forwards  pro- 
duce both  these  bad  effects,  and  many  others  in  addition.  And 
truly  they  are  more  apt  to  lose  the  power  of  their  legs  and 
arms,  to  have  torpor  of  the  body,  and  retention  of  urine,  who 
experience  no  displacement  cither  forwards  or  Ijackwards,  but 
merely  a  violent  concussion  along  the  spine,  while  those  who 
have  displacement  backwards  are  least  subject  to  these  sym- 
ptoms.^ 

'  'I'lio  suliject  oi'  diislocations  of  the  vertebra  is  still  oliscurc,  notwithstanding  the 
labouis  of  recent  authorities  in  illustration  of  it.    See  in  particular  the  surgical  works 


ARTICULATIONS.  615 

19.^  And  one  might  observe  many  other  instances  in  medi- 
cine, of  considerable  iujnries  not  proving  serious,  but  producing 
a  crisis  in  some  affection,  "while  less  considerable  injuries  prove 
more  serious,  give  rise  to  chronic  diseases,  and  extend  their 
effects  to  the  -whole  sj'stem.  Now  something  similar  may 
happen  in  fracture  of  the  ribs ;  for  in  fracture  of  one  or  more 
ribs,  in  general,  if  the  fractured  bones  are  not  driven  inwards, 
nor  are  laid  bare,  fever  rarely  supervenes,  neither  does  it  often 
happen  that  there  is  hemoptysis,  empyema,  any  suppurating 
sores,  Avliicli  require  treatment  with  pledgets,  nor  necrosis  of 
the  bones  ;  and  in  these  cases  the  ordinary  regimen  is  sufficient. 
For,  unless  they  be  seized  with  continual  fevei'^  a  strict  diet 
does  more  harm  than  good,  by  inducing  inanition,  and  increasing 
the  pain,  fever,  and  cough ;  for  moderate  fulness  of  the  intes- 
tines has  a  tendency  to  replace  the  ribs,  while  evacuation  leads 
to  suspension  of  the  ribs,  and  suspension  induces  pain.  Ordi- 
nary bandaging,  externally,  is  sufficient  in  such  cases ;  the 
bandages  should  be  applied  moderately  tight,  along  with  cerate 
and  compresses,  or  a  pad  of  wool  may  be  applied.  The  rib 
is  consolidated  in  twenty  days,  for  callus  soon  forms  in  such 
bones. 

50.  But  when  there  is  contusion  of  the  flesh  about  the  ribs, 
cither  from  a  blow,  or  a  fall,  or  a  bruise,  or  any  like  cause, 
there  is  often  copious  vomiting  of  blood,  for  there  are  canals 
stretched  along  the  vacuity  of  each  rib  [intercostal  space  ?),  and 
nerves  proceeding  from  the  most  important  parts  of  the  body 
have  their  origin  there.-  Many  of  these,  therefore,  are  troubled 
with  coughs,  tubercles,  empj'ema,  external  suppurations,  and 
sphacelus   of  the   ribs.      And    even   when   no  such   symptoms 

of  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  Sir  Charles  Bell,  and  Chelius.  It  will  be  remarked  that  our 
author  still  sticks  to  his  favorite  opinion,  that  fractures  of  bones  in  all  parts  of  the 
body  are  less  formidable  than  contusions. 

'  Our  author  now  enters  upon  the  treatment  of  injuries  of  the  chest ;  and  here  again 
tlic  professional  reader  will  be  struck  with  the  similarity  of  his  views  respecting  them  to 
those  laid  down  by  him  on  the  subject  of  injuries  of  the  head.  Thus  severe  con- 
tusions of  the  chest  are  held  to  be  more  dangerous  than  fractures  attended  with  dis- 
placement of  the  fractured  portions  of  bone. 

^  By  canals  {or  passages),  Galen  says  our  author  meant  arteries  and  veins.  These, 
he  adds,  have  their  origin  from  "  a  most  important  part,"  namely,  the  heart ;  while 
the  nerves  (jovoi)  are  derived  from  the  corresponding  part  of  the  spinal  marrow,  and 
are  further  connected  with  another  class  of  nerves  derived  from  the  brain. 


ei6  ARTICULATIONS. 

supervene  from  contusion  of  the  skin  about  the  ribs,  still  in 
such  cases  there  is,  generally,  more  continued  pain  than  in 
fractures  of  the  ribs,  and  relapses  of  pain  in  the  seat  of  the 
injury  are  more  apt  to  occur.  Wherefore  some  physicians  pay 
much  less  attention  to  such  injuries,  than  where  the  rib  is 
fractured,  whereas,  if  they  were  wise,  they  would  treat  such 
cases  with  far  greater  care  than  the  other;  for  it  is  proper  that 
the  diet  should  be  restricted,  that  the  patients  should  remain 
at  rest  as  much  as  possible,  and  abstain  from  venery,  from  fat 
articles  of  food,  from  such  as  excite  cough,  and  from  everything 
strong;  thej^  should  be  bled  in  the  arm,  speak  as  little  as 
possible,  should  have  the  contused  part  bound  round  with  folded 
compresses,  plenty  of  bandages,  broader  than  the  contusion, 
and  which  should  be  smeared  with  cerate ;  in  applying  the 
bandages,  broad  and  soft  shawls  should  be  used,  and  they  should 
be  put  on  moderately  firm,  so  that  the  patient  will  say  that 
they  are  neither  too  tight  nor  loose,  and  the  bandaging  should 
commence  at  the  seat  of  the  injury,  and  be  made  more  parti- 
cularly tight  there,  and  the  bandaging  should  be  conducted  as 
is  done  with  a  double-headed  roller,  so  that  the  skin  about  the 
ribs  may  not  be  ruffled,  but  may  lie  smooth,  and  the  bandaging 
should  be  renewed  every  day,  or  every  alternate  day.  It  is 
better  also  to  open  the  bowels  with  some  gentle  medicine,  so 
as  just  to  produce  an  evacuation  of  the  food,  and  the  diet  is  to 
be  restricted  for  ten  days,  and  then  the  body  is  to  be  recruited 
and  filled  up;  while  you  are  upon  the  reducing  system,  the 
bandaging  should  be  tighter,  but  when  you  are  making  him  up 
again,  it  must  be  looser ;  and,  if  he  spit  blood  from  the  com- 
mencement, the  treatment  and  bandaging  should  be  continued 
for  forty  days ;  but  if  there  be  no  hsemoptysis,  treatment  for 
twenty  days  Avill  generally  be  sufficient;  but  the  length  of  time 
must  be  regulated  by  the  magnitude  of  the  injury.  When 
such  contusions  are  neglected,  if  no  greater  mischief  result 
therefrom,  at  all  events  the  bruised  part  has  its  flesh  more 
pulpy  than  it  had  formerly.^  When,  therefore,  any  such  thing 
is  left  behind,  and  is  not  properly  dissipated  by  the  treatment, 

'  The  description  here  given  of  the  swellings,  both  in  the  flesh)'  and  solid  parts  of 
the  chest,  which  are  the  usual  consequences  of  a  neglected  injury,  is  so  clear  as  not 
to  require  any  (ilucidation.  The  treatment,  I  need  scarcely  add,  is  founded  on  most 
rational  principles. 


ARTICULATIONS.  617 

it  will  be  worse  if  the  mucosity  be  lodged  near  the  bone,  for 
the  flesh  no  longer  adheres  to  the  bone  as  formerly,  the  bone 
becomes  diseased,  and  chronic  sloughings  of  the  bone  in  many 
cases  arise  from  such  causes.  But  if  the  mischief  be  not  upon 
the  bone,  but  it  is  the  flesh  itself  which  is  pulpy,  relapses  and 
pains  will  return  from  time  to  time,  if  there  happen  to  be  any 
disorder  in  the  body  ;  wherefore  proper  bandaging,  and  for  a 
considerable  time,  must  be  had  recourse  to,  until  the  extra- 
vasated  blood  forming  in  the  bruise  be  dried  up  and  absorbed, 
and  the  part  be  made  up  with  sound  flesh,  and  the  flesh  adhere 
to  the  bone.  The  best  cure  is  the  cautery  in  those  cases 
Avhich,  from  neglect,  have  become  chronic,  and  the  place  turns 
painful,  and  the  flesh  is  pulp^^  And  when  the  flesh  itself  is 
pulpy,  the  burning  should  be  carried  as  far  as  the  bone,  but 
the  bone  itself  should  not  be  heated ;  ])ut  if  it  be  in  the  inter- 
costal space,  you  need  not  make  the  burning  so  superficial,  only 
you  must  take  care  not  to  burn  quite  through.  But  if  the 
contusion  appear  to  b^  at  the  bone,  if  it  be  still  recent,  and 
the  bone  has  not  vet  become  necrosed,  if  it  be  very  small,  it  is 
to  be  burnt  as  has  been  described;  but  if  the  rising  along 
the  bone  be  oblong,  several  eschars  are  to  be  burnt  over  it. 
Necrosis  of  the  rib  will  be  described  along  with  the  treatment 
of  suppurating  sores. 

51.  There  are  four  modes  of  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint  :  of 
which  modes,  dislocation  inwards  takes  place  most  frequently, 
outwards,  the  most  frequently  of  all  the  other  modes  ■}  and  it 
sometimes  takes  place  backwards  and  forwards,  but  seldom. 
A\  lien,  therefore,  dislocation  takes  place  inwtirds,  the  leg  appears 
longer  than  natural,  when  compared  with  the  other  leg,  for  two 
reasons  truly ;  for  the  bone  which  articulates  with  the  hip-joint 

'  It  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  states  that  dislocation  inwards  is  more  fre- 
quent than  any  of  the  other  modes  of  displacement,  in  which  statement  he  is  sujj- 
ported  by  Celsus,  Paulus  ^Egineta,  and  most  of  the  ancient  authorities.  This  is  at 
variance  with  the  experience  of  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  who  found  dislocation  tijncards, 
that  is  to  say,  upon  the  dorsum  of  the  ilium,  the  most  frequent  of  all.  And  here  I 
must  take  an  opportunity  of  correcting  a  mistake  into  which  I  perceive  that  I  have 
fallen,  in  my  Commentary  on  Paulus  ^-Egineta,  B.  YI,  118,  where,  thi'ough  an  over- 
sight, I  represent  Hippocrates  as  holding  that  dislocation  outwards  is  the  most  com- 
mon of  all.  His  language  is  so  laconic,  that  I  might  be  excused  for  having  committed 
this  mistake ;  but  if  I  had  read  the  commentaries  of  Galen  and  Apollonius  carefully 
at  the  time,  1  should  have  seen  my  error.  Veram  opere  in  lomjo  fas  est  ohrepere 
somnum  ! 


618  ARTICULATIONS. 

is  carried  from  above  down  to  the  ischium  where  it  rises  uj) 
to  the  pubes,  upon  itj  then,  the  head  of  the  femur  rests,  and 
the  ueck  of  the  femur  is  lodged  in  the  cotyloid  foramen 
[foramen  thyroideum  .^)}  The  buttock  appears  hollow  externally, 
from  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  having  shifted  inwards,  and 
the  extremity  of  the  femur  at  the  knee  is  turned  outwards, 
and  the  leg  and  foot  in  like  manner.  The  foot  then  being 
turned  outwards,  physicians,  from  ignorance,  bring  the  sound 
leg  to  it,  and  not  it  to  the  sound  leg ;  on  this  account,  the 
injured  limb  appears  to  be  much  longer  than  the  sound  one, 
and  in  many  other  cases  similar  circumstances  lead  to  error  in 
judgment.  Neither  does  the  limb  at  the  groin  admit  of  flexion 
as  in  the  sound  limb,  and  the  head  of  the  bone  is  felt  at  the 
perineum  too  prominent.  These,  then,  are  the  symptoms  at- 
tending dislocation  of  the  thigh  inwards. 

52.  When,  then,  a  dislocation  has  not  been  reduced,  but 
has  been  misunderstood  or  neglected,  the  leg,  in  walking,  is 
rolled  about  as  is  the  case  with  oxen,  anct  the  weight  of  the  body 
is  mostly  supported  on  the  sound  leg,^  and  the  liml)  at  the  flank, 
and  the  joint  where  the  dislocation  has  occurred  is  necessarily 
hollow  and  bent,  w  hile  on  the  soimd  side  the  buttock  is  neces- 
sarily rounded.'^      For  if  one  should  walk  with  the  foot  of  the 

'  Galen  admits  that,  at  first  sight,  thei'e  is  a  slight  obscurity  in  this  description  ; 
but  he  maintains  that  if  any  one  will  read  the  passage  two  or  three  times,  he  will  not 
fail  to  apprehend  the  meaning.  The  two  reasons  for  the  lengthening  of  the  limb  re- 
solve themselves  veiy  much  into  one,  namely,  that  the  head  of  the  femur  descends 
from  a  higher  situation,  and  is  lodged  below  on  a  bone.  Perhaps,  however,  it  may 
be  held  rather  arbitrary  to  apply  the  term  KorvXt]  to  the  thyroid  foramen.  1  know 
not,  however,  how  to  make  sense  of  the  passage  otherwise,  unless  by  a  conjectural 
emendation.  If  instead  of  Itti  rnc  Kor(''X»/f  we  were  permitted  to  read  <f7ro,  the 
meaning  would  obviously  be,  that  "the  neck  of  the  femur  is  carried  downward  _/)-om 
the  acetabulum."  The  interpretation  which  M.  Littrc  gives  does  not  at  all  satisfy  me. 
It  is  as  follows  :  "6  du\>}p  tTrl  ttiq  kotvXijq  oxtsrai,  c*est-k-dire,  quelecol  estappuye 
bur  le  rebord  de  la  cavite  cotyloide,  est  retenu  par  ce  rebord,  et  de  la  sorte  maintient 
la  tcte  dans  la  nouvelle  position  et  I'empeche  de  remonter."  But  this  interpretation 
does  not  appear  to  me  consistent  with  the  facts  of  the  case ;  for  the  head  of  the  femur 
is  not  fixed  at  the  border  of  the  acetabulum,  nor,  if  it  were,  could  the  lengthening  of 
the  limb  be  thereby  accounted  for. 

-  I  can  state,  from  familiar  acquaintance  with  a  case  of  unreduced  dislocation  on 
the  thyroid  foramen,  that  this  is  a  most  correct  description  of  the  appearances  which 
it  presents.  The  increased  length  of  the  limb  and  the  inflexibility  of  the  hmb  at 
the  groin  are  the  strongly  marked  symptoms. 

^  The  meaning  here  is  somewhat  obscure,  but  I  take  it  to  be  this :    that  in  the 


ARTICULATIONS.  HI  9 

sound  leg  turned  outwards,  the  weight  of  the  body  would  be 
thrown  upon  the  injured  limb,  but  the  injured  limb  could  not 
carry  it,  for  hoAV  could  it?  One,  then,  is  forced  in  walking 
to  turn  the  leg  inwards,  and  not  outwards,  for  thus  the  sound 
leg  best  supports  its  own  half  of  the  body,  and  also  that  of  the 
injured  side.  But  being  hollow  at  the  flank  and  the  hip-joint, 
they  appear  small  in  stature,  and  are  forced  to  rest  on  a  staft" 
at  the  side  of  the  sound  leg.  For  they  require  the  support  of 
a  staff  there,  since  the  nates  inclines  to  this  side,  and  the  weight 
of  the  body  is  carried  to  it.  They  are  forced  also  to  stoop, 
for  they  are  obliged  to  rest  the  hand  on  the  side  of  the  thigh 
against  the  aftected  limb  ;  for  the  limb  which  is  injured  cannot 
support  the  body  in  changing  the  legs,  unless  it  be  held  Avlien  it  is 
applied  to  the  ground.  They  who  have  got  an  unreduced  dislo- 
cation inwards  are  forced  to  put  themselves  into  these  attitudes, 
and  this  from  no  premeditation  on  their  part  how  they  should 
assume  the  easiest  position,  but  the  impediment  itself  teaches 
them  to  choose  that  which  is  most  conformable  to  their  present 
circumstances.  For  persons  who  have  a  sore  on  the  foot  or  leg, 
and  cannot  rest  upon  the  limb,  all,  even  children,  walk  in  this 
way ;  for  they  turn  the  injured  limb  outwards  in  walking,  and 
they  derive  two  advantages  therefrom,  to  supply  two  wants  ; 
the  weight  of  the  body  is  not  equally  thrown  upon  the  limb 
turned  outwards,  as  upon  the  one  turned  inwards,  for  neither  is 
the  weight  in  a  line  with  it,  but  is  much  more  thrown  upon  the 
one  under  the  body ;  for  the  Aveight  is  in  a  straight  line  with 
it,  both  in  walking  and  in  the  shifting  of  the  legs.  In  this 
position  one  can  most  quickly  turn  the  sound  limb  under  the 
body,  by  walking  with  the  unsound  limb  outwards,  and  the 
sound  inwards.  In  the  case  we  are  now  treating  of,  it  is  well 
that  the  body  finds  out  the  attitudes  which  are  the  easiest  for 
itself.  Those  persons,  then,  who  have  not  attained  their  growth 
at  the  time  when  they  met  with  a  dislocation  which  is  not 
reduced,  become  maimed  in  the  thigh,  the  leg,  and  the 
foot,  for  neither  do  the  bones  grow  properly,  but  become 
shortened,  and  especially  the  bone  of  the  thigh ;  and  the  whole 

lumbar  region,  and  the  region  of  the  hip-joint,  the  parts  are  atrophied  from  want  of 
the  usual  exercise  (agreeably  to  a  law  wliich  Hippocrates  has  frequently  inculcated) ; 
whereas  the  same  parts  on  the  opposite  side  are  unusually  plump,  as  being  subjected 
to  e.vtra  work.     Hippocrates  frequently  bt.ttes  this  as  a  law  in  the  animal  economy. 


G20  ARTICULATIONS. 

limb  is  eraaciatedj  loses  its  muscularity,  and  becomes  enervated 
and  thinner,  botli  from  the  impediment  at  the  joint,  and  because 
the  patient  cannot  use  the  limb,  as  it  does  not  lie  in  its  natural 
position,  for  a  certain  amount  of  exercise  will  relieve  excessive 
enervation,  and  it  will  remedy  in  so  far  the  deficiency  of  growth 
in  length.  Those  persons,  then,  are  most  maimed  who  have 
experienced  the  dislocation  iw  utero,  next  those  who  have  met 
with  it  in  infancy,  and  least  of  all,  those  Avho  are  full  grown. ^ 
The  mode  of  walking  adopted  by  adidts  has  been  already  de- 
scribed ;  but  those  who  are  children  when  this  accident  befalls 
them,  generally  lose  the  erect  position  of  the  body,  and  crawl 
about  miserably  on  the  sound  leg,  supporting  themselves  with 
tlie  hand  of  the  sound  side  resting  on  the  ground.  Some, 
also,  who  had  attained  manhood  before  they  met  with  this 
accident,  have  also  lost  the  faculty  of  walking  erect.  Those 
who  Avere  children  when  thev  met  with  the  accident,  and  have 
been  properly  instructed,  stand  erect  upon  the  sound  leg,  but 
carry  about  a  staff,  which  they  apply  under  the  armpit  of  the 
sound  side,  and  some  use  a  staff  in  both  arms ;  the  unsound 
limb  thej'  bear  up,  and  the  smaller  the  unsound  liml),  the  greater 
facility  have  they  in  walking,  and  their  sound  leg  is  no  less 
strong  than  when  both  are  sound.  The  fleshy  parts  of  the 
limb  are  enervated  in  all  such  cases,  but  those  who  have  dis- 
location inwards  are  more  subject  to  this  loss  of  strength 
than,  for  the  most  part,  those  w^ho  have  it  outwards. 

53.  Some  tell  a  story  how  the  Amazonian  women  dislo- 
cate the  joints  of  their  male  children  while  mere  infants, 
som-c   at  the  knee,  and  others  at  the  hip-joint,  that  they  may 

'  I  cannot  refrain  from  calling  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fiihiess  and  com- 
pleteness of  our  author's  description  in  this  place.  Where  else  shall  we  find  so  much 
interesting  and  important  information  on  this  suhject  ?  Sir  Astley  Cooper  was  fond 
cf  exalting  his  discoveries  in  practical  surgery  hy  representing  the  profession  as 
havirig  been  totally  ignorant  of  dislocations  at  the  hip-joint  before  his  time  ;  hut  it 
may  l)c  much  douhfed  if  even  he  was  so  well  acquainted  Mitli  tlie  suhject  in  all  its 
bearings  as  Hippocrates  in  this  place  shows  himself  to  liave  l)ecn.  A  good  deal  of 
interesting  information  on  the  suhject  of  congenital  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint  has 
b>een  collected,  however,  since  the  death  of  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  more  especially  by 
Dupuytren,  R.  Smith,  and  Chelius.  The  first  of  these  has  given  a  very  circumstantial 
("icscnption  of  the  appearances  which  the  limbs  present  in  a  case  of  congenital  dislo- 
caiiou.  See  his  work,  On  Injuries  of  the  Bones,  lately  reprinted  by  the  Sydenham 
Society. 


ARTICULATIONS.  621 

])C  raaimedj  and  that  the  male  sex  may  not  conspire  against 
the  female,  and  that  they  use  them  as  artisans  to  perform  any 
sedentary  work,  such  as  that  of  a  shoemaker  or  brazier.^ 
AVhether  these  things  he  true  or  not  I  do  not  know,  hut  this 
I  know,  that  matters  would  be  such  as  is  represented,  provided 
their  childicn,  while  infants,  were  to  have  their  joints  dislo- 
cated. The  consequences  of  dislocation  inwards  at  the  hip- 
joint  are  mucli  greater  than  of  dislocation  outwards  at  the 
hip-joint,  but  at  the  knee,  although  there  be  some  difference, 
it  is  less ;  but  the  mode  of  either  impediment  is  peculiar,  their 
legs  are  more  bandied  when  the  dislocation  is  outwards,  but 
those  who  have  dislocation  inwards  stand  erect  on  their  feet 
with  less  freedom.  In  like  manner,  when  the  dislocation  is 
at  the  ankle-joint,  if  outwards  they  become  vari  [theii'  toes 
are  turned  inwards  ?),  but  they  can  stand ;  but  if  the  dislocation 
be  inwards  they  become  valgi  [their  toes  are  turned  outwards  /), 
but  they  have  less  freedom  of  standing.  The  proportional 
growth  of  their  bones  is  as  follows  :  in  those  cases  in  vrhich 
the  bone  of  the  leg  is  dislocated,  the  bones  of  the  feet  grow 
very  little,  as  being  very  near  the  injury,  but  the  bones  of  the 
leg  increase  in  size,  and  with  very  little  defect,  but  the  fleshy 
parts  {muscles  /)  are  wasted..  But  when  the  ankle-joint  is  in 
its  natural  state,  but  the  knee  is  dislocated,  in  these  cases  the 
bones  of  the  leg  do  not  grow'  in  like  manner,  but  become 
shortened,  as  being  nearest  the  seat  of  the  injury,  and  the 
bones  of  the  feet  also  are  atrophied,  but  not  in  the  same  propor- 
tion ;  because,  as  Avas  said  a  little  while  ago,  the  ankle-joint  is 
safe,  and  if  they  could  use  it,  as  in  the  case  of  club-foot,  the 
bones  of  the  foot  would  be  still  less  atrophied.  Wlien  the 
dislocation  takes  place  at  the  hip-joint,  the  bone  of  the  thigh,  in 
tliis  case,  does  not  generally  grow  in  like  manner,  as  being  the 
one  nearest  the  seat  of  the  injury,  but  becomes  shorter  than  the 
sound  one ;  but  the  growth  of  the  bones  of  the  leg  is  not 
arrested   in  like  manner ;   nor  of  those  of  the  feet,   for  this 


'  The  myth  of  the  Amazons  is  fully  treated  of  in  the  Argument  to  the  treatise  Gn 
Airs,  &c.  In  tliis  place  it  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  declines  giving  an  opinion 
whetlier  he  regarded  the  vulgar  heUef  as  being  v^ell  founded  or  not.  There  seems 
no  good  reason,  then,  for  holding,  with  Gruner,  that  the  views  maintained  regarding 
this  myth  in  these  two  treatises  are  totally  different,  and  indicate  a  distinct  author- 
ship. 


G22  ARTICULATIONS. 

reason,  that  there  is  no  displacement  between  the  bones  of  the 
thigh  and  leg,  nor  between  those  of  the  leg  and  foot ;   in  those 
cases,  however,  the  fleshy  parts  of  the  whole  limb  are  atrophied  ; 
but  if  they  could  make  use  of  the  limb,    the   growth  of  the 
bones  would  be   still  more  developed,  as  formerly  stated,  only 
the  thigh,  although  its  flesh  would  be  much  less  wasted,  would 
still  be  by  no  means  so  fleshy  as  the  sound  limb.      The  follow  ing 
observations  are  a  proof  of  this  :  those  persons  who  are  weasel- 
armed    {(jaliancones)  from  birth,   owing  to  dislocation   of  the 
humerus,   or  when  the  accident  has  happened  to  them  before 
they  have  attained  their  full   growth,  such  persons   have   the 
boric  of  the  arm  shortened,  but  those  of  the  fore-arm  and  hand 
are  little  inferior  in  size  to  the  sound,   for  the  reasons  which 
have  been  stated,  because  the  humerus  is  the  bone  nearest  to 
the  joint   affected,   and,  on   that  account,  it   is   shorter  than 
natural ;  but  the  fore-arm  is  not  equally  affected  by  the  accident, 
because  the  joint  at  which  the  bones  of  the  arm  and  fore-arm 
are  articulated  remains  in  its  natural  condition,   and  the  hand 
is  still  further  distant  than  the  fore-arm  from  the  seat  of  the 
injury.       Such  are   the  reasons  why  certain  of  the  bones  in 
this  case  increase  in  growth,  and  certain  do  not.      The  laborious 
ofKce  of  the  hand  contributes  much  to  the  development  of  the 
flesh  in  the  fore-arm  and  hand,  for  whatever  work  is  done  by 
the   hand,   these   weasel-armed   persons   strive   to   do   no    less 
eflcctually  with  the  other  hand  than  with  the  sound ;  for  the 
arms  do  not  support  the  weight  of  the  body  like  the  legs,  and 
the  w^ork  performed  by  them  is  light.      From  exercise,   then, 
the  fleshy  parts  on  the  hand  and  fore-arm  are  not  atrophied  in 
weasel-armed  persons,  and  by  these  means  the  arm,  too,  gains 
flesh.      But  in  dislocation  inwards  at  the  hip-joint,   whether 
from  birth  or  from  childhood,  the  fleshy  parts,  on  that  account, 
are  much  more  atrophied  than  those  of  the  hand,  because  the 
patients  cannot  exercise  the  leg.      Another  proof  will  be  given 
in  the  observations  which  will  be  presently  stated,  that  these 
things  are  such  as  I  have  represented.^ 

5  i.  Wlien  the  head  of  the  femur  is  dislocated  outwards,  the 
limb  in  these  cases,  when  compared  with  the  other,  appears 
shortened,  and  this  is  natural,  for  the  head  of  the  femur  no 
longer  rests  on  a  bone  as  in  dislocation  inwards,  but  along  the 

'  See  §  55. 


ARTICULATIONS.  G23 

side  of  a  bone  which  naturally  inclines  to  the  side,  and  it  is  lodged 
in  flesh  of  a  pulp}'  and  yielding  nature^  and  on  that  account  it 
appears  more  shortened.  Inwardly,  the  thigh  about  the  peri- 
neum appears  more  hollow  and  flabl)y,  but  externally  the 
buttock  is  more  rounded,  from  the  head  of  the  thigh  having 
slipped  outwards,  but  the  nates  appear  to  be  raised  up,  owing 
to  the  flesh  there  having  yielded  to  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone; 
but  the  extremity  of  the  thigh-bone,  at  the  knee,  appears  to  be 
turned  inwards,  and  the  leg  and  foot  in  like  manner,  neither 
does  it  admit  of  flexion  like  the  sound  limb.  These,  then,  are 
the  symptoms  of  dislocation  outwards.^ 

55.  When  such  a  dislocation  is  not  reduced  in  adults,  the 
whole  liml)  appears  to  be  shortened,  and  in  walking  they  cannot 
reach  the  ground  with  the  heel,  but  they  walk  with  the  ball  of 
the  foot  on  the  ground,  and  the  points  of  their  toes  incline  a 
little  inwards.  But  the  injured  limb,  in  this  ease,  can  support 
the  body  much  better  than  in  dislocation  inwards,  both  because 
the  head  of  the  femur  and  the  neck  of  its  articular  extremity, 
being  naturally  oblique,  have  formed  a  bed  under  a  considerable 
portion  of  the  hip,  and  because  the  extremity  of  the  foot  is  not 
forcibly  turned  outwards,  but  is  nearly  in  a  line  with  the  body, 
and  is  even  inclined  more  inwardly.  When,  then,  the  articular 
extremity  of  the  femur  has  worn  out  a  socket  for  itself  in  the 
flesh  where  it  was  lodged,  and  the  flesh  is  lubricated,  it  ceases 
to  be  painful  in  the  course  of  time,  and  when  it  becomes  free 
from  pain,  they  can  walk  without  a  staff",  if  so  inclined,  and 
they  can  support  the  body  on  the  injured  limb.  From  usage 
then,  in  such  cases,  the  fleshy  parts  are  less  enervated  than  in 
those  which  have  been  mentioned  a  little  before,  still,  however, 
they  lose  their  strength  more  or  less ;  but  in  general  there  is 
more  enervation  when  the  dislocation  is  inwards  than  when  it 
is  outwards.  Some  of  them,  then,  cannot  wear  their  shoes, 
owing  to  the  unbending  state  of  their  leg,  and  some  of  them 
can.  But  when  this  dislocation  takes  place  in  utero,  and  when 
the  dislocation  having  occurred  at  any  time  before  manhood, 

'  The  symptoms  in  this  case  are  reported  with  a  remarkable  degree  of  accuracy. 
Celsus  gives  a  very  elegant  version  of  this  passage :  "  Si  in  exteriorem,  brevius, 
varumque  fit,  et  pes  intus  inclinatur ;  calx  ingressu  terram  non  contingit,  sed  planta 
ima ;  meliiisque  id  cms  superius  corpus,  quam  in  priore  casu,  fert,  minusque  baculo 
eget."  (viii,  20.) 


624  ARTICULATIONS. 

from  violence,  has  not  been  replaced,  or  when  from  disease  the 
articular  extremity  has  started  from  its  socket,  and  is  displaced 
(for  many  such  cases  occur,  and  from  some  of  them,  if  the 
femur  become  necrosed,  obstinate  suppurations  requiring  the 
use  of  tents  are  formed,  and  in  certain  of  them  the  bone  is  laid 
bare),  whether  the  bone  become  necrosed  or  not,  the  bone  of 
the  thigh  is  much  shortened,  and  does  not  usually  grow  like 
the  sound  one,  the  bones,  too,  of  the  leg,  become  shorter 
than  those  of  the  other,  but  in  a  small  degree,  for  the  same 
reasons  that  were  formerly  stated;  such  persons  can  walk,  some 
of  them  in  the  same  fashion  as  adults  having  an  unreduced 
dislocation,  and  some  of  them  walk  with  the  whole  foot  on  the 
ground,  but  limp  in  walking,  being  obliged  to  do  so  by  the 
shortness  of  the  limb.  Such  is  the  result,  even  though  they  be 
carefully  and  properly  trained  in  the  attitudes  before  they  have 
strength  for  walking,  and  in  like  manner  also,  after  they  have 
acquired  the  necessary  strength ;  but  those  persons  require  the 
most  care  who  were  very  young  when  they  met  with  the  accident, 
for,  if  neglected  Avhile  children,  the  limb  becomes  entirely  useless 
and  atrophied.  The  fleshy  parts  of  the  entire  limb  are  more 
wasted  than  those  of  the  sound  limb,  but  this  is  much  less  apt 
to  happen  in  their  case  than  in  dislocations  inwards,  owing  to 
usage  and  exercise,  as  they  are  speedily  able  to  make  use  of 
the  limb,  as  was  stated  a  little  before  with  regard  to  the  weasel- 
armed  {(/aliancones) } 

56.  There  are  persons  who,  from  birth  or  from  disease,  have 
dislocations  outwards  of  both  the  thighs ;  in  them,  then,  the 
bones  are  aft'ected  in  like  manner,  but  the  fleshy  parts  in  their 
case  lose  their  strength  less  ;  the  legs,  too,  are  plump  and  fleshy, 
except  that  there  is  some  little  deficiency  at  the  inside,  and 

'  I  would  merely  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  this  admirable  account  of  the 
consequences  resulting  from  an  unreduced  dislocation  of  the  thigh  baclvwards.  Con- 
genital dislocation,  dislocation  from  disease,  and  dislocation  from  violence,  all  these 
modes  are  described,  and  their  after-consequences  most  faithfully  recorded.  I  may 
add,  that  none  of  the  ancient  commentators  or  authorities  supply  any  additional  in- 
formation on  this  interesting  subject.  Indeed,  after  the  lapse  of  twenty-four  centuries, 
there  is  little  to  add  to  the  observations  of  the  Coan  sage.  The  labours  of  Heine  and 
Guerin  have  supplied,  it  is  true,  some  new  facts  respecting  the  nature  of  congenital 
dislocation  at  the  hip-joint ;  but,  upon  the  whole,  no  one  author  of  the  present  day, 
as  far  as  I  am  aware,  has  given  so  complete  a  history  of  the  displacements  at  the 
hip-joint  as  Hippocrates. 


ARTICULATIONS.  C25 

they  are  plump  because  they  have  the  equal  use  of  both  their 
legs,  for  in  walking  they  totter  equally  to  this  side  and  that.^ 
Their  nates  appear  very  prominent,  from  the  displacement  of 
the  hones  of  the  joint.  But  if  in  their  case  the  bones  do  not 
sphacelate  [become  carious?)"  and  if  they  do  not  become  bent 
above  the  hip-joint,  if  nothing  of  this  kind  happen  to  them, 
they  become  otherwise  sufficiently  healthy,  but  the  growth  of 
all  the  rest  of  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  head,  is 
arrested.^ 

57.  In  dislocations  of  the  head  of  the  femur  backwards, 
which  rarely  occur,  the  patient  cannot  extend  the  leg,  either 
at  the  dislocated  joint,  or  at  the  ham,  to  any  extent,  and  of 
all  the  dislocations,  this  is  the  variety  in  which  the  patients 
have  the  least  power  of  making  extension  at  the  groin  and  the 
ham.  But,  moreover,  this  also  should  be  known  (for  it  is  a 
valuable  piece  of  knowledge,  and  of  much  importance,  and  yet 
most  people  are  ignorant  of  it),  that  persons  in  health  cannot 
extend  the  joint  at  the  ham,  if  they  do  not  extend  the  joint  at 
the  groin  at  the  same  time,  unless  they  raise  the  foot  very  high, 
for  in  this  way  they  could  do  it ;  neither  also  could  they  bend 
the  joint  at  the  ham,  but  with  much  greater  difficulty,  if  they 
do  not  bend  the  joint  at  the  groin  at  the  same  time.  There 
are  many  other  things  in  the  body  which  have  similar  con- 
nexions, both  with  regard  to  the  contractions  of  nerves  {lifja- 
ments  ?),  and  the  positions  of  muscles,  and  many  of  them  more 
"worthy  of  being  known  than  is  generally  supposed,  and  with 
regard  to  the  nature  of  the  intestine  and  that  of  the  whole 
internal  cavity,  and  with  regard  to  the  displacements  and  con- 
tractions of  the  uterus ;  but  all  these  things  will  be  treated  of 

'  It  is  now  well  ascertained,  that  in  a  case  of  dislocation  on  both  sides,  the  walking 
in  the  course  of  time  improves  very  much.     See  Chelius,  vol.  i,  p.  804. 

2  It  will  of  course  be  readily  understood,  that  our  author  here  alludes  to  morbus 
coJcariuH  in  infancy  and  early  life.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  refers  the  disease  to 
inflammation  of  the  ligaments  of  the  joint,  and  mentions  that  the  disease  occurs  also 
at  other  joints,  such  as  the  elbow,  knee,  and  fingers,  and  is  followed  by  ancylosis  iii 
these  parts. 

'  The  atrophy  of  all  the  rest  of  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  head,  is  ascribed 
by  Galen  to  sympathy  of  the  spinal  column  with  the  inflammation  at  the  hip-joint. 
He  strongly  calls  attention  to  the  remark,  that  when  the  spine  is  in  anywise  affected, 
the  whole  of  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  head,  is  less  developed  than  it 
naturallv  is. 

40 


026  ARTICULATIONS. 

elsewhere^  in  a  work  akin  to  the  present  one.  Bnt  with  regard 
to  the  matter  on  hand,  they  cannot  make  extension,  as  has 
been  ah^eady  stated ;  and  the  limb  appeal's  shortened,  for  two 
reasons — first,  becanse  it  cannot  be  extended,  and  also  because 
the  bone  has  slipped  into  the  flesh  of  the  nates  ;  for  the  head 
and  neck  of  the  femur,  in  this  dislocation,  are  carried  down- 
wards from  their  natural  situation,  to  the  outside  of  the  nates. ^ 
But  yet  they  can  bend  the  limb,  unless  prevented  by  pain,  and 
the  leg  and  foot  appear  pretty  straight,  and  not  much  inclined 
towards  either  side,  but  at  the  groin  the  flesh,  when  felt,  appears 
looser,  from  the  bone  of  the  joint  having  slijiped  to  the  other 
side,  but  at  the  nates  the  head  of  the  femur  may  be  felt  to 
be  more  prominent  than  natural.  Such  are  the  symptoms 
accompanying  dislocation  of  the  thigh  backwards." 

'  Notwithstanding  tlie  elaboi'ate  Commentary  of  Galen,  tliere  is  some  obscurity  in 
this  description.  The  natural  meaning  I  take  to  be  as  expressed  in  the  text.  See  the 
following  note. 

*  Tliis  mode  of  dislocation  is  so  rarely  met  with,  that  I  am  happy  to  have  it  in  my 
power  to  give  a  satisfactory  description  of  it,  upon  the  authority  of  an  eminent  anato- 
mist in  London.  See  History  of  a  Case  of  Dislocation  of  Head  of  the  Femur  back- 
wards; with  some  Observations  on  that  Form  of  Dislocation.  By  Richard  Quain. 
Medical  Gazette,  No.  1077. 

"  The  subject  of  the  injury,  a  man  aged  00,  was  killed  by  a  fall  from  a  ladder,  the 
cause  of  death  being  extensive  fracture  through  the  base  of  the  skull.  Considerable 
deformity  being  observed  in  the  right  lower  limb,  the  author  was  induced  to  make  a 
careful  examination  of  the  extremity,  with  a  view  to  detect  the  nature  of  the  injury 
it  had  sustained.  It  was  apparently,  bnt  not  really,  much  shortened  ;  it  was  also  in- 
verted, and  separated  from  the  sourul  leg.  Tiie  trochanter  major  was  altered  in  its 
relation  to  the  iliac  spine,  and  the  depression  l)ehind  it  was  wanting  ;  the  head  of  the 
femur  could  be  felt  towards  the  back  of  the  pelvis.  The  limb  could  be  flexed,  but  not 
rotated  outwards.  On  removing  the  gluta^us  maximus,  the  head  of  the  dislocated 
bone  was  ex])osed  below  the  pyriform  muscle,  and  immediately  behind  the  aceta- 
bulum. .  .  .  The  practical  inferences  drawn  by  the  author  from  the  foregoing 
observations  may  l)e  summed  up  as  follows:- — 1st.  In  the  ordinary  form  of  dislo- 
cation backwards,  the  femur  does  not  reach  the  sciatic  notch.  2d.  The  head  of  the 
bone  is  lodged  immediately  behind  the  acetabulum,  over  the  base  of  the  ischiatic 
spine,  and  opposite  to  a  small  part  of  the  sciatic  foramina.  .3d.  The  injury  would  be 
correctly  named  the  dislocation  of  the  head  of  the  femur  backwards.  4th.  During 
the  extension  made  to  reduce  this  (hslocation,  the  thigh  is  most  advantageously 
directed  across  the  iielvis,  so  that  it  shall  form  a  right  angle  with  the  abdomen.  At 
the  same  time  the  limb  is  to  be  in  a  state  of  abduction  ;  the  femur  will  thus  be  drawn 
away  from  the  pelvis,  forwards  and  outwards.  The  knee  is  to  be  bent,  the  extending 
orce  being  fixed  .above  the  joint."  From  the  above  description  it  will  be  remarked, 
that  tJie  following  account  of  this  fcnm  of  dislocation  given  by  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  is 


ARTICULATIONS.  627 

58.  When  this  dislocation  occurs  in  an  adult^  and  is  not 
reduced,  he  can  walk,  indeed,  after  a  time,  and  when  the  i^ain 
has  abated,  and  when  he  has  been  accustomed  to  rotate  the 
articular  bone  in  the  flesh;  he  finds  it  necessary,  however,  to 
make  strong  flexion  at  the  groin  in  Malking,  for  two  reasons, 
both  because  the  limb,  for  the  causes  already  stated,  becomes 
much  shorter,  and  he  is  far  from  touching  tlie  ground  with  his 
heel,  and  he  can  barely  reach  it  with  the  l)all  of  his  foot, 
and  not  even  thus,  unless  he  bend  himself  at  the  groins,  and 
also  bend  with  the  other  leg  at  the  ham.  And  in  this  case,  he 
is  under  the  necessity  of  supporting  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh 
with  his  hand  at  each  step  :  this  also  contributes,  in  a  certain 
degree,  to  make  him  bend  the  body  at  the  groins ;  for,  during 
the  shifting  of  the  feet  in  walking,  the  body  cannot  be  supported 
on  the  unsound  limb,  unless  it  be  pressed  to  the  ground  by  the 
hand, — the  end  of  the  femur  not  being  placed  properly  under 
the  body,  but  ha\-ing  slipped  backward  to  the  nates ;  and  if  he 
should  try  to  rest  the  weight  of  his  body  for  a  little,  upon 
the  foot,  without  any  other  support,  he  would  fall  backwards, 
for  there  would  be  a  great  inclination  in  this  direction,  from 
the  hips  having  protruded  backwards  far  beyond  the  line  of  the 
foot,  and  the  spine  inclining  towards  the  hips.  Such  persons 
can  walk,  indeed,  without  a  staff,  if  so  accustomed,  for  because 
the  sole  of  the  foot  is  in  its  old  line,  and  is  not  inclined  out- 
wards, they  do  not  require  anything  to  balance  them.  Such, 
however,  as,  instead  of  grasping  the  thigh,  prefer  resting  their 
weight  upon  a  staff  introduced  into  the  anupit  of  the  affected 
side,  these,  if  they  use  a  longer  staff,  will  walk,  indeed,  more 
erect,  but  will  not  be  able  to  reach  the  ground  with  the  foot, 

not  correct  on  all  points  ;  indeed,  it  is  less  accurate  than  the  description  given  by 
Hippocrates  : — "  In  this  accident  there  is  scarcely  any  diflference  in  length  between 
the  one  leg  and  the  other;  if  any,  about  half  an  inch  shorter.  The  knee  and  foot  are 
turned  inwards,  but  different  in  appearance  to  that  of  the  dislocation  upwards  ;  the 
foot  is  turned  over  the  other,  the  toe  resting  against  the  upper  part  of  the  other  foot. 
When  any  attempt  is  made  to  move  it,  there  is  scarcely  any  motion.  The  situation 
of  the  bone  is  thus : — the  head  of  the  os  femoris  is  thrown  into  the  ischiatic  notch, 
tlie  trochanter  resting  upon  the  side,  or  a  little  behind  the  acetabulum."  (Surgical 
Lectures,  27.)  It  appears  from  Mr.  Quain's  dissection,  that  modern  authorities  have 
been  mistaken  in  supposing  that,  in  this  dislocation,  the  head  of  the  femur  is  lodged 
in  the  ischiatic  notch.  The  fact  is,  that,  as  represented  by  Hippocrates,  the  head  of 
the  femur  is  displaced  backwards. 


628  ARTICULATIONS. 

or  if  tliey  wish  to  rest  upon  the  foot,  they  must  take  <i  shorter 
staff,  and  will  require  to  hend  the  body  at  the  groins.  The 
wasting  of  the  fleshy  parts  is  analogous  to  what  happens  in  the 
cases  formerly  descriljed,  for  the  Avasting*  is  greatest  in  those 
oases  in  which  the  patients  keep  tlie  limb  up,  and  do  not 
exercise  it,  whilst  those  wlio  practise  Avalking,  have  the  least 
atrophy.  Tlie  sound  leg,  however,  is  not  hencfited,  but  is 
rather  i-eadcred  more  deformed,  if  the  injured  limlj  be  applied 
to  the  ground,  for  it  is  forced  to  cooperate  Avitb  the  other,  being 
protruded  at  the  hip,  and  bent  at  the  ham.  But  if  the  patient 
does  not  use  the  injured  limb  by  applyi^ig  it  to  the  ground, 
but  carries  it  up,  and  rests  upon  a  staff,  tlie  sound  leg  thereby 
gains  strength,  for  it  is  employed  in  its  natural  position,  and 
further,  the  exercise  gives  it  strength.  But  it  may  be  said, 
these  things  are  foreign  to  medicine ;  for  what  is  the  use  of 
enlarging  iipon  cases  which  are  already  past  remedy?  This  is 
far  from  being  the  cas;",  for  it  belongs  to  the  knowledge  of 
medicine  to  be  acquainted  also  with  these,  and  they  cannot 
possibly  be  separated  from  one  another;  for  to  such  as  arc 
curable,  means  are  to  be  used  to  prevent  them  from  becoming 
incurable,  studying  how  they  may  best  be  prevented  from  getting 
into  an  incurable  state.  And  incurable  cases  should  be  known, 
that  they  may  nut  be  aggravated  by  useless  applications,  and 
splendid  and  credita])le  prognostics  are  made  by  knowing  where, 
how,  and  when  every  case  will  terminate,  and  Avhether  it  will  be 
converted  into  a  curable  or  into  an  incurable  disease.^  When 
then,  from  birth,  or  during  one's  youth,  this  dislocation  back- 
wards occurs,  and  is  not  reduced,  whether  it  be  connected  with 
violence  or  disease  (for  mam^  such  dislocations  occur  in  diseases, 
but  the  nature  of  the  diseases  in  which  dislocations  take  place, 
will  be  described  afterwards)  ;  if,  then,  the  dislocated  limb  be 
not  reduced,  the  bone  of  the  thigh  becomes  shortened,  the 
whole  limb  is  impaired,  is  arrested  in  its  growth,  and  loses  its 
flesh  from  want  of  use ;  the  articulation  at  the  ham  is  also 
impaired,  for  the  nerves  (Hr/a/uents.^)  become  stretched,  from 
the   causes   formerly   stated,    Avherefore    those    mIio   have    this 

'  I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  nowadays  it  will  not  be  questioned  that  a  minute 
acquaintance  with  incurable  diseases  constitutes  a  most  important  part  of  the 
physician's  knowledge,  without  which  he  can  neither  form  an  accurate  diagnosis 
nor  prognosis.  Our  author's  remarkable  partiality  for  the  latter  is  very  apparent  iu 
this  passage. 


ARTICULATIONS.  G29 

dislocation,  cannot  make  extension  at  the  knee-joint.  Tn  a 
word,  all  parts  of  the  body  Avliicli  were  made  for  active  use,  if 
moderately  used  and  exercised  at  the  Ld)0ur  to  which  they  are 
hahiiuated,  become  healthy,  increase  in  bulk,  and  bear  their 
age  well,  but  when  not  used,  and  when  h)ft  without  exercise, 
they  become  diseased,  their  growth  is  arrested^  and  they  soon 
become  old.  Among  these  parts  the  joints  and  nerves  {Ii(j(t- 
ments?),  if  not  used,  are  riot  the  least  liable  to  l)c  so  affected  ; 
they  are  impaired,  then,  for  the  reasons  we  have  stated,  more 
in  this  variety  of  dislocation  than  in  the  others,  for  the  whole 
limb  is  wasted,  both  in  its  bones  and  in  its  fieshy  parts.  Such 
persons,  then,  when  they  attain  their  full  growth,  keep  the 
limb  raised  and  flexed,  rest  the  weight  of  the  body  on  the  other 
leg,  and  support  themselves  with  a  staff,  some  with  one,  and 
others  with  two. 

59.  In  dislocations  of  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  forwards 
(they  are  of  rare  occurrence),  the  patients  cannot  extend  the 
leg  completely,  but  least  of  all  can  they  bend  it  at  the  groin  ; 
they  are  pained,  also,  if  forced  to  bend  the  limb  at  the  ham. 
The  length  of  the  leg,  if  compared  at  the  heel,  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  other;  but  the  extremity  of  the  foot  inclines  less  to 
project  forwards.  Bnt  the  whole  liuib  has  its  natural  direction, 
and  inclines  neither  to  this  side  nor  to  that.  These  cases  are 
particularly  attended  with  severe  pain,  and  they  are  more  apt 
to  be  accompanied  with  retention  of  urine  at  first  than  any  of 
the  other  dislocations  ;  for  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  is  lodged 
very  near  to  important  nerves.  And  tlie  region  of  the  groin 
appears  swelled  out  and  stretched,  while  that  of  the  nates  is 
more  wrinkled  and  flabby.  The  symptoms  now  stated  are  those 
which  attend  this  dislocation  of  the  thigh-bone.^ 

'  Upon  Reference  to  Sir  Astley  Cooper's  work,  On  Dislocations,  p.  95,  it  will  lie 
found  that  there  is  but  little  disagreement  between  his  description  of  this  form  of 
dislocation  and  that  here  given  by  our  author.  To  be  sure,  Sir  Astley  says,  the  limb  is 
shortened  by  an  inch  ;  bnt  probably,  as  stated  in  ]\!r.  Qnain's  description  of  the  state 
of  the  limb  in  dislocation  backwards,  this  shortening  is  more  apparent  than  real ;  for, 
considering  the  situation  in  which  the  head  of  the  femur  is  lodged,  it  is  difficult  to  see 
liow  there  can  be  any  real  shortening.  The  turning  outwards  which  Sir  Astley 
remarks,  must  also  be  very  slight,  seeing  it  is  altogether  denied  by  Boyer.  All  the 
modern  authorities  agree  with  Hippocrates  as  to  the  effects  produced  by  the  pressure  of 
the  head  of  the  bone  upon  the  anterior  crural  nerve.  See,  in  particular,  Chelius, 
vol.  i,  p.  707.  Galen's  Commentary  is  merely  explanatory  of  the  text,  which,  how- 
ever, is  sutHciently  clear  for  all  practical  puriwses. 


630  ARTICULATIONS. 

CO.  When  persons  have  attained  their  full  gro^vtli  before 
meeting  with  this  dislocation^  and  wlien  it  has  not  been  reduced, 
upon  the  su])sidence  of  the  pain^  and  when  the  bone  of  the 
joint  has  been  accustomed  to  be  rotated  in  tlie  place  where  it 
is  lodged,  these  persons  can  walk  almost  erect  without  a  staff, 
and  with  the  injured  leg  almost  quite  straight,  as  it  does  not 
admit  of  easy  flexion  at  the  groin  and  the  ham  ;  owing,  then, 
to  this  want  of  flexion  at  the  groin,  they  keep  the  limb  more 
straight  in  walking  than  they  do  the  sound  one.  And  some- 
times they  drag  the  foot  along  the  ground,  as  not  being  able 
to  bend  the  upper  part  of  the  limb,  and  they  walk  with  the 
whole  foot  on  the  ground ;  for  in  walking  they  rest  no  less  on 
the  heel  than  on  the  fore  part  of  the  foot ;  and  if  they  could 
take  great  steps,  they  would  rest  entirely  on  the  heel  in  walking ; 
for  persons  whose  limbs  are  sound,  the  greater  the  steps  they 
take  in  Avalking,  rest  so  much  the  more  on  the  heel,  wliile  they 
are  putting  down  the  one  foot  and  raising  the  opposite.  In  this 
form  of  dislocation,  persons  rest  their  weight  more  on  the  heel 
than  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  foot,  for  the  fore  part  of  the 
foot  cannot  be  bent  forwards  equally  well  Avhen  the  rest  of  the 
lindi  is  extended  as  when  it  is  in  a  state  of  flexion  ;  neither, 
again,  can  the  foot  be  arched  to  the  same  degree  when  the  limb 
is  bent  as  when  it  is  extended.^  The  natural  state  of  matters 
is  such  as  has  been  now  described ;  and  in  an  unreduced  dis- 
location, persons  walk  in  the  manner  described,  for  the  reasons 
which  have  been  stated.  The  limb,  moreover,  is  less  fleshy 
than  the  other,  at  the  nates,  the  calf  of  the  leg,  and  the  whole 
of  its  posterior  part.  When  this  dislocation  occurs  in  infancy, 
and  is  not  reduced,  or  when  it  is  congenital,  in  these  cases  the 
bone  of  the  thigh  is  more  atrophied  than  those  of  the  leg  and 
foot ;  but  the  atrophy  of  the  thigh-bone  is  least  of  all  in  this 
form  of  dislocation.  The  fleshy  parts,  however,  are  everywhere 
attenuated,  more  especially  behind,  as  has  been  stated  above. 
If  properly  trained,  such  persons,  when  they  grow  up,  can  use 
the  limb,  which  is  only  a  little  shorter  than  the  other,  and  yet 
they  support  themselves  on  a  staff"  at  the  aftected  side.      For, 

'  The  weaning  of  this  passage  would  appear  to  be  as  given  in  the  text ;  Init  it  must 
he  achuitted  to  he  somewhat  obscure,  owing  to  the  use  of  certain  vmusual  terms  in  it 
(such  as  Kan7ni\f(aOai  and  (T(/(ori(jO((i),  the  exact  meaning  of  which  is  not  very  clearly 
exiihiincd  either  l)y  Erotian  or  Galen. 


ARTICULATIONS.  631 

not  bi'iiif^  Jible  to  use  properly  the  ball  of  the  foot  without 
the  heel,  iior  to  put  it  down  as  some  can  in  tlie  other  varieties 
of  (li.slocation  (the  cause  of  which  has  been  just  uow  stated), 
on  this  account  they  require  a  staff.  But  those  who  are  neg- 
lected, and  are  not  in  the  practice  of  putting  their  foot  to  the 
ground,  but  keep  the  limb  up,  have  the  bones  more  atrophied 
than  those  who  use  the  limb ;  and,  at  the  articulations,  the 
limb  is  more  maimed  in  the  direct  line  than  in  the  other  forms 
of  dislocation.^ 

Gl.  In  a  word,  luxations  and  subluxations  take  place  in  dif- 
ferent degrees,  being  sometimes  greater  and  sometimes  less ; 
and  those  cases  in  which  the  bone  has  slipped  or  been  displaced 
to  a  much  greater  extent,  are  in  general  more  difficult  to  rectify 
than  otherwise ;  and  if  not  reduced,  such  cases  have  greater 
and  more  striking  impairment  and  lesion  of  the  bones,  fleshy 
parts,  and  attitudes ;  but  when  the  bone  has  slipped,  or  been 
displaced  to  a  less  extent,  it  is  easier  to  reduce  such  cases  than 
the  other  ;  and  if  the  attempts  at  reduction  have  failed,  or  have 
been  neglected,  the  impairment  in  such  cases  is  less,  and  proves 
less  injurious  than  in  the  cases  just  mentioned.  The  other 
joints  present  great  differences  as  to  the  extent  of  the  displace- 
ments which  they  are  subject  to.  But  the  heads  of  the  femur 
and  humerus  are  very  similar  to  one  another  as  to  their  dislo- 
cations. For  the  heads  of  the  bones  are  rounded  and  smooth, 
and  the  sockets  Mhich  receive  the  heads  are  also  circular,  and 
adapted  to  the  heads ;  they  do  not  admit  then  of  being  dislo- 
cated in  any  intermediate  degree,  but,  from  their  rounded  shape, 
the  bones  slip  either  outAvards  or  inwards.  In  the  case  w'e  are 
now  treating  of,  then,  there  is  either  a  complete  dislocation  or 
none  at  all,  and  yet  these  bones  admit  of  being  displaced  to  a 

'  The  last  sentence  is  obscure  to  »ie,  hnt  neither  Foes  nor  Littre  states  any  diffi- 
culty which  they  find  about  it.  The  latter  translates  it  thus :  "  Mais  chez  ceux  qui, 
ayant  ete  nt'gliges,  n'appuient  pas  la  jauibe  sur  le  sol  et  la  tiennent  en  Fair,  les  os 
croissent  beaucoup  nioins  que  chez  ceux  qui  se  servent  de  leur  janibe ;  de  la  memo 
facon,  les  chairs  s'atrophicnt  bien  davantage ;  dans  cctte  luxation  les  articulations  de 
la  jambe  ont  subi  une  lesion  qui  les  tient  plus  droites  que  dans  les  autres  luxations 
de  la  cuisse."  The  sense  here  would  agree  with  the  context,  but  seems  scarcely 
warranted  by  the  original.  Foes,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  a  literal  translation,  but 
it  is  as  unintelligible  as  the  original.  "  Circa  articulos  autem,  quod  ad  direetionem 
spectat,  crure  ii  alicpianto  magis  capti  sunt,  quam  quibus  alitcr  luxatio  contigcrit." 


632  ARTICULATIONS. 

greater  or  less  extent;  and  the  thigli  is  more  subject  to  these 
differences  than  the  arm.^ 

6.3.  AVherefore,  then,  some  of  these  congenital  displacements, 
if  to  a  small  extent,  may  be  reduced  to  their  natural  condition, 
and  especially  those  at  the  ankle-joint.  Most  cases  of  con- 
genital clu1>foot  are  remediable,  unless  the  declination  be  very 
great,  or  when  the  affection  occurs  at  an  advanced  period  of 
youth."  The  best  plan,  then,  is  to  treat  such  cases  at  as  early 
a  period  as  possible,  befoi-e  the  deficiency  of  the  bones  of  the 
foot  is  very  great,  and  before  there  is  any  great  wasting  of  the 
flesh  of  the  leg.  There  is  more  than  one  variety  of  club-foot, 
the  most  of  them  being  not  complete  dislocations,^  but  im- 
pairments connected  with  the  habitual  maintenance  of  the 
limb  in  a  certain  position.  In  conducting  the  treatment,  at- 
tention must  be  paid  to  the  following  points  :  to  push  back 
and  rectify  the  bone  of  the  leg  at  the  ankle  from  without  in- 
wards, and  to  make  counter-pressure  on  the  bone  of  the  heel 
in  an  outward  direction,  so  as  to  bring  it  into  linCj  in  order 
that  the  displaced  bones  may  meet  at  the  middle  and  side  of 
the  foot ;  and  the  mass  of  the  toes,  with  the  great  toe,  are  to 
be  inclined  inwards,  and  retained  soj*^  and  the  parts  are  to  be 

'  I  Ijelieve  all  our  inodcni  autliorities  are  agreed  (hat  there  is  no  incomplete  lux- 
ation of  the  femur.  Sir  Astley  Cooper  speaks  of  a  partial  dislocation  of  the  humerus, 
but  the  nature  of  it  does  not  seem  to  be  accurately  defined. 

'  Galen  remarks,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  passage,  that  it  is  clear  our  author 
treats  of  the  cure  both  of  congenital  club-foot,  and  of  the  club-foot  which  occurs  in 
early  infancy.  He  further  adds,  that  his  account  of  this  affection  applies  principally 
to  the  species  in  which  the  leg  is  distorted  outwards,  and  the  foot  turned  inwards, 
that  is  to  say,  to  varus. 

•*  I  need  scarcely  remark  now  that  our  author  has  here  exactly  hit  the  true  cha- 
racter of  this  imiicdiment,  which,  as  he  says,  is  not  a  dislocation,  but,  originally,  a 
mere  dccUnafioa  of  the  foot. 

*  Having  lately  gone  through  the  proces.s  of  curing  congenital  i-arus  in  both  feet 
of  a  child  a  year  old,  I  can  attest  to  the  general  accuracy  of  the  directions  here  given. 
From  the  nature  of  the  case,  it  will  readily  be  understood  that  the  foot  is  to  be  pushed 
outwards,  and  the  leg  inwards,  so  as  to  bring  the  foot  into  a  line  with  the  leg.  The 
only  dilhculty  which  one  encounters  in  the  description,  is  the  direction  that  "tlic 
mass  of  the  toes,  with  the  great  toe,  should  be  inclined  inwards,  and  retained  so." 
J.I.  J.  Guerin,  so  well  known  for  his  skill  in  orthopedy,  gave  M.  Littre  the  following 
explanation  of  this  manoeuvre  :  "  Quant  a  t^o)  tyKXii'tw,  il  faut  le  traduire  par  ahnlsyrr, 
incliner  tons  les  orteils  en  dedans  (par  un  mouvement  d'arc  de  cercle  sur  I'axe 
antcro-postcrieur  du  pied).     C'est  la  le  sens  littoral  et  il  cxprime  paifaitement  ce 


ARTICULATIONS.  033 

secured,  with  cerate  containing  a  full  proportion  of  rcsin,i  witli 
compresses,  and  soft  bandages  in  sufficient  quantity,  but  not 
applied  too  tight ;  and  the  turns  of  the  bandages  should  be  in 
the  same  direction  as  the  rectifying  of  the  foot  with  the  hands, 
so  that  the  foot  may  appear  to  incline  a  little  outwards."  And 
a  sole  made  of  leather  not  very  hard,  or  of  lead,  is  to  be  bound 
on,  and  it  is  not  to  be  applied  to  the  skin,  but  when  you  are 
about  to  make  the  last  turns  of  the  bandages.'^  And  when  it 
is  all  bandaged,  you  must  attach  the  end  of  one  of  the  bandages 
that  are  used  to  the  bandages  applied  to  the  inferior  part  of 
the  foot  on  the  line  of  the  little  toe ;  and  then  this  bandage  is 
to  be  rolled  upwards  in  what  is  considered  to  be  a  sufficient 
degree,  to  above  the  calf  of  the  leg,  so  that  it  may  remain  firm 
when  thus  arranged.  In  a  word,  as  if  moulding  a  wax  model, 
you  must  bring  to  their  natural  position  the  parts  which  were 
abnormally  displaced  and  contracted  together,  so  rectifying  them 
with  your  hands,  and  with  the  bandaging  in  like  manner,  as 
to  bring  them  into  their  position,  not  by  force,  but  gently  ; 
and  the  bandages  are  to  be  stitched  so  as  to  suit  the  position  in 
which  the  limb  is  to  be  placed,  for  different  modes  of  the  de- 
formity require  different  positions.  And  a  small  shoe  made  of 
lead  is  to  be  bound  on  externally  to  the  bandaging,  having  the 

qu'il  faut  faire  pour  la  reduction  du  varus.  Dans  cette  variete  du  pied-bot,  le  pied 
etant  renverse  sur  la  face  externe ;  la  rangee  des  orteils  est,  comme  le  pied,  situee 
verticalement  et  regarde  en  dehors  ;  il  con\ient  done  d'incliner  ou  d'abaisser  les 
orteils  en  dedans  et  les  fixer  dans  cette  position."  By  the  way,  there  is  some  mis- 
take in  this  quotation,  for  the  reading  in  the  text  is  not  t^w  iyKXtvuv  (although  I 
humbly  think  t^io  iKKXireiv  would  be  the  most  suitable  reading),  but  tc  to  iktio 
pfpoc  tyKXiveiv.  The  only  way  in  which  I  can  attach  any  proper  meaning  to  the 
common  reading,  is  by  supposing  that  it  refers  to  a  very  aggravated  case  of  (al/pcs 
varus,  in  which  the  foot  is  fairly  turned  round  on  its  axis.  In  such  a  case,  no  doubt 
the  toes  would  have  to  be  pushed  inwards  and  downwai-ds,  in  the  first  place.  But, 
however  we  may  understand  this  clause,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hippocrates 
understood  properly  the  principles  upon  which  tlie  treatment  ought  to  be  con- 
ducted. 

'  No  doubt,  as  is  remarked  by  Galen  in  his  Commentary,  the  addition  of  resin  to 
the  cerate  would  give  the  bandages  a  greater  degree  of  firmness  and  stability. 

2  That  is  to  say — agreeably  to  the  Ilippocratic  rule,  contraria  coutrariis  curantur 
—the  abnormal  inchnation  inwards  is  to  be  cured  by  producing  for  a  time  an  incli- 
nation outwards. 

3  The  benefit  of  this  leather  sole  is  in  reahty  very  marked  in  the  treatment  of  in- 
fantile club-foot.     This  I  can  attest  from  personal  experience. 


634  ARTICULATIONS. 

same  shape  as  the  Chian  slippers  had.^  But  there  is  no  ne- 
cessity for  it  if  the  parts  be  properly  adjusted  with  the  hands, 
properly  secured  with  the  bandages,  and  properly  disposed  of 
afterwards.  This,  then,  is  the  mode  of  cure,  and  it  neither 
requires  cutting,  burning,  nor  any  other  complex  means,  for 
such  cases  yield  sooner  to  treatment  than  one  would  believe. 
However,  they  are  to  be  fairly  mastered  only  by  time,  and  not 
until  the  body  has  grown  up  in  the  natural  shape ;  when  re- 
course is  had  to  a  shoe,  the  most  suitable  are  the  buskins, 
which  derive  their  name  from  being  used  in  travclUng  through 
mud ;  for  this  sort  of  shoe  does  not  yield  to  the  foot,  but  the 
foot  yields  to  it.  A  shoe  shaped  like  the  Cretan  is  also  suitable. 
63.  In  cases  of  complete  dislocation  at  tlie  ankle-joint,  com- 
plicated with  an  external  wound,  whether  the  displacement  be 
inwards  or  outwards,  you  are  not  to  reduce  the  parts,  but  let 
any  other  physician  reduce  them  if  he  choose.  For  this  you 
should  know  for  certain,  that  the  patient  will  die  if  the  parts 
are  allowed  to  remain  reduced,  and  that  he  will  not  survive 
more  than  a  few  days,  for  few  of  them  pass  the  seventh  day, 
being  cut  off  by  convulsions,  and  sometimes  the  leg  and  foot 
are  seized  with  gangrene."  It  should  be  well  known  that  such 
will  be  the  results ;  and  it  does  not  appear  to  me  that  hellebore 
will  do  any  good,  though  administered  the  same  day,  and  the 
draught  repeated,  and  yet  it  is  the  most  likely  means,  if  any 
such  there  be ;  but  I  am  of  opinion  that  not  even  it  will  be  of 
service.  But  if  not  reduced,  nor  any  attempts  at  first  made  to 
reduce  them,  most  of  such  cases  recover.  The  leg  and  foot 
are  to  be  arranged  as  the  patient  wishes,  only  they  must  not 
be  put  in  a  dependent  position,  nor  moved  about;"   and  they 

'  Of  the  Cliian  slippers  or  sandals,  and  Uic  huskiiis  for  travelling  through  nuul  or 
clay,  Galen  can  give  no  account.  See  further  the  editors  of  Erotian.  They  were,  no 
douht,  composed  of  stout  and  unyiehhng  materials.  It  is  well  known  that  such  a 
boot  is  very  useful  to  keep  the  foot  in  position  after  it  has  been  reetitlcd. 

-  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  states  that  the  danger  of  reduction  consists  partly 
in  the  additional  violence  intlicted  on  the  muscles,  and  partly  in  their  being  then  put 
iutoastretchedstate,  whereby  spasms  or  convulsions  are  brought  on,  and  gangrene  as 
the  result  of  the  intense  inflammation  which  ensues.  Galen  explains  the  term  gan- 
grene to  mean  the  intermediate  state  between  intense  inflammation  and  sphacelus, 
the  latter  term  being  apiilied  to  the  complete  corruption,  that  is  to  say,  death  of  a  part. 
Celsus  uses  "cancer"  as  being  synonymous  with  the  term  "  gangrene."  (viii,  25.) 

^  Celsus  translates  this  clause  of  the  sentence  as  follows :  "  tautum  (mcnihruni) 
ne  movcatin-,  neve  dcpendeat."  (viii,  2."f.) 


ARTICULATIONS.  635 

are  to  be  treated  with  pitched  cerate,  a  few  compresses  dipped 
in  Aviue,  and  not  very  cokl,  for  cold  in  such  cases  induces  con- 
vulsions 3^  the  leaves  also  of  beet,  or  of  colt's  foot,  of  any  such, 
Avlicn  half  boiled  in  dark-coloured  austere  wine,  form  a  suitable 
application  to  the  wound  and  the  surrounding  parts ;  and  the 
wound  may  further  be  anointed  with  cerate  in  a  tepid  state. 
But  if  it  be  the  winter  season,  the  part  is  to  be  covered  with 
unscoured  wool,  which  is  to  be  sprinkled  from  above  with  tepid 
wine  and  oil,  but  on  no  account  is  either  bandage  or  compress 
to  be  applied ;  for  this  should  be  known  most  especially,  that 
whatever  compresses,  or  is  heavy,  does  mischief  in  such  cases. 
And  certain  of  the  dressings  used  to  recent  wounds  are  suitable 
in  such  cases ;  and  wool  may  be  laid  upon  the  sore,  and  sprinkled 
with  wine,  and  allowed  to  remain  for  a  considerable  time ;  but 
those  dressings  for  recent  Avounds  which  only  last  for  a  few 
days,  and  into  which  resin  enters  as  an  ingredient,  do  not  agree 
Avith  them ;  for  the  cleansing  of  the  sores  is  a  slow  process,  and 
the  sore  has  a  copious  discharge  for  a  long  time.  Certain  of 
these  cases  it  may  be  advantageous  to  bandage.  It  ought  also 
to  be  well  understood,  that  the  patient  must  necessarily  be 
much  maimed  and  deformed,  for  the  foot  is  retracted  outwards, 
and  the  bones,  which  have  been  displaced  outwards,  protrude : 
these  bones,  in  fact,  not  being  generally  laid  bare,  unless  to  a 
small  extent ;  neither  do  they  exfoliate,  but  they  heal  by  thin 
and  feeble  cicatrices,  provided  the  patient  keeps  quiet  for  a 
length  of  time  ;  but  otherwise  there  is  danger  that  a  small  ulcer 
may  remain  incurable.  And  yet  in  the  case  we  are  treating 
of,  those  who  are  thus  treated  are  saved ;  whereas,  when  the 
parts  are  reduced  and  allowed  to  remain  in  place,  the  patients 
die." 

'  It  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  only  forbids  the  use  of  "  very  cold"  applica- 
tions, from  which  Galen  justly  infers  that  he  did  not  disapprove  of  moderately  cold 
things.  Galen  here  gives  some  interesting  observations  on  the  distinction  between 
things  which  are  cold  to  the  senses,  and  those  which  are  possessed  of  cold  or  con- 
gealing qualities,  such  as  cicuta,  mandragora,  and  the  like.  The  ancient  authorities 
all  held  that  narcotics  are  of  a  cold  or  refrigerant  nature. 

•  Our  author,  it  will  be  remarked  in  this  and  the  succeeding  paragraphs,  lays  down 
his  own  views  respecting  the  treatment  of  compound  dislocations.  That  he  must 
have  been  familiar  with  the  treatment  of  them  there  can  be  no  doubt,  from  the  precise 
and  well-defined  manner  in  which  he  descril)es  all  the  phenomena  regarding  them. 
The  (lunger  of  such  accidents  he  has  fairly  stated,  but  probably  not  exaggerated.  I  need 


G36  ARTICULATIONS. 

64.  The  same  rule  applies  to  dislocations  at  the  wrist,  at- 
tended with  a  AYOund  and  projection  of  the  Ijone,  whether  the 
bones  of  the  arm  be  displaced  inwards  or  outwards.^  For  this 
should  be  well  understood,  that  the  patient  will  die  in  the 
course  of  a  few  days^  by  the  same  mode  of  death  as  formerly 
described,  if  the  bone  be  reduced,  and  allowed  to  remain  so. 
But  in  those  cases  in  which  they  are  not  reduced,  nor  any  at- 
tempt made  to  reduce  them,  the  patients,  for  the  most  part, 
recover  ;  and  the  same  mode  of  treatment  as  has  been  described 
will  be  applicable;  but  the  deformity  and  impediment  of  the 
limb  must  necessarily  be  great,  and  the  fingers  of  the  hand 
will  be  weak  and  useless  ;  for  if  the  bones  have  slipped  inwards, 
they  cannot  bend  the  fingers,  or  if  outwards,  they  cannot  ex- 
tend them." 

Go.  When  the  os  tibise,  having  made  a  Avound  at  the  knee,  has 
protruded  through  the  skin,  whether  the  dislocation  be  outwaids 
or  inwards,  in  such  a  case,  if  the  bone  be  reduced,  death  will  l)c 
even  more  speedy  than  in  the  other  cases,  although  speedy  also 
in  them.  But  the  only  hope  of  recovery  is  if  you  treat  them 
without  reduction.  These  cases  ai'e  more  dangerous  than  the 
others,  as  being  so  much  higher  up,  as  being  so  much  stronger 
joints,  and  displaced  from  bones  which  are  so  much  stronger. 
But  if  the  OS  femoris  form  a  wound  at  the  knee,  and  slip  through 

scarcely  say  that,  with  the  modern  surgeon  in  tliese  unfortunate  cases,  the  tirst  con- 
sideration is,  whether  or  not  the  limb  is  to  be  taken  off  at  once ;  and  that,  even  with 
this  frightful  alternative,  the  results  have  Ijcen  by  no  means  satisfactory.  We  have 
discussed  this  subject,  however,  in  the  Argument,  where  we  have  given  an  abstract  of 
the  other  views  of  practice  entertained  by  subsequent  authorities. 

'  Tliat  is  to  say,  whether  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  protrude  before  or  behind.  It 
is  obvious  from  the  text,  and  is  made  still  more  clear  from  Galen's  Commentary,  that, 
in  this  case,  Hippocrates  understands  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  to  be  tlie  parts  dis- 
jilaccd,  and  not  those  of  the  hand,  as  is  usually  understood  in  modern  works  on 
surgery.  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  however,  like  Hippocrates,  considers  the  hand  as  the 
part  in  position,  and  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  as  those  which  are  displaced.  But 
wliether  our  author  is  always  consistent  with  himself  in  regard  to  this,  and  the  dis- 
locations of  the  other  joints,  may  be  doubted.  It  is  well  known,  that  early  writers, 
however  remarkable  they  may  be  for  originality  of  thought  and  vigour  of  exjjres- 
sion,  are  seldom  so  distinguished  for  precision  in  the  use  of  terms  as  succeeding 
authors  are.  That  Hippocrates  is  not  exempt  from  this  <lefect  must  be  admitted,  nor 
is  this  to  be  wondered  at,  since  he  lived  Ijcfm-e  the  age  of  Aristotle,  who  first  brought 
logic  and  criticism  to  perfection. 

^  I  need  scarcely  say  that  recent  auihorities  give  the  symptoms  very  difiercutly. 
See  the  Argument. 


ARTICULATIONS.  C37 

it,  provided  it  be  reduced  and  left  so,  it  will  occasiou  a  still 
more  violent  and  speedy  death  than  in  the  cases  formerly  de- 
scribed ;  but  if  not  reduced,  it  -will  be  much  more  dangerous 
than  those  cases  mentioned  before,  and  yet  this  is  the  only  hope 
of  recovery.! 

6G.  The  same  rule  applies  to  the  elbow-joint,  and  with  re- 
gard to  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  and  arm.  For  when  these 
bones  protrude  through  a  wound  which  they  have  made  in 
the  skin,  all  cases  in  which  they  are  reduced  prove  fatal;  but 
if  not  reduced,  there  is  a  chance  of  recovery ;  but  to  those  that 
survive  there  is  certain  impediment.  And  if  in  any  instance 
the  bones  of  the  upper  articulations  {shoulder-joint?)  should  be 
dislocated,  and  project  through  a  wound  which  they  have  made 
in  the  shin,  these,  if  reduced,  are  followed  by  more  speedy 
death ;  and  if  not  reduced,  they  are  more  dangerous  than  the 
others.  But  the  mode  of  treatment  which  appears  to  me  most 
suitable  has  been  already  described. 

67.  When  the  joints  of  the  toes  or  hands  are  dislocated,  and 
the  bones  protrude  through  a  wound  which  they  have  made, 
and  when  there  is  no  fracture  of  the  bone,  but  merely  displace- 
ment of  the  joint,  in  these  cases,  if  the  reduction  be  made  and 
allowed  to  remain,  there  is  some  danger  of  spasm  {tetanus?)  if 
not  properly  treated,  and  yet  it  may  be  worth  while  to  reduce 
them,  having  warned  the  patient  beforehand  that  much  caution 
and  care  will  be  required.  The  easiest,  the  most  efficient  method, 
and  the  one  most  conformable  to  art,  is  that  by  the  lever,  as  for- 
merly described  when  treating  of  bones  which  have  been  frac- 
tured and  protruded ;  then  the  patient  must  be  as  quiet  as 
possible,  lie  in  a  recumbent  position,  and  observe  a  restricted 
regimen.  And  it  will  be  better  also  that  he  should  get  some 
gentle  emetics.  The  sore  is  to  be  treated  with  the  dressings 
for  fresh  wounds,  which  permit  of  affusions,  or  with  the  leaves 
of  camomile,"  or  with  the  applications  for  fractured  bones  of 
the  head,  but  nothing  very  cold  must  be  applied.  The  first 
{most  distant  ?)  joints  are  least  dangerous,  but  those  still  higher, 

'  As  remarked  by  Galen,  our  author  in  this  paragraph  makes  a  distinction  in  dis- 
locations at  the  knee-joint,  according  as  it  is  the  end  of  the  tibia  or  of  the  femur 
which  protrudes  through  the  skin.  Galen  adds,  that  at  the  ankle  it  is  only  the  bones 
of  the  leg,  and  at  the  wrist  only  those  of  the  fore-arm,  which  are  protruded. 

-  Probably  the  Anthemis  valentina.  See  the  Appendix  to  Dunbar's  Greek  Lexicon, 
under  iroXu600aX/iov. 


638  ARTICULATIONS, 

are  more  so.      Reduction  should  be  made  the  same  day,  or  the 
next,  but  by  no  means  on  the  third  or  fourth,  for  it  is  on  the 
fourth  day  that  exacerbations  especially  attack.   In  those  cases, 
then,  where  immediate  reduction   cannot  be  accomplished,  we 
must  Avait  until  after  the  aforesaid  days ;   for  whatever  you  re- 
duce within  ten  days,  may  be  expected  to  induce  spasm.      But 
if  the  spasm  supervene  on  its  being  reduced,  the  joint  should  be 
quickly  displaced,  and  bathed  frequently  with  warm  water,  and 
the  whole  body  should  be  kept  in  a  warm,  soft,  and  easy  con- 
dition, and  more  especially  about  the  joints,  for  the  whole  body 
should  rather  be  in  a  bent  than  in  an  extended  state.      More- 
over, it  is  to  be  expected,  that  the  articular  extremities  of  the 
bones  of  the  fingers  will  exfoliate,  for  this  generally  happens, 
if  even  the  least  degree  of  inflammation  take  place,  so  that  if  it 
were  not  that  the  physician  would  be  exposed  to  censure,  owing 
to  the  ignorance  of  the  common  people,  no  reduction  should  be 
made  at  all.      The  reduction  of  the  bones  of  joints  which  have 
protruded  through  the  skin,  is  attended  with  the  dangers  which 
have  been  described. 

08.  When  the  articular  bones  of  the  fingers  are  fairly  chopped 
off*,  these  cases  are  mosth^  unattended  Avitli  danger,  unless  deli- 
quium  come  on  in  consequence  of  the  injury,  and  ordinary 
treatment  will  be  sufficient  to  such  sores.  But  when  resection 
is  made,  not  at  the  articulations,  but  at  some  other  point  in  the 
bones,  these  cases  also  are  free  from  danger,  and  are  still  more 
easily  cured  than  the  others ;  and  the  fractured  bones  of  the 
fingers  which  protrude  otherwise  than  at  the  joint  admit  of 
reduction  without  danger.  Complete  resections  of  bones  at  the 
joints,  whether  the  foot,  the  liand,  the  leg,  the  ankle,  the  fore- 
arm, the  wrist,  for  the  most  part,  are  not  attended  with  danger, 
unless  one  be  cut  ofl;'  at  once  by  deliquium  animi,  or  if  con- 
tinual fever  supervene  on  the  fourth  day.^ 

'  This  paragraph  on  resection  of  the  bones  in  compound  dislocations  and  fractnres 
contains  ahnost  all  the  information  on  the  sii])ject  which  is  to  he  found  in  the  works 
on  ancient  medicine.  Galen  finds  our  author's  meaning  in  this  paragraph  so  obvious, 
that  he  does  not  think  it  necessaiy  to  give  anything  more  than  an  apology  for  a  com- 
mentary. Celsus  notices  the  practice  of  resection  in  compound  dislocations  very 
briefly,  as  follows :  "  Si  nudum  os  eniinet,  impedimentum  semper  futurum  est ; 
ideo  quod  excedit,  abscindendum  est."  ^viii,  25.) 

In  modern  times  this  practice  has  bee  partially  advocated  by  several  eminent 
antlioritics  in  surgery,  especially  Mr.  Hey,  oi  Leeds,  and  Sir  Astlcy  Cooper,  in  this 


ARTICULATIONS.  C39 

G9.  With  regard  to  the  sphacehis  of  fleshy  parts,  it  tiikes 
place  in  wounds  where  there  are  large  hlood- vessels,  which  have 
been  strongly  compressed,  and  in  fractures  of  bones  which  have 
been  bound  too  tight,  and  in  other  cases  of  immoderate  con- 
striction, when  the  parts  which  have  been  strangulated  generally 
drop  off;  and  the  most  of  such  patients  recover,  even  when  a 
l)oi'tion  of  the  thigh  comes  away,  or  of  the  arm,  both  bones  and 
flesh,  but  less  so  in  this  case ;  and  when  the  fore-arm  and  leg 
drop  off",  the  patients  readily  recover.'  In  cases,  then,  of  frac- 
ture of  the  bones,  when  strangulation  and  blackening  of  the 
parts  take  place  at  first,  the  separation  of  the  dead  and  living 
parts  quickly  occurs,  and  the  parts  speedily  drop  off,  as  the 
bones  have  already  given  way ;  but  when  the  blackening  [morti- 
fication) takes  place  while  the  bones  are  entire,  the  fleshy  parts, 
in  this  case,  also  quickly  die ;  but  the  bones  are  slow  in  sepa- 
rating at  the  boundary  of  the  blackening,  and  where  the  bones 
are  laid  bare.  Those  parts  of  the  body  which  are  below  the 
boundaries  of  the  blackening  are  to  be  removed  at  the  joint, 
as  soon  as  they  are  fairly  dead  and  have  lost  their  sensibility ; 
care  being  taken  not  to  wound  any  living  part ;  for  if  the  part 
which  is  cut  off"  give  pain,  and  if  it  should  prove  not  to  be  quite 
dead,   there  is   great  danger  lest  the  patient  may  swoon  away 

country,  and  by  M.  Leveille,  iu  France,  the  last  of  ulioni  professes  to  have  been 
guided  by  the  authority  of  Hippocrates.  (Nouvelle  Doctrine  Chirurgicale,  torn,  ii, 
p.  44.)  The  case  in  which  this  practice  has  been  most  generally  followed  is  com- 
pound dislocation  of  the  astragalus.  In  dislocations  of  the  bones  of  the  larger  joints, 
such  as  the  end  of  the  humerus,  the  lower  end  of  the  tibia  and  fibula,  and  the  like, 
resection  has  seldom  been  practised,  and  only  when  reduction  was  otherwise  found 
to  be  impracticable.  Mr.  Fergusson  suggests  the  propriety  of  resection  at  the  elbow 
under  these  circumstances.  Mr.  Syme,  upon  the  whole,  approves  of  resection  iu  the 
case  of  the  elbow,  the  wrist,  and  the  ankle,  when  the  bones  cannot  be  otherwise 
reduced;  but,  in  the  case  of  the  knee-joint,  he  holds  that  amputation  must  be 
immediately  had  recourse  to. 

'  This  paragraph  contains  a  very  interesting  account  of  the  ancient  mode  of  treating 
severe  injuries  of  the  extremities  which  terminate  in  gangrene.  It  will  be  seen  that 
our  author's  practice  was  altogether  of  the  expectant  mode ;  when  a  limb  mortified, 
as  much  of  it  as  was  become  quite  dead  was  separated  at  a  joint,  and  the  whole 
mortified  part  was  not  removed  until  there  was  a  complete  Une  of  separation  between 
the  dead  and  living  part.  The  constitutional  treatment  was  altogether  of  a  mild 
character.  The  advocates  for  the  mild  system  of  treatment  in  gangrene  of  the  foot, 
it  would  thus  appear,  have  the  authority  of  Hippocrates  to  quote  on  theur  side.  I 
need  scarcely  add  that,  until  within  the  last  few  years,  the  opposite  system  of 
treatment  is  what  was  adopted  in  modern  practice. 


640  ARTICULATIONS. 

from  the  piiiu,  and  such  swoouings  often  are  immediately  fatal. 
I  have  known  the  thigh-bones^  wheu  denuded  in  this  manner^ 
drop  off  on  the  eightieth  day ;  but  in  the  case  of  this  patient, 
the  parts  below  were  separated  at  the  knee  on  the  twentieth 
day,  and,  as  I  tliouglit,  too  early,  for  it  appeared  to  me  that 
this  should  be  done  more  guardedly.  In  a  case  which  I  had 
of  such  blackening  in  the  leg,  the  bones  of  the  leg,  as  far  as 
they  were  denuded,  separated  at  its  middle  on  the  sixtieth  day. 
But  the  separation  of  denuded  bones  is  quicker  or  slower,  ac- 
cording to  the  mode  of  treatment ;  something,  too,  depends 
upon  whether  the  compression  be  stronger  or  weaker,  and 
whether  the  nerves,  flesh,  arteries,  and  veins  arc  quicker  or 
slower  in  becoming  blackened  and  in  dying;  since,  when  the 
parts  are  not  strongly  compressed,  the  separation  is  more  super- 
ficial, and  does  not  go  the  length  of  laying  the  bones  bare,  and  in 
some  cases  it  is  still  more  superficial,  so  as  not  even  to  expose 
the  nerves.  For  the  reasons  now  stated,  it  is  impossible  to 
define  accurately  the  time  at  which  each  of  these  cases  will 
terminate.'  The  treatment  of  such  cases,  however,  is  to  be 
readily  undertaken,  for  they  are  more  formidable  to  look  at 
than  to  treat ;~  and   a  mild  treatment  is  sufficient  in  all  such 

'  Galen  makes  the  following  remarks  on  this  passage :  Hippocrates  liaving  pre- 
viously stated  that  in  those  cases  in  which  the  flesh  connected  with  the  hones  has 
become  blackened  and  corrupted,  the  same  thing,  in  the  course  of  time,  should 
happen  to  the  bones ;  and,  on  that  account,  liaving  given  directions  to  cut  them  oft', 
he  now  advises  the  removal  to  be  made  without  touching  the  sound  parts,  lest,  owing 
to  the  pain,  the  patient  should  fall  into  a  severe  swoon,  from  which  it  would  be 
difficult  to  recover  him.  lie  recommends,  therefore,  that  this  should  be  done  at  a 
joint,  as  the  removal  there  can  be  speedily  accomplished,  vvhei"eas,  in  the  middle  of  a 
limb,  time  is  taken  up  in  cutting  oft'  the  bone. 

'  Galen  remarks  on  this  passage  that  here  our  author  shows  that  he  had  a  proper 
regard  for  the  safety  of  the  physician  as  well  as  for  that  of  the  patient ;  for,  as  he 
states,  these  cases,  although  they  put  on  a  formidable  appearance,  are  not  so  dan- 
gerous in  reality,  but  that  a  physician  may  undertake  the  management  of  them 
without  endangering  his  own  character.  Those  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  which  at 
first  sight  do  not  appear  formidable,  but  are  dangerous  in  reality,  lie  advises  the 
physician  to  have  nothing  to  do  with.  Many  passages  in  the  works  of  our  author, 
and  in  those  of  the  other  ancient  writers  on  medicine,  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion, 
that  in  ancient  times  a  greater  degree  of  responsibility  attached  to  the  physician 
in  mulertaking  the  management  of  the  sick  than  there  does  in  our  days.  It  would 
appear  to  have  been  a  very  serious  matter  for  the  physician  when  his  patient  died 
without  his  death  having  been  previously  prognosticated.  Necessity,  then,  and 
the  regard  for  personal  safety,  would  compel  the  ancient  physician  to  cultivate  prog- 


ARTICULATIONS.  641 

cases,  for  they  come  to  a  crisis  of  themselves ;  otily  the  diet 
must  be  attended  to,  so  that  it  may  l)e  as  little  calculated  to 
create  fever  as  possible,  and  the  body  is  to  be  placed  in  the 
proper  positions  :  these  are,  neither  raised  very  high  up,  nor 
inclining  much  downwards,  but  rather  upwards,  until  the  sepa- 
ration be  completed ;  for  at  that  time  there  is  most  danger 
of  hemorrhage ;  on  this  account,  wounds  should  not  be  laid  in 
a  declining  position,  but  the  contrary. ^  But  after  a  while, 
and  when  the  sores  have  become  clean,  the  same  positions  will 
no  longer  be  appropriate ;  but  a  straight  position,  and  one  in- 
clining downwards,  may  be  proper ;  and  in  the  course  of  time, 
in  some  of  these  cases,  abscesses  form,  and  require  bandages. 
One  may  also  expect  that  such  patients  will  be  attacked  with 
dysentery  ;  for  dysentery  usually  supervenes  in  cases  of  mortifi- 
cation and  of  hemorrhage  from  w^ounds ;  it  comes  on  generally 
when  the  blackening  and  hemorrhage  have  arrived  at  a  crisis, 
and  is  profuse  and  intense,  but  does  not  last  many  days ; 
neither  is  it  of  a  fatal  nature,  for  such  patients  do  not  usually 
lose  their  appetite,  nor  is  it  proper  to  put  them  on  a  restricted 
diet." 

70.'   Dislocation  inwards   at   the   hip-joint  is  to  be  reduced 

nosis,  so  that  he  might  not  decline  to  undertake  the  management  of  cases  by  which 
any  credit  could  he  gained,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  undertake  a  formidable  one 
without  announcing,  beforehand,  its  probable  issue.  I  fear  it  must  be  admitted  that 
professional  virtue  in  ancient  times  never  rose  to  that  pitch  of  disinterestedness 
enjoined  by  our  Sydeiiham,  when  he  says  that  "  the  physician  ought  to  be  always 
ready  to  serve  his  patient  even  at  the  risk  of  his  own  reputation." 

'  I  need  scarcely  point  out  to  the  professional  reader  how  very  sensible  and  judicious 
these  directions  are  as  regards  the  position  of  the  hmb  in  such  cases.  Galen,  in  a 
Commentary  written  in  his  elegant  but  diffuse  style,  gives  our  author's  meaning  in  a 
more  expanded  form,  but  without  supplying  any  additional  information  of  the  least 
practical  importance. 

^  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  enters  into  a  lengthy  discussion  on  the  nature  of  the 
symptomatic  dysentery  here  briefly  described,  Imt  there  is  not  much  in  it  of  any  great 
interest,  or  that  is  not  quite  obvious. 

^  Our  author,  in  this  and  the  six  following  paragraphs,  resumes  the  consideration 
of  dislocations  of  the  hip-joint,  and  describes,  very  clearly  and  circumstantially,  various 
modes  of  reducing  the  head  of  the  bone.  Galen,  in  his  Commentarj',  informs  us  that 
Ctesias,  being  a  kinsman  of  Hippocrates,  and  one  of  the  Asclepiada?,  and  certain  others 
after  him,  had  found  fault  with  Hippocrates  for  giving  directions  respecting  the 
reduction,  seeing  that,  as  they  alleged,  the  bone,  when  so  reduced,  in  all  cases  imme- 
diately slips  out  of  its  socket.  This  opinion  they  pretended  to  have  founded  partly 
on  experience  and  partlv  on  the  construction  of  the  hip-joint ;  for  thev  maintained 

41 


G-12  ARTICULATIONS. 

in  tlie  following  manner  :  (it  is  a  good,  proper,  and  natural 
mode  of  rednction,  and  has  something  of  display  in  it,  if  any 
one  takes  delight  in  such  ostentatious  modes  of  procedure.) 
The  patient  is  to  be  suspended  by  the  feet  from  a  cross-beam 
with  a  strong,  soft,  and  broad  cord  ;  the  feet  are  to  be  about 
four  inches  or  less  from  one  another ;  and  a  broad  and  soft 
leather  collar  connected  with  the  cross-beam  is  to  be  put  on 
above  the  knees  ;  and  the  affected  leg  should  be  so  extended 
as  to  be  two  inches  longer  than  the  other ;  the  head  should  be 
about  two  cubits  from  the  ground,  or  a  little  more  or  less ;  and 
the  arms  should  be  stretched  along  the  sides,  and  bound  with 
something  soft ;  all  these  preparations  should  be  made  while  he 
is  lying  on  his  back,  so  that  he  may  be  suspended  for  as  short 
a  time  as  possible.  But  when  the  patient  is  suspended,  a 
person  properly  instructed  and  not  weak,  having  introduced 
his  ai'm  between  his  thighs,  is  to  place  his  fore-arm  between  the 

tliat,  as  dislocation  cannot  take  place  unless  the  ligamentum   tei'cs  be  torn,  and,  as 
when  torn,  its  parts  cannot  unite,  it  follows  that  a  complete  cure  in  this  case  is  phy- 
sically impossible.     Galen  enters  into  a  lengthy  and  elaborate  discussion  of  this 
question,  in  the  course  of  which  he  states,  that  in  laxity  of  the  joint,  the  lir/amcntum 
teres  may  be  so  elongated  as  to  allow  the  bone  to  slip  out  of  the  acetabulum  without 
being  ruptured.     And,  coming  to  tlie  point,  lie  cites  tlie  authority  of  Heraclides 
Tarentinus  in  support  of  the  opinion,  that  a  reduced  femur  may  remain  in  its  place. 
Heraclides  further  appeals  to  Hippocrates,  Diodes,  Philotinuis,EuenorBeleus(Nileus?), 
Molphis,  and  Nymphodorus  on  the  same  side.    Galen  concludes  this  portion  of  his  Com- 
mentary  with  further  stating  that  many  recent  authorities  had  reported  cases  in  which 
they  had  effected  the  reduction  without  its  being  followed  byanother  escape  of  the  bone. 
— Apollonius  Citiensis,  in  his   Commentary  on  this  passage,  replies  to  the  same 
objection  as  made  by  Ilegctor,  and  others  of  the  followers  of  Herophilus.     This  dis- 
cussion of  the  question  is  interesting  as  a  piece  of  ancient  polemic,  but  does  not  elicit 
any  additional  facts  in  illustration  of  the  subject.     See  Scholia  in  Hippocratem  et 
Galenum,  torn,  i,  pp.  34-41;  ed.  Dietz. — Celsus  alludes  to  this  controversy  in  the 
following  terms  :  "  Magnum  autem  femori  periculum  est,  ne  vel  diificulter  reponatur, 
vel  repositum  rursus  excidat.     Quidam   semper  iterum  excedcre  contendunt ;  sed 
Hippocrates,  et  Diodes,  et  Pbilotimus,  et  Nileus,  et  Heraclides  Tarentinus,  clari 
admodum   auctores,  ex  toto  se  restituisse  memorial  prodiderunt.     Neque  tot  genera 
machinamentorum  quoque,  adextendendum  in  hoc  casu  femur,  Hippocrates,  Andreas, 
Nileus,  Nymphodorus,  Protarchus,  Heraclides,  faber  quoque  quidam  reperissent,  si  id 
frustra  esset."  (viii,  20.)     With  regard  to  the  methods  of  reducing  this  dislocation, 
reconuuended  by  our  author,  I  may  mention,  in  general  terms,  that  they  will  be 
readily  understood  by  any  person  who  will  read  his  descriptions  carefully,  aiul  com- 
pare them  with  the  figures  as  given  by  Vidus  Vidius,  and  copied  from  him  by  M.  Littri'. 
There  is  not  much,  if  anything,  of  practical  importance  in  the  Commentaries  either 
of  Appollonius  or  of  Galen,  so  that  I  shall  make  but  few  extracts  from  them. 


ARTICULATIONS.  Ci:? 

perineum  and  the  dislocated  head  of  the  os  femoris ;  and  then, 
having  joined  the  other  hand  to  the  one  thus  passed  through 
the  thighs,  he  is  to  stand  by  the  side  of  the  suspended  patient, 
and  suddenly  suspend  and  swing  himself  in  the  air  as  perpen- 
dicularly as  possible,  This  method  comprises  all  the  conditions 
■svhich  are  natural ;  for  the  body  being  suspended  by  its  weight, 
produces  extension,  and  the  person  suspended  from  him,  along 
with  the  extension,  forces  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  to  rise 
up  above  the  acetabulum ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  uses  the 
bone  of  the  fore-arm  as  a  lever,  and  forces  the  os  fcmoris  to 
slip  into  its  old  seat.  The  cords  should  be  properly  prepared, 
and  care  should  be  taken  that  the  person  suspended  along  with 
the  patient  have  a  sufficiently  stronghold. 

71.  Wherefore,  as  formerly  stated,  men's  constitutions  dijffer 
much  from  one  another  as  to  the  facility  or  difficulty  with  which 
dislocations  are  reduced ;  and  the  cause  of  this  was  also  stated 
formerly  in  treating  of  the  shoulder.      In   some   the   thigh   is 

I/O  O 

reduced  with  no  preparation,  with  slight  extension,  directed  by 
the  hands,  and  with  slight  movement ;  and  in  some  the  reduction 
is  effected  by  bending  the  limb  at  the  joint,  and  making  ro- 
tation. But  much  more  frequently  it  does  not  yield  to  any 
ordinary  apparatus,  and  therefore  one  should  be  acquainted  with 
the  most  powerful  means  which  can  be  applied  in  each  case, 
and  use  whatever  may  be  judged  most  proper  under  all  circum- 
stances. The  modes  of  extension  have  been  described  in  the 
former  parts  of  the  work,  so  that  one  may  make  use  of  what- 
ever may  happen  to  be  at  hand.  For,  extension  and  counter- 
extension  are  to  be  made  in  the  dii'ections  of  the  limb  and  the 
body  ;  and  if  this  be  properly  effected,  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone 
will  be  raised  above  its  ancient  seat ;  and  if  thus  raised,  it  will 
not  be  easy  to  prevent  it  from  settling  in  its  place,  so  that  any 
ordinary  impulse  with  the  lever  and  adjustment  will  be  quite  suffi- 
cient ;  but  some  apply  insufficient  extension,  and  hence  the  reduc- 
tion gives  much  trouble.  The  bands  then  should  be  fastened,  not 
only  at  the  foot,  but  also  above  the  knee,  so  that  the  force  of  the 
extension  may  not  be  expended  on  the  knee-joint  more  than  upon 
the  hip-joint.  The  extension  in  the  direction  of  the  foot  is  to  be 
thus  contrived.  But  the  counter-extension  is  not  only  to 
be  managed  by  means  of  something  carried  round  the  chest 
and  armpits,  but  also  by  a  long,   double,    strong,    and   supple 


644  ARTICULATIONS. 

thong  applied  to  the  perineum,  and  carried  lieliind  along  the 
spine,  and  in  front  along  the  collar-bone,  and  fixed  to  the  point 
from  which  counter-extension  is  made  ;  and  then  force  is  to  be 
so  applied,  by  means  of  this  extension  and  counter-extension, 
that  the  thong  at  the  perineum  may  not  pass  over  the  head 
of  the  thigh-bone^  but  between  it  and  the  perineum ;  and 
during  the  extension  one  should  strike  the  head  of  the  femur 
with  the  fist,  so  as  to  drive  it  outward.  And  when  the  patient 
is  raised  up  by  the  stretching,  you  should  pass  a  hand  through 
{between  the  leys  ?)  and  grasp  it  with  the  other  hand,  so  as  at 
the  same  time  to  make  extension,  and  force  the  dislocated  limb 
outAvards  ;  while  some  other  person  sitting  by  the  knee  quietly 
directs  it  inwards. 

72.  It  has  been  formerly  stated  by  us  that  it  will  be  of 
importance  for  any  person  who  practises  medicine  in  a  populous 
city  to  get  prepared  a  quadrangular  board,  about  six  cubits  or 
a  little  more  in  length,  and  about  two  cubits  in  breadth  ;^  a 
fathom  will  be  sufficient  thickness  for  it ;  and  then  along  it 
fi'om  the  one  end  to  the  other,  an  excavation  must  be  made, 
so  that  the  working  of  the  levers  may  not  be  higher  than  is 
proper ;  then  at  both  sides  we  are  to  raise  short,  strong,  and 
strongly-fixed  posts,  having  axles ;  and  in  the  middle  of  the 
Ijencli  five  or  six  long  grooves  arc  to  be  scooped  out,  about  four 
inches  distant  from  one  another,  three  inches  will  be  a  sufficient 
breadth  for  them,  and  the  depth  in  like  manner;  and  although 
the  number  of  grooves  I  have  mentioned  will  be  sufficient, 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  their  being  made  all  over  the  bench. 
And  the  bench  should  have  in  its  middle  a  pretty  deep  hole, 
of  a  square  shape,  and  of  about  three  inches  in  size ;  and  into 
this  hole,  Avhen  judged  necessary,  is  to  be  adjusted  a  corre- 
sponding piece  of  wood,  rounded  above,  which,  at  the  proper 
time,  is  to  be  adjusted  between  the  perineum  and  the  head  of 
the  thigh-bone.  This  upright  piece  of  wood  prevents  the  lx)dy 
from  yielding  to  the  force   dragging  dowuAvards  by  the  feet ; 

'  The  drawings  of  the  scainnnm  Hippocratis,  as  given  by  us  from  Vidus  Vidius  and 
Littre,  will  render  this  description  quite  intelligble.  It  is  thus  described  by  Celsus : 
"  Etiamnuni  valeiitius  intenditur  raembram  super  scamnuui,  cui  ab  utraque  parte 
axes  sunt,  ad  quos  habena;  illaj  dehgantur:  qui,  ut  in  torcularibus,  conversi,  rum- 
pere  quoque,  si  perscveraverit,  uon  sohuu  cxtenderc,  uervos  et  musculos  jjossuut." 
(viii,  20.)  Sec  the  Plates. 


AirriCUliATlONS.  Glf) 

ibr  soinetiines  this  piece  of  wood  serves  the  purpose  of  counter- 
extension  upwards  ;  and  sometimes,  too,  when  extension  and 
counter-extension  are  made,  this  piece  of  wood,  if  susceptiljk^ 
of  some  motion  to  this  side  or  that,  will  serve  the  purpose  of 
a  lever  for  pushing  the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  outwards.  It 
is  on  this  account  that  several  grooves  are  scooped  out  on  the 
bench,  so  that  this  piece  of  wood,  being  erected  at  the  one 
which  answers,  may  act  as  a  lever,  either  on  the  sides  of  the 
articular  heads  of  Ijones,  or  may  make  pressure  direct  on  the 
heads  along  with  the  extension,  according  as  it  may  suit  to 
push  inwards  or  outwards  with  the  lever ;  and  the  lever  may 
be  either  of  a  round  or  broad  form,  as  may  be  judged  proper; 
for  sometimes  the  one  form  and  sometimes  the  other  suits  with 
the  articulation.  This  mode  of  applying  the  lever  along  with 
extension  is  applicable  in  the  reduction  of  all  dislocations  of  the 
thigh.  In  the  case  now  on  hand,  a  round  lever  is  proper ;  but  in 
dislocations  outwards  a  flat  lever  will  be  the  suitable  one.  By 
means  of  such  machines  and  of  such  powers,  it  appears  to  me 
that  Ave  need  never  fail  in  reducing  any  dislocation  at  a  joint. 

73.  And  one  might  find  out  other  modes  of  reduction  for 
this  joint.  If  the  Lirge  bench  were  to  have  raised  on  it  two 
posts  about  a  foot  (iw  diameter  1') ,  and  of  a  suitable  height,  on 
each  side  near  its  middle,  and  if  a  transverse  piece  of  wood  like 
the  step  of  a  ladder,  were  inserted  in  the  posts,  then  if  the  sound 
leg  were  carried  through  between  the  posts,  and  the  injured  limb 
were  brought  over  the  transverse  piece  of  wood,  which  should 
be  exactly  adapted  in  height  to  the  joint  which  is  dislocated, 
(and  it  is  an  easy  matter  so  to  adjust  it,  for  the  step  of  the 
ladder  should  be  made  a  little  higher  than  required,  and  a 
convenient  robe^  folded  several  times,  is  to  be  laid  below  the 
patient^s  body),  then  a  piece  of  wood,  of  suitable  breadth  and 
length,  is  to  be  laid  below  the  limb,  and  it  should  reach  from 
the  ankle  to  beyond  the  head  of  the  thigh-l^one,  and  should  be 
bound  moderately  tight  to  the  limb.  Then  the  Hmb  being 
extended,  either  by  means  of  the  pestle-like  piece  of  wood 
(formerly  described),  or  by  any  of  the  other  methods  of  exten- 
sion, the  limb  which  is  carried  over  the  step  with  the  piece  of 
wood  attached  to  it,  is  to  be  forced  downwards,  Avliile  somebody 
grasps  the  patient  above  the  hip-joint.  In  this  manner  the 
extension   will    carry   the    head   of  the   thigh-bone  above   the 


646  ARTICULATIONS. 

acetabulum,  while  tlie  lever  power  tliat  is  exercised  v.ill  push 
the  head  of  the  thigh-bone  into  its  natural  seat.  All  the 
above-mentioned  powers  are  strong,  and  more  than  sufficient 
to  rectify  the  accident,  if  properly  and  skilfully  applied.  For, 
as  formerly  stated,  in  most  cases  reduction  may  be  effected  by 
much  weaker  extension,  and  an  inferior  apparatus. 

71.  If  the  head  of  the  bone  slip  outwards,  extension  and 
counter-extension  must  be  made  as  described,  or  in  a  similar 
manner.  But  along  witli  the  extension  a  broad  lever  is  to  be 
used  to  force  the  bone  from  without  inwards,  the  lever  being 
placed  at  the  nates  or  a  little  farther  up,  and  some  person  is 
to  steady  the  patient's  body,  so  that  it  may  not  yield,  either  by 
grasping  him  at  the  buttock  with  his  hands,  or  this  may  be 
effected  by  means  of  another  similar  lever,  adjusted  to  one  of 
the  grooves,  while  the  patient  has  something  laid  below  him, 
and  he  is  secured,  and  the  dislocated  thigh  is  to  be  turned 
gently  from  within  outwards  at  the  knee.  Suspension  will  not 
answer  in  this  form  of  dislocation,  for,  in  this  instance,  the  arm 
of  the  person  suspended  from  him,  would  push  the  head  of  the 
thigli-bone  from  the  acetabulum.  But  one  might  use  the  piece 
of  wood  })lHeed  below  him  as  a  lever,  in  such  a  manner  as  might 
suit  with  this  mode  of  dislocation ;  it  must  work  from  without. 
But  what  use  is  there  for  more  words  ?  For  if  the  extension 
be  well  and  properly  done,  and  if  the  lever  he  properly  used, 
what  dislocation  of  the  joint  could  occur,  that  might  not  be 
thus  reduced  ?^ 

75.  In  dislocation  of  tiie  thigh,  backwards,  extension  and 
counter-extension  should  he  made  as  has  been  described  ;  and 
having  laid  on  the  bench  a  cloth  which  has  been  folded  several 
times,  so  that  the  patient  may  lie  soft,  he  is  to  be  laid  on  his 
face,  and  extension  thus  made,  and,  along  with  the  extension, 
pressure  is  to  be  made  with  a  board,  as  in  the  case  of  hump- 
biick,  the  boai'd  being  placed  on  the  region  of  the  nates,  and 
rather  below  tlian  al)ove  the  hip-joint;  and  the  hole  made  in 
the  wall  for  the  board  should  not  be  direct  over,  but  should  be 
iiiclined  a  httle  downwards,  towards  the  feet.  This  mode  of 
reduction  is  particuhirly  appropriate  to  this  variety  of  dislocation, 
and  at  the  same  time  is  very  strong.      But  perhaps,  instead  of 

'   Sec  tla-  Plate  ut  tliu  ciid  of  the  volume. 


ARTICULATIONS.  647 

the  boardj  it  miglit  be  sufficient  to  have  a  person  sitting  [on 
the  seat  of  luxation  ?),  or  pressing  with  his  hands,  or  with  his 
foot,  and  suddenly  raising  himself  up,  along  with  the  extension. 
None  of  the  other  afore- mentioned  modes  of  reduction  are 
natural  in  this  form  of  dislocation. 

7Q.  In  dislocation  forwards,  the  same  mode  of  extension 
should  be  made;  but  a  person  who  has  very  strong  hands,  and 
is  well  trained,  should  place  the  palm  of  the  one  hand  on  the 
groin,  and  taking  hold  of  this  hand  with  the  other,  is  at  the 
same  time  to  push  the  dislocated  part  downwards,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  the  fore  part  of  the  knee.  This  method  of 
reduction  is  most  especially  conformable  to  this  mode  of  dis- 
location. And  the  mode  of  suspension  is  also  not  far  removed 
from  being  natural,  but  the  person  suspended  should  be  well 
trained,  so  that  his  arm  may  not  act  as  a  lever  upon  the  joint, 
but  that  the  force  of  the  suspension  may  act  about  the  middle 
of  the  perineum,  and  at  the  os  sacrum. 

77.  Reduction  by  the  bladder  is  also  celebrated  in  disloca- 
tions at  this  joint,  and  I  have  seen  certain  persons  who,  from 
ignorance,  attempted  to  reduce  both  dislocations  outwards  and 
backwards  therewith,  not  knowing  that  thev  were  rather  dis- 

'  Of 

placing  than  replacing  the  parts;  it  is  clear,  however,  that  he 
who  first  invented  this  method  intended  it  for  dislocation 
inwards.  It  is  proper,  then,  to  know  how  the  bladder  should 
be  used,  if  it  is  to  be  used,  and  it  should  be  understood  that 
many  other  methods  are  more  powerful  than  it.  The  bladder 
should  be  placed  between  the  thighs  uninflated,  so  that  it  may 
be  carried  as  far  up  the  perineum  as  possible,  and  the  thighs 
beginning  at  the  patella  are  to  be  bound  together  with  a  swathe, 
as  far  up  as  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  and  then  a  brass  pipe  is 
to  be  introduced  into  one  of  the  loose  feet  of  the  bladder,^  and 
air  forced  into  it,  the  patient  is  to  lie  on  his  side  with  the 
injured  limb  uppermost.    This,  then,  is  tlie  preparation ;  some, 

'  By  "feet"  is  meant  corners,  I  suppose.  Dietz  gives  the  following  note  on  this 
passage :  "  Pedes  utris  qnatuor  anguli  dicuntur,  capraj  pedum  reliquia;.  Srepius  in 
Hispaiiia  vinum  hujusmodi  utribiis  incliisuui,  qui  pleni  tuniidique  capiat  formam  re- 
fci-unt,  a  niulionibus  transvehi  cognovi  iisque  inulis  impositis  loco  clitellaruin  usns 
sum  viator."  (Ed.  Dietz,  torn,  i,  p.  30.)  In  like  manner,  "pes  veli"  means  "tlie 
lower  corner  of  a  sail."     See  Catullus,  iv,  19  ;  and  Facciolati's  Lexicon,  under  Pes. 


G48  ARTICULATIONS. 

however,  do  the  thing  worse  than  as  I  hnve  described,  for 
they  do  not  bind  the  thighs  together  to  any  extent,  but  only 
at  the  knees,  neither  do  they  make  extension,  whereas  exten- 
sion should  be  made,  and  yet  some  people  by  having  the 
good  fortune  to  meet  with  a  favorable  case,  have  succeeded 
in  making  reduction.  But  it  is  not  a  convenient  method 
of  applying  force,  for  the  bladder,  when  inflated,  does  not 
present  its  most  prominent  part  to  the  articular  extremity  of 
the  femur,  which  is  the  place  that  ought  to  be  more  especially 
pressed  outwards,  but  its  middle,  which  probably  corresponds 
with  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  or  still  lower  down,  for  the 
thighs  are  naturally  curved,  being  fleshy,  and  in  contact  above, 
and  becoming  smaller  downwards,  so  that  the  natural  configura- 
tion of  the  parts  forces  the  bladder  from  the  most  proper  place. 
And  if  a  small  bladder  be  introduced,  its  power  Avill  be  small, 
and  unable  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  the  articular  bone.  But 
if  the  bladder  must  be  used,  the  thighs  arc  to  be  bound  together 
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  the  bladder  is  to  be  inflated  along 
with  the  extension  of  the  body,  and  in  this  method  of  reduction 
both  legs  are  to  be  bound  together  at  their  extremity. 

78.  The  prime  object  of  the  physician  in  the  whole  art  of 
medicine  sliould  be  to  cure  that  which  is  diseased ;  and  if  this 
can  be  accomplished  in  various  ways,  the  least  troublesome 
should  be  selected ;  for  this  is  more  becoming  a  good  man,  and 
one  well  skilled  in  the  art,  who  does  not  covet  popular  coin  of 
base  alloy.  With  regard  to  the  subject  now  on  hand,  the  fol- 
lowing are  domestic  means  of  making  extension  of  the  body, 
so  that  it  is  easy  to  choose  from  among  the  things  at  hand: — 
In  the  first  place,  when  soft  and  supple  thongs  are  not  at  hand 
for  ligatures,  either  iron  chains,  or  cords,  or  cables  of  ships,  are 
to  be  wrapped  round  v.itli  scarfs  or  pieces  of  woollen  rags, 
especially  at  the  parts  of  them  which  arc  to  be  applied,  and 
in  this  state  they  are  to  be  used  as  bauds.  In  the  second 
place,  the  patient  is  to  be  comfortably  laid  on  the  strongest 
and  largest  couch  that  is  at  hand,  and  the  feet  of  the  couch, 
cither  those  at  the  {path'ufs  ?)  head,  or  those  at  the  feet,  are 
to  be  fastened  to  the  threshold,  either  within  or  without,  as  is 
most  suitable ;  and  a  square  piece  of  wood  is  to  be  laid  across, 
and  extending  from  the  one  foot  to  the  other ;  and  if  this  piece 


ARTICULATIONS.  G49 

of  wood  be  slender,  it  should  be  bound  to  the  feet  of  the  couch, 
but,  if  it  be  thick,  there  will  be  no  necessity  for  this ;  tlicn  the 
lieads  of  the  ligatures,  l)oth  of  those  at  the  head  and  those  at 
the  feet,  are  to  be  fastened  to  a  pestle,  or  some  such  piece  of 
wood,  at  cither  end ;  the  ligatures  should  run  along  the  line  of 
the  bodv,  or  be  a  little  elevated  above  it,  and  it  should  be 
stretched  proportionally  to  the  pestles,  so  that,  standing  erect, 
the  one  may  be  fastened  to  the  threshold,  and  the  other  to  the 
transverse  piece  of  wood.  Extension  is  then  to  be  made  by 
bending  back  the  ends  of  the  pestles.^  A  ladder,  having  strong 
steps,  if  laid  below  the  bed,  will  serve  the  purpose  of  the 
threshold  and  the  piece  of  wood  laid  along  [the  foot  of  the  conch  ?), 
as  the  pestles  can  be  fastened  to  the  steps  at  either  end,  and 
when  drawn  back  they  thus  make  extension  of  the  ligatures. 
Dislocation,  inwards  or  forwards,  may  be  reduced  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner  •.  a  ladder  is  to  be  fastened  in  the  ground,  and 
the  man  is  to  be  seated  upon  it,  and  then  the  sound  leg  is  to 
be  gently  stretched  along  and  bound  to  it,  wherever  it  is  found 
convenient ;  and  water  is  to  be  poured  into  an  earthen  vessel,  or 
stones  put  into  a  hamper  and  slung  from  the  injured  leg,  so  as 
to  effect  the  reduction.  Another  mode  of  reduction  :  a  cross- 
beam is  to  be  fastened  betw-een  two  pillars  of  moderate  height ; 
and  at  one  part  of  the  cross-beam  there  should  be  a  protu- 
berance proportionate  to  the  size  of  the  nates;"  and  haWng 
bound  a  coverlet  round  the  patient^s  breast,  he  is  to  be  seated 
on  the  protuberant  part  of  the  cross-beam,  and  afterwards  the 
breast  is  to  be  fastened  to  the  pillar  by  some  broad  ligature ; 
then  some  one  is  to  hold  the  sound  leg  so  that  he  may  not  fall 
off,  and  from  the  injured  limb  is  to  be  suspended  some  con- 
venient weight,  as  formerly  described.'^ 

79.  It  should  be  particularly  known  that  the  union  of  all 
bones  is,  for  the  most  part,  by  a  head  and  socket  {cotyle);  in 
some  of  these  the  place  {socket  /)  is  cotyloid  and  oblong,    and 

'  By  "  pestles,"  as  explained  above,  was  meant  poles,  or  strong  staffs.  Celsus  uses 
the  expression  "  valida  bacula"  as  applied  to  them,  (viii,  20.) 

2  The  reading  here  seems  very  doubtful ;  Vidus  Vidius  appears  to  have  read 
TTTixvcuov,  which  M.  Littre  approves  of,  though  he  does  not  adopt  it. 

*  We  have  got  no  commentary  of  Galen  on  this  paragraph,  and  there  is  nothing 
in  the  Scholia  of  ApoUonius  of  much  interest  bearing  upon  it.  The  modes  of  re- 
duction adverted  to  in  it  are  easdy  understood,  when  the  description  is  compared 
with  the  drawings  given  by  Vidus  Vichus  and  Littre. 


Ojo  articulations. 

in  some  tlie  socket  is  glenoid  [s/iaUotv  .'^).^  In  all  dislocHtions 
reduction  is  to  be  effected,  if  possible,  immediately,  wliile  still 
warm,  but  otherwise,  as  quickly  as  it  can  be  done ;  for  reduc- 
tion will  be  a  much  easier  and  quicker  process  to  the  operator, 
and  a  much  less  painful  one  to  the  patient,  if  effected  before 
swelling  comes  on.  But  all  the  joints  when  about  to  be  re- 
duced should  be  first  softened,  and  gently  moved  about;  for, 
thus  they  are  more  easily  reduced.  And,  in  all  cases  of  re- 
duction at  joints,  the  patient  must  be  put  on  a  spare  diet,  but 
more  especially  in  the  case  of  the  greatest  joints,  and  those 
most  difficult  to  reduce,  and  less  so  in  those  which  are  very 
small  and  easily  reduced. 

80.  If  any  joint  of  the  fingers  is  dislocated,  whether  the 
first,  second,  or  the  third,  the  same  method  of  reduction  is  to 
be  applied,  but  the  largest  joints  are  the  most  difficult  to  re- 
duce. There  are  four  modes  of  displacement — either  upwards, 
downwards,  or  to  either  side ;  most  commonly  upwards,  and 
most  rarely  laterally,  and  in  consequence  of  violent  motion."  On 
both  sides  of  its  articular  cavity  there  is  a  sort  of  raised  border. 
Yv'lien  the  dislocation  is  upwards  or  downwards,  owing  to  the 
articular  cavity  having  smoother  edges  there  than  at  the  sides, 
if  the  joint  of  it  be  dislocated,  it  is  more  easily  reduced.  This 
is  the  mode  of  reduction  : — The  end  of  the  finger  is  to  be 
M-rapped  round  with  a  fillet,  or  something  such  that,  when  you 
lay  hold  of  it  and  make  extension,  it  v>'ill  not  sli]) ;  and  when 
this  is  done,  some  person  is  to  grasp  the  arm  at  the  wrist,  and 
another  is  to  take  hold  of  the  finger  which  is  wrapped  in  the 
fillet,  and  then  each  is  to  make  considerable  extension  towards 
himself,   and   at  the  same   time  the  projecting  bone  is  to  be 

'  Our  author  evidently  alludes  especially  to  tlie  hip-  and  shoulder-joints,  hut  he 
applies  the  terms  in  a  general  way  to  all  the  articulations.  The  apj)lication  of  the 
term  kotiXij  to  the  articular  cavity  of  the  hip-joint  is  very  ancient,  hcing  met  with 
in  the  Homeric  poems,  as — 

f'rffft  iiijpoQ 
ItX'V  ^i'<^~pf'i>i'!'Ch  icoTi<\)]i'  dvT)}v  KuXiovm. 

(Iliad,  V,  305,  3()G.) 

^  Our  author  evidently  understands  the  hand  to  be  placed  in  a  state  of  pronation  . 
hy  u|)wards,  then,  is  meant  forwards,  and  by  downwards  is  meant  backwards,  as  the 
terms  are  now  generally  applied.  Sec  Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary.  Celsns  also 
uses  the  terms  forwards  and  backwards:  ''qui  vel  in  priorem  vcl  in  posteriureni 
partem  cxciderunt.''   (viii,  I'.).) 


ARTICULATIONS.  651 

pushed  into  its  place.  But,  if  the  disk)cation  be  hiterul,  the 
same  mode  of  reduction  is  to  be  used;  but  when  you  tliink 
that  the  extremity  of  the  bone  has  cleared  the  rim,  at  the  same 
time  that  extension  is  made,  the  bone  is  to  be  pushed  direct 
into  its  place,  while  another  person  on  the  other  side  of  the 
finger  is  to  take  care  and  make  counter-pressure,  so  that  it  may 
not  again  slip  out  there.  The  twisted  nooses  formed  from 
palm-shoots  are  convenient  for  effecting  reduction,  if  you  will 
make  extension  and  counter-extension  by  holding  the  twisted 
string  in  the  one  hand  and  the  wrist  in  the  other.^  When 
reduced,  you  must  bind  the  part  as  quickly  as  possible  with 
bandages  :  these  are  to  be  very  slender,  and  waxed  with  cerate, 
neither  very  soft  nor  very  hard,  but  of  middle  consistence ;  for 
that  which  is  hard  drops  off  from  the  tinger,  while  that  which 
is  soft  and  liquid  is  melted  and  lost  by  the  increased  heat  of 
the  finger.  The  bandage  is  to  be  loosed  on  the  third  or  fourth 
day ;  but  on  the  whole,  if  inflamed,  it  is  to  be  the  more  fre- 
quently loosed,  and  if  otherwise,  more  rarely ;  this  I  say  re- 
specting all  the  joints.  The  articulation  of  a  finger  is  restored 
in  fourteen  days.  The  treatment  of  the  fingers  and  of  the  toes 
is  the  same. 

81.  After  all  reductions  of  joints  the  patient  should  be  con- 
fined to  a  restricted  diet  and  abstinence  until  the  seventh  day; 
and  if  there  be  inflammation,  the  bandages  are  to  be  the  more 
frequently  loosed,  but  otherwise,  less  frequently,  and  the  pained 
joint  is  to  be  kept  constantly  in  a  state  of  rest,  and  is  to  be 
laid  in  the  most  convenient  position  possible. 

82.  Accidents  at  the  knee  are  more  mild  than  at  the  elbow, 
from  its  being  more  compact,  regular,  and  elegant  in  its  con- 
struction ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  more  readily  dislocated  and  re- 
duced. It  is  most  frequently  dislocated  inwards,  but  also  out- 
wards and  backwards.  The  modes  of  reduction  are  these  :  by 
flexion  at  the  knee,  or  by  sudden  calcitration,"  or  having  rolled 

'  These  strings  or  nooses,  formed  from  palm-shoots,  are  mentioned  in  allusion  tc 
this  surgical  use  of  them  by  Aristotle  (De  Partibus  Animal.,  iv,  9) ;  and  by  Diodes, 
in  a  fragment  preserved  by  Apollonius  Citiensis  (ed.  Dietz,  p.  19).  See  further 
Littre,  torn,  iv,  p.  61.  They  would  appear  to  have  been  formed  from  the  inner  rind 
of  the  palm-tree;  these,  if  of  a  glutinous  nature,  would,  no  doubt,  answer  excellently 
\\\  the  case  to  which  they  are  applied  by  our  author. 

'■*  Tliis  term  has  not  l)een  explained  by  any  ancient  author,  and  therefore  there  is 
some  difficulty  in  understanding  properly  the  process  to  which  it  is  applied.     M, 


(i.V2  ARTICULATIONS. 

a  swathe  into  a  ball,  and  fixed  it  in  the  ham,  tlie  patient's  body 
is  to  be  suddenly  dropped  on  its  bended  knees.  Dislocation 
backwards,  also,  as  in  the  case  of  the  elbow,  may  be  reduced 
by  moderate  extension,  and  to  either  side,  either  by  flexion  or 
calcitration,  but  also  by  moderate  extension.  The  adjustment 
is  the  same  in  all  cases.  In  dislocations  backwards  which  are 
not  reduced,  the  patient  cannot  bend  the  joint,  but  neither 
can  he,  to  any  great  extent,  in  the  other  varieties  ;  the  thigh 
and  leg  are  wasted  in  front ;  but  if  inwards  the  patients  become 
bow-legged,  and  the  external  parts  are  wasted  ;  but  if  outwards 
they  become  more  bandy-legged,  but  the  impediment  is  less, 
for  the  body  is  supported  on  the  larger  of  the  bones,  and  the 
inner  parts  are  wasted.  When  these  accidents  happen  at  birth 
or  during  adolescence,  they  follow  the  rule  formerly  stated.^ 

<S3.  Dislocations  at  the  ankle-joint  require  strong  extension, 
either  with  the  hands  or  some  such  means ;  and  adjustment, 
v.'hich  at  the  same  time  effects  both  purposes,  as  is  common  in 
;dl  cases. 2 

84.  Injuries  of  the  foot  are  to  be  remedied  like  those  of 
tlie  hand.^ 

8.").  The  bones  connected  with  the  leg,  and  which  are  dis- 
located, either  at  birth  or  during  adolescence,  follow  the  same 
course  as  those  in  the  hand.' 

80.  ATlien  persons  jumping  from  a  height  pitch  on  the  heel, 
so  as  to  occasion  separation  [diastasis)  of  the  bones,  ecchymosis 
of  the  veins,  and  contusion  of  the  nerves  ;  when  these  symptoms 
are  very  violent  there  is  danger  of  sphacelus,  and  that  the  case 

Jjitlre  gives  a  very  elaborate  and  ingenious  disquisition  on  this  subject.  The  follow- 
ing is  his  own  explanation  :  "  Cela  ctabli,  voici  comment  je  concois  de  Vtclactisme  : 
le  patient  utait  jilace  debout  sur  la  janibe  saine,  et  dcs  aides  le  maiiUenaieiit  dans 
cette  position;  la  jambe  luxce  etait  en  Fair;  le  medecin  la  saississait  par  le  pied  ct 
la  flcchissait  brusquement  en  la  portant  vers  les  fesses.  Ce  precede,  dans  rhypothese 
(jue  je  propose,  ne  ditfererait  de  la  ilexion  simple  (pie  parce  qu'il  se  pratiquerait  le 
nialade  etant  <lel)out."  ((Euv.  Ilii).,  torn,  iv,  p.  68,  Arg.)  Foes,  in  his  note  on  this 
passage,  explains  the  term  thus  :  "  Excalcitratio,  per  calces  elapsi  ossis  impulsio,  aut 
ea  qua;  fit  repcnte  calcibus  in  sublime  jactatis  et  per  subitum  flexum  articuli  repositio."' 
I  do  not  exactly  see  how  the  process,  as  re))resented  by  Foes,  could  have  eftected  the 
purpose;  I  am  inclined  therefore  to  think  that  il.  Littre's  exi)lanation  is  the  true 
one. 

'  On  dislocations  at  the  knee-joint,  see  the  Argument,  and  §  37  of  the  work.  On 
Fractures. 

^  See,  On  Fractures.  §  13.  ^  Ibid.,  §  'J.  ^  Ibid.,  §  10. 


ARTICULATIONS.  053 

may  give  troii1)lc  during  life,  for  tlie  bones  arc  so  constructed  as 
to  slip  from  one  another,  and  the  nerves  communicate  together/ 
And,  indeed,  in  cases  of  fracture,  cither  from  an  injury  in  the 
h^g  or  thigh,  or  in  paralysis  of  the  nerves  {tendons  ?)  connected 
with  these  parts,  or  from  neglect  during  confinement  to  hed, 
when  the  heel  gets  blackened  the  most  serious  consequences 
result  therefrom.  Sometimes,  in  addition  to  the  sphacelus, 
there  come  on  acute  fevers,  accompanied  with  hiccup,  aberration 
of  intellect,  and  speedy  death,  with  lividities  of  the  large  blood- 
vessels. With  regard  to  the  symptoms  attending  exacerbations, 
if  the  ccchymosed  and  blackened  parts  and  those  around  be 
somewhat  hard  and  red,  and  if  along  with  the  hardness  there 
be  lividity,  mortification  is  to  be  apprehended ;  but  if  the  parts 
be  slightly  livid,  or  even  very  livid,  and  the  swelling  diffused, 

'  The  accident  here  briefly  touched  upon  would  appear  to  Ije  dislocation  of  the 
OS  calcis  from  the  astragalus.  A  very  distinct  case  of  it  was  reported  lately  by  Mr. 
Bransby  Cooper.  "  John  Ryley,  aged  49,  was  admitted  into  Guy's  Hospital  with  a 
dislocation  of  foot.  lie  stated  that  in  swinging  himself  out  of  a  cart,  he  lost  his 
liold,  and  slipped  down  from  the  curb-stone,  his  right  foot  being  turned  completely 
inwards,  in  which  position  it  remained  until  he  was  brought  into  the  Hospital.  Tlie 
diagnostic  marks  of  the  injury  were  as  follows :  The  chief  deformity  arose  from  tlie 
complete  inversion  of  the  whole  foot,  the  sole  of  which  faced  directly  inwards.  The 
astragalus  formed  also  a  very  evident  deformity ;  for,  although  it  remained  in  its 
natural  position  with  respect  to  the  tibia  and  fibula,  its  anterior  articulatory  surface 
pressed  so  tightly  against  tlie  skin,  that,  had  the  dislocation  remained  unreduced,  the 
integuments  must  very  soon  have  undergone  idceration.  The  superior  edge  of  the 
anterior  articulatory  surface  of  the  astragalus  could  be  easily  felt,  and  its  form  was 
distinctly  visible ;  a  deep  hollow  was  also  observed  below  the  external  malleolus, 
where  there  was  evidently  extensive  contusion  of  the  soft  parts.  The  external 
malleolus  formed  a  considerable  projection  in  its  natural  situation ;  but  neitlier  it  nor 
any  of  the  other  bones  of  the  foot  was  fractured.  From  these  appearances  it  was 
judged  to  be  a  dislocation  of  the  os  calcis  and  navicular  bone,  with  the  rest  of  the 
foot  outwards  from  the  astragalus.  The  reduction  was  effected  in  the  following 
manner :  The  surgeon  knelt  at  the  foot  of  the  patient's  bed,  and,  grasping  the  heel 
with  his  right  hand,  made  extension  from  tlie  instep  with  his  left,  an  assistant  at  the 
same  time  pressing  the  tibia  inwards  towards  its  natural  position.  The  reduction 
was  very  easily  effected."  Severe  symptoms  supervened  at  first,  but  afterwards  a 
perfect  recovery  took  place.  (Med.  Gaz.,  No.  1069.)  Though  in  this  case  the  result 
was  favorable,  there  can  be  little  dotilit  that  if  the  dislocation  had  licen  compound, 
or  if  the  parts  had  not  been  promptly  replaced,  the  consequences  might  have  been 
such  as  Hippocrates  describes,  namely,  great  swelling  and  gangrene.  These  symptoms, 
it  will  be  seen,  he  also  represents  as  the  consequences  of  injuries,  and  of  the  pressure 
produced  by  position  in  cases  of  paralysis.  His  observations  on  the  latter  case  are 
most  appropriate  and  deserving  of  attention. 


G54  ARTICULATIONS. 

or  if  greenish  and  soft,  these  appearances,  in  such  cases,  are 
all  favorable.  The  treatment,  if  no  fever  be  present,  consists 
in  the  administration  of  hellebore,  but  otherwise  it  is  not  to 
be  given,  but  oxyglyky  [decoction  of  honeycombs  and  vinegar) 
is  to  be  given  for  drink,  if  required.  Bandaging  as  in  the 
other  articulations  :  above  all,  more  especially  in  contusions, 
the  bandages  should  be  numerous  and  softer  than  usual,  but 
the  compression  should  be  less ;  most  turns  should  be  made 
around  the  heel.  Position,  like  the  bandaging,  should  be 
so  regulated  as  not  to  determine  to  the  heel.  Splints  are  not 
to  be  used. 

87.  When  the  foot  is  dislocated,  either  alone  or  along  with 
its  epiphysis,  the  displacement  is,  for  the  most  part,  to  the 
inside.  If  not  reduced,  in  the  course  of  time,  the  hip,  the  thigh, 
and  the  side  of  the  leg  opposite  the  dislocation,  become 
atrophied.  Reduction  is  the  same  as  in  the  wrist,  but  the 
extension  requires  to  l)e  very  powerful.  Trciitment,  agreeably 
to  the  general  rule  for  joints.  Exacerbations  do  occur,  but 
less  frequently  than  in  dislocations  .at  the  wrist,  provided  the 
parts  get  rest.  "While  they  remain  at  rest  the  diet  should  be 
restricted.  Those  which  occur  at  birth,  or  during  adolescence, 
follow  the  rule  formerlv  stated.^ 

'  See,  On  Fractures,  ^  13.  Dislocation  of  the  foot,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  astragalus, 
is  here  correctly  dcscribeil.  Compare  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper's  description  of  the  acci- 
dent in  the  Medical  Gazette,  No.  1069.  As  stated  by  our  author,  dislocation  inwards 
is  far  more  common  than  any  of  the  other  varieties,  and  is  generally  accompanied 
with  fracture  of  the  malleolus.  Whether  by  epiphysis,  in  this  paragraph,  is  meant 
the  external  malleolus  or  conjoined  malleoli,  has  been  much  disputed.  If  the  latter, 
the  case  was  evidently  fracture  of  bones  of  the  leg  immediately  above  the  ankle-joint. 
See  the  Arsumenl. 


0  C  H  L  I  C  U  S, 


MOCHLICUS. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

The  work  commences  with  a  very  brief  description  of  the 
bones  of  the  human  body ;  that  is  to  say,  Avith  a  compendious 
system  of  Osteology  (§  1). 

In  §  2,  fractures  of  the  nose  are  treated  of. 
In  §  3,  those  of  the  ears  are  treated  of. 
In  §  4,  there  is  given  a  summary  view  of  dislocations  of  the 
lower  jaw. 

In  §  5,  the  dislocations  of  the  shoulder  are  minutely  de- 
scribed, alone;  with  all  the  known  methods  of  reduction. 

In  §  6,  is  given  an  account  of  the  nature  and  treatment  of 
abruption  of  the  acromion. 

In  §  7,  two  forms  of  displacement  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm, 
at  the  elbow-joint,  are  described  :  the  same  as  'Articulations/ 
§  17. 

In  §  8,  two  complete  luxations  of  the  same  are  given  in  the 
same  terms  as  §  18,  of  '  Articulations.' 

In  §  9,  is  given  a  brief  notice  of  dislocation  forwards  and 
backwards  :  it  is  the  same  as  '  Articulations,'  §  19. 

In  ^  10,  there  is  a  brief  notice  of  diastasis  of  the  bones  at 
the  elbow,  by  which  is  evidently  meant  separation  of  the  radius 
from  the  ulna  :  the  same  as  '  Articulations,'  §  20. 

In  §  11,  the  effects  of  these  luxations  when  not  reduced, 
are  brieflv  described:  the  same  as  'Articulations/  'S  21. 

In  §  12,  complete  lateral  dislocations  of  the  bones  of  the 
fore-arm,  are  treated  of:  the  same  as  'Articulations,'  §  22. 

In  §  13,  complete  dislocations  forwards  and  backwards,  are 
noticed  :  the  same  as  '  Articulations,'  §  23. 

In  §  14',  another  form  of  dislocation  is  described  :  the  same 
as  §  7,  and  '  Articulations,'  .^  2 1. 

In  §  15,  the  general  rules  by  which  reduction  is  to  be 
accomplished,,  are  briefly  given. 

42 


fir>8  jMOCIILICUS. 

In  '^  16^  a  description  is  given  of  luxation,  or  subluxation 
inwards  and  outwards,  of  the  bones  at  tlie  wrist. 

In  §  17,  complete  luxations  of  the  bones  at  the  wrist,  in  all 
directions,  along  with  separate  displacement  of  either  bone  are 
described  very  succinctly. 

In  §  18,  the  consequences  of  unreduced  dislocations  are  very 
briefly  noticed. 

In  §  11),  luxations  of  the  fingers  are  described. 

Luxations  at  the  hip-joint  are  correctly  and  distinctly  de- 
scri])cd  in  §§  20,  21,  22,  23,  24. 

The  modes  of  reduction  are  briefly  enumerated  in  §  25. 

In  §  26,  the  symptoms  and  treatment  of  dislocation  at  tiie 
knee  are  correctly  given. 

In  §  27,  the  modes  of  reducing  dislocations  at  the  ankle- 
joint  are  briefly  described. 

In  §  28,  the  analogy  between  the  accidents  which  befall 
the  liones  of  the  foot,  and  those  of  the  hand,  is  adverted  to. 

In  '^  29,  the  consequences  of  unreduced  luxations  in  the 
bones  of  the  foot  are  compared  with  the  same  in  the  hand. 

In  §  .'iO,  the  treatment  of  gangrene,  following  upon  disloca- 
tion of  the  OS  calcis,  and  the  consequence  of  other  causes,  is 
laid  down  in  the  same  terms  as  at  '  Articulations,'  ■^  86. 

In  §  31,  the  luxations  at  the  ankle-joint  are  briefly  given  as 
in  §  87  of  the  work  '  On  the  Articulations.^ 

In  §  32,  a  brief  summary  is  given  of  the  important  chapter 
on  club-foot,  in  the  work  '  On  the  Articulations^,  §  62. 

lu  §  33,  the  treatment  of  compound  luxations  is  given  with 
much  precision. 

In  §  3 1,  a  summary  is  given  of  the  rules  of  practice  respecting 
complete  section  of  the  extremities. 

In  §  35,  gangrene  of  the  members  resulting  from  dislocation 
or  any  other  cause,  is  distinctly  treated  of. 

In  ■§>  36,  curvatures  of  the  spine  from  accident,  and  other- 
wise, are  treated  of.  The  doctrine  is  enforced  that,  as  in 
injuries  of  the  chest,  there  is  more  danger  from  a  severe  con- 
tusion than  from  a  fracture. 

In  ^  37,  the  displacement  of  the  spinal  vertebrae  from  injury 
is  briefly  treated  of. 

In  §  38,  all  the  usual  modes  of  reducing  dislocation  of  tlie 
spine  arc  treated  of  at  consideral)le  length. 


ARGUMENT.  059 

In  §  39,  necrosis  of  the  palate  with  subsidence  of  the  nasal 
1)ones  is  briefly  described. 

In  §   10,  some  general  observations  of  consideralile  import- 
ance, on  displacements  of  1)ones  are  given,  with  other  remarks. 

In  §  41,  the  treatment  of  fractures  complicated  with  a  wound, 
is  distinctly  laid  down. 

In  §  43,  are  given  a  few  general  observations  on  complete 
and  partial  luxations. 

We  can  have  no  difficulty  in   deciding  that  the  author   of 
this  work,  whether  Hippocrates  himself,  or  one  of  his  immediate 
successors,  must  have  intended  it  as   a  remembrancer  to  the 
reader  on  all  the  various  subject-matters  treated  of  in  the  preced- 
ing works  'On  Fractures,'  and  '  On  the  Articulations.^     In  fact, 
many  of  the  paragraphs  in  it,  and  the  work  '  On  the  Articu- 
lations,' are  given  in  exactly  the  same  words.     That  tlie  object 
of  the  work  is  to  fix  in  the   mind   the  important   fticts  more 
fully  given  in  these  two  works,  can  admit  of  no  doubt,  and  as 
such  its  importance  cannot  be  questioned.      Taking  together 
the  four  treatises,  namely,  '  On  the  Surgery,'  '  Ou  Fractures,' 
'  On  the  Articulations,'  and  '  The  Mochlicus,'  the  subject  of 
dislocations  and  fractures  is  treated  of  most  scientifically  and 
completely.    In  the  first  place,  the  work  '  Ou  the  Surgery,'  sup- 
plies us  with  a  coup  d'wil,  as  it  were,  of  the  whole  subject,  and 
prepares  us  for  what  we  are  to  meet  with  in  the  course  of  our 
investigation;  then  we  have  all  the  parts  of  the  subject  examined 
separately  and  minutely,  in  the  works  '  On  Fractures/  and  'On 
the  Articulations ;'  and  to  conclude,  we  have  here  a  brief  reca- 
pitulation of  all  the  heads  of  the  preceding  inquiry.    When  we 
reflect  on  the  admirable  manner  in  which  the  Avliole  subject  is 
handled,  and  the  many  important  truths  which  are  evolved  in 
the  course  of  it,  Ave  cannot  surely  but  regard  with  veneration 
the  labours  of  our  forefathers,  nor  can  we  miss  to  be  impressed 
with  the  feeling  that  they  have  more  cause  to  look  down  with 
contempt  upon  us  their  posterity  for  not  having  prosecuted  with 
more  success  the  path  of  discovery  Avhich  they  had  pointed  out, 
than  their  posterity  have  to  look  back  with  scorn  upon  them, 
because  Ave  have  noAV  made  some  little  advances  beyond  their 
limit  s.  In  conclusion,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  it  as  my  decided 
opinion,  that  no  other  author  has  treated  the  same  subject  in  so 
complete  a  manner  as  Hippocrates  has  done  in  these  treatises. 


660 


MOCHLICUS. 

1.^  With  regard  to  the  construction  of  bones,  the  bones  and 
joints  of  the  fingers  are  simple,  the  bones  of  the  hand  and  foot 
are  numerous,  and  articulated  in  various  ways ;  the  uppermost 
are  the  largest ;  the  heel  consists  of  one  bone  which  is  seen  to 
project  outwards,  and  the  back  tendons  are  attached  to  it. 
The  leg  consists  of  two  bones,  united  together  above  and  below, 
but  slightly  separated  in  the  middle;  the  external  bone  {fibula), 
where  it  comes  into  proximity  with  the  little  toe,  is  but  slightly 
smaller  than  the  other,  more  so  where  they  are  separated,  and 
at  the  knee,  the  outer  hamstring  arises  from  it ;"  these  bones 
have  a  common  epiphysis  below,  with  which  the  foot  is  moved, 
and  another  epiphysis  above,^  in  which  is  moved  the  articular 
extremity  of  the  femur,  which  is  simple  and  light  in  proportion 
to  its  length,  in  the  form  of  a  condyle,  and  having  the  patella 
(connected  with  it  ?),  the  femur  itself  bends  outwards  and 
forwards ;  its  head  is  a  round  epiphysis  which  gives  origin  to 
the  ligament  inserted  in  the  acetabulum  of  the  hip-joint.* 
This  bone  is  articulated  somewhat  obliquely,  but  less  so  than 
the  humerus.  The  ischium  is  united  to  the  great  vertebra 
contiguous  to  the  os  sacrum  by  a  cartilaginous  ligament.^ 
The  spine,  from  the  os  sacrum  to  the  great  vertebra,  is  curved 
backwards;  in  this  quarter  are  situated  the  bladder,  the  organs 
of  generation,  and  the  inclined  portion  of  the  rectum ;   from 

'  The  brief  description  of  the  l)Oiies  given  in  this  paragraph  is  evidently  condensed 
fi'om  a  larger  work  on  the  subject.  A  considerable  portion  of  the  matter  which  is 
found  here  in  an  abridged  form,  is  taken  from  the  preceding  treatises,  On  Fractures 
and  On  the  Articulations,  but  not  the  whole  of  it. 

'^  The  tendon  of  the  biceps. 

■*  It  will  be  here  perceived  that  by  epiphysis  is  merely  meant  a  close  union  of 
the  two  bones  by  means  of  a  ligament.  The  term  in  this  j)aragrapli  is  not  always 
used  in  this  sense.  Strictly  speaking,  its  signitication  would  appear  to  be  a  pro- 
tuberance of  a  bone.  It  is  applied  to  the  malleoli,  to  the  head  of  the  tibia,  to  the 
head  and  neck  of  the  femur,  to  the  spinous  processes  of  the  vertebra^,  to  the  upper 
and  lower  extremities  of  the  humerus,  and  to  the  lower  extremity  of  the  radius. 

*  Allusion  is  evidently  made  to  the  ligamentum  teres. 

•''  It  will  be  readily  perceived  that  the  term  ischium  is  not  used  here  exactly  as 
applied  Ijy  modern  anatomists.  It  is  applied  in  this  place  to  the  ilium  where  it  is 
articulated  with  the  os  sacrum.  By  the  great  vertebra,  as  stated  in  the  preceding 
work,  is  meant  the  last  vertebra  of  the  loins. 


MOCHLICUS.  GGI 

this  to  the  diaphragm  it  pi'occeds  in  a  straiglit  line  inclining 
forwards,  and  the  psose  are  situated  there ;  from  this  pointy  to 
the  great  vertebra  above  the  tops  of  the  shoulders,  it  rises  in  a 
line  that  is  curved  back^vards,  and  the  curvature  appears  greater 
than  it  is  in  reality,  for  the  posterior  processes  of  the  spine  are 
there  highest ;  the  articulation  of  the  neck  inclines  forwards. 
The  vertebrse  on  the  inside^  are  regularly  placed  upon  one 
another,  but  behind  they  are  connected  by  a  cartilaginous 
ligament ;  they  are  articulated  in  the  form  of  synarthrosis  at 
the  back  part  of  the  spinal  marrow ;  behind  they  have  a  sharp 
process  having  a  cartilaginous  epiphysis,  whence  proceeds  the 
roots  of  nerves  running  downwards,  as  also  muscles  extending 
from  the  neck  to  the  loins,  and  filling  the  space  between  the 
ribs  and  the  spine.  The  ribs  are  connected  to  all  the  inter- 
vertebral spaces  on  the  inside,  from  the  neck  to  the  lumbar 
region,  by  a  small  ligament,  and  before  to  the  sternum,  their 
extremities  being  spongy  and  soft;  their  form  is  the  most  arched 
in  man  of  all  animals  ;  for  in  this  part,  man  is,  of  all  animals, 
the  narrowest  in  proportion  to  his  bulk.  The  ribs  are  united 
to  each  vertebra  by  a  small  ligament  at  the  place  from  which 
the  short  and  broad  lateral  processes  [transverse  processes^) 
arise.  The  sternum  is  one  continuous  bone,  having  lateral  pits 
for  the  insertion  of  the  ribs  ;  it  is  of  a  spongy  and  cartilaginous 
structure.  The  clavicles  are  rounded  in  front,  having  some 
slight  movements  at  the  sternum,  but  more  free  at  the  acromion. 
The  acromion,  in  man,  arises  from  the  scapula  differently 
from  most  other  animals.  The  scapula  is  cartilaginous  towards 
the  spine,  and  spongy  elsewhere,  having  an  irregular  figure 
externally ;  its  neck  and  articular  cavity  cartilaginous ;  it  does 
not  interfere  with  the  movements  of  the  ribs,  and  is  free  of  all 
connexion  with  the  other  bones,  except  the  humerus.  The 
head  of  the  humerus  is  articulated  with  its  {glenoid?)  cavity, 
by  means  of  a  small  ligament,  and  it  consists  of  a  rounded 
epiphysis  composed  of  spongy  cartilage,  the  humerus  itself  is 
bent  outwards  and  forwards,  and  it  is  articulated  with  its 
{^glenoid'')  cavity  by  its  side,  and  not  in  a  straight  line.  At 
the  elbow  it  is  broad,  and  has  condyles  and  ca\ities,  and  is  of 

'  Meaning  before,  that  is  to  say,  at  their  anterior  part. 


GG2  MOCIILICUS. 

a  solid  consistence ;  behind  it  is  a  cavity  in  whicli  tlie  coronoid 
process  {olecranon?)  of  the  uhia  is  lodged^  when  tlie  arm  is 
extended  -^  here,  too^  is  inserted  the  benumbing  nerve/  which 
arises  from  between  the  tAvo  bones  of  the  fore-arm  at  their 
junction^  and  terminates  there. 

2.  When  tlie  nose  is  fractured,  the  parts  should  be  modelled 
instantly,  if  possible.  If  the  fracture  be  in  its  cartilaginous 
part,  introduce  into  the  nostrils  a  tent  formed  of  caddis,  inclosed 
in  the  outer  skin  of  a  Carthaginian  hide,  or  anything  else 
which  does  not  irritate ;  the  skin  is  to  be  glued  to  the  parts 
displaced,  whicli  are  to  be  thus  rectified.  Bandaging  in  this 
case  docs  mischief.  The  treatment  is  to  consist  of  flour  with 
manna,  or  of  svdphur  with  cerate.  You  will  immediately 
adjust  the  fragments,  and  afterwards  retain  them  in  place  with 
your  fingers  introduced  into  the  nostrils,  and  turning  the  parts 
into  place ;  then  the  Carthaginian  skin  is  to  be  used.  Callus 
forms  even  when  there  is  a  MOund ;  and  the  same  things  are 
to  be  done,  even  when  there  is  to  be  exfoliation  of  the  bones, 
for  this  is  not  of  a  serious  nature.^ 

'  IIcic  I  would  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  application  of  this  term, 
"the  coronoid  process  of  the  ulna"  (?)  Kopiom)  i)  tK  tov  7r»;xfoc),  which  creates  a 
good  deal  of  amhiguity  in  several  of  our  author's  dcscri])tions  of  the  accidents  at  the 
elhow-joint.  There  can  he  no  douht,  in  this  place,  that  it  is  applied  to  the  olecranon, 
as  I  think  it  is  on  all  occasions,  hut  j\T.  Littre  interprets  ditfercntly  several  of  the 
jiassages  in  which  it  occurs.  In  the  present  instance,  M.  Littre,  however,  understands 
it  as  I  always  do.  By  Galen,  the  term  (kojowcj;)  is  alw,ays  decidedly  applied  to  the 
whole  of  the  posterior  process  of  the  ulna,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  olecranon.  See 
Chirnrgici  Veteres,  ed.  Cocchi,  p.  141. 

^  Foes  explains  this  as  meaning  the  ligament :  he  says,  "  j'cipKwStg  t'tvpoi'  liga- 
mentum  intelligere  vidctur  quod  ligamentorum  natnra  sensu  carcat.  Innuit  antem 
ligamcntuni  illud  dcnsum,  crassum  et  validum  ac  membranosura,  quod  ex  brachii  tine 
inferiore  excrtiun,  cuhituni  cum  radio  conncctit,  totanique  deartic\dationem  circum- 
vesficns,  majore  tamcn  parte  cubitum  annectit,  ut  scrit)it  Ilijipocrates  libro  de  Fract." 
Rut,  if  our  author  meant  the  ligament  in  this  place,  it  is  clear  that  he  ascribes  to  it 
the  well-known  sensation  occasioned  by  j)rcssure  on  the  ulnar  nerve.  The  following 
description  of  it  will  explain  clearly  what  1  allude  to :  "  At  tlie  elbow  the  ulnar  nerve 
is  superficial,  and  supported  by  the  inner  condyle,  against  which  it  is  easily  com- 
pressed, giving  rise  to  the  thrilling  sensation  along  the  inner  side  of  the  fore-arm  and 
little  tiuger,  ascribed  to  striking  the  'funny-bone.'"  (Wilson's  Anatomy,  p.  392.) 
Whether  or  not  Hippocrates  may  not  fall  into  the  mistake  of  confounding  nerves  with 
ligaments  I  cannot  venture  to  state  positively. 

^  This  paragraph  is  abridged  from  §§  35,  3G,  37,  38,  39  of  the  work,  On  the 
Articulations.  On  the  caddis  mentioned  in  this  ])aragraph,  see  the  editors  of  Erotiau, 
Eustachius,  and  Fraiilzius,  under  (rx»'>/  dOovlov. 


MOCIILICUS.  G()3 

3.  In  fractures  of  tlie  ears,  neitlicr  bandages  nor  cataplasms 
slionld  be  used  ;  or,  if  any  bandage  be  used,  it  sliould  l)o  i)ut 
on  very  light ;  tlie  cerate  and  sulphur,  should  be  applied  to 
agglutinate  the  bandages.  When  matter  forms  in  the  ears,  it 
is  found  to  be  more  deeply  seated  than  might  be  supposed,  for 
all  parts  that  are  pulpy,  and  consist  of  juicy  flesh,  prove 
deceptions  in  such  a  case.  But  no  harm  will  result  from 
making  an  opening,  for  the  parts  are  lean,  watery,  and  full  of 
mucus.  No  mention  is  here  made  of  the  places  and  circum- 
stances wliicli  render  it  fatal  to  make  an  opening.^  The  cure 
is  soonest  effected  by  transfixing  the  ear  with  a  cautery ;  but 
the  ear  is  maimed  and  diminished  in  size,  if  burnt  across.  If 
opened,  one  of  the  gentle  medicines  for  fresh  wounds  should 
be  used  as  a  dressing.^ 

4.  The  jaw-bone  is  often  slightly  displaced  [suhluxated?), 
and  is  restored  again ;  it  is  dislocated  but  rarely,  especiallj^  in 
gaping;  in  fact,  the  bone  is  never  dislocated  unless  it  slip  while 
the  mouth  is  opened  wide.  It  slips,  however,  the  more  readily 
from  its  ligaments  being  oblique,  supple,  and  of  a  yielding 
nature.  The  symptoms  are  :  the  lower  jaw  protrudes,  it  is  dis- 
torted to  the  side  opposite  the  dislocation,  and  the  patient  can- 
not shut  his  mouth;  when  both  sides  are  dislocated,  the  jaw 
projects  more,  the  mouth  can  be  less  shut,  but  there  is  no  dis- 
tortion ;  this  is  shown  by  the  rows  of  the  teeth  in  the  upper 
and  lower  jaw  corresponding  with  one  another.  If,  then,  both 
sides  be  dislocated,  and  not  immediately  reduced,  the  patient 
for  the  most  part  dies  on  the  tenth  day,  with  symptoms  of  con- 
tinued fever,  stupor,  and  coma,  for  the  muscles  there  induce 
such  effects;  there  is  disorder  of  the  bowels  attended  with 
scanty  and  unmixed  dejections ;  and  the  vomitings,  if  any,  are 
of  the  same  character.  The  other  variety  is  less  troublesome. 
The  method  of  reduction  is  the  same  in  both: — The  patient  being 
laid  down  or  seated,  the  physician  is  to  take  hold  of  his  head, 
and  grasping  both  sides  of  the  jaw-bone  with  both  hands, 
within  and  without,  he  must  perform  three  manoeuvres  at  once, 
— rectify  the  position  of  the  jaw,  push  it  backwards,  and  shut 
the  mouth.      The  treatment  should  consist  of  soothing  applica- 

'  Compare  On  the  Articulations,  §  15. 

*  The  contents  of  this  paragraph  are  aljridged  from  §  40  of  tlie  work,  On  the 
Articulations. 


GG4  MOCHLICUS. 

tions,  position^  and  applying  a  suitable  bandage  to  support  the 
jaw-bone,  so  as  to  co-operate  with  the  reduction.^ 

5.  The  bone  of  the  shoulder  is  dislocated  downwards.  I 
have  never  heard  of  any  other  mode.  The  parts  put  on  the 
appearance  of  dislocation  forwards^  wdien  the  flesh  about  the 
joint  is  Avasted  during  consumption^  as  also  seems  to  be  the 
case  with  cattle  when  in  a  state  of  leanness  after  winter.^ 
Those  persons  are  most  liable  to  dislocations  who  are  thin,  slen- 
der, and  have  humidities  about  their  joints  without  inflam- 
mation, for  it  knits  the  joints.  Those  who  attempt  to  reduce 
and  rectify  dislocations  in  oxen,  commit  a  Ijlunder,  as  forgetting 
that  the  symptoms  arise  from  the  manner  in  which  the  ox  uses 
the  limb,  and  that  the  appearance  is  the  same  in  a  man  who  is 
in  a  similar  condition,  and  forgetting  also  that  Homer  has  said, 
that  oxen  are  most  lean  at  that  season.  In  this  dislocation, 
then,  Avhen  not  reduced,  the  patient  cannot  perform  any  of 
those  acts  which  others  do,  by  raising  the  arm  from  the  side. 
I  have  thus  stated  who  are  the  persons  most  subject  to  this 
dislocation,  and  how  they  are  aflectcd.  In  congenital  dis- 
locations the  nearest  bones  are  most  shortened,  as  is  the  case 
with  persons  who  are  iveusel-unncd ;  the  fore-arm  less  so,  and 
the  hand  still  less  ;  the  bones  al)ove  arc  not  afi^ected.  And  the 
parts  (near  the  seat  of  the  injury)  are  most  wasted  in  flesh ;  and 
this  happens  more  especially  on  the  side  of  the  arm  opposite  the 
dislocation,  and  that  during  adolescence,  yet  in  a  somewhat  less 
degree  than  in  congenital  cases.  The  deep-seated  suppurations 
occur  most  frequently  to  new-born  infants  about  the  joint  of 
the  shoulder,  and  these  produce  the  same  consequences  as  dis- 
locations.' In  adults,  the  bones  are  not  so  diminished  in  size, 
and  justly,  seeing  that  the  others  will  not  increase  as  in  the 
former  case ;  but  wasting  of  the  flesh  takes  place,  for  it  is  in- 
creased, and  is  diminished  every  day,  and  at  all  ages.  And 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  force  of  habit,  and  to  the 
symptom  produced  by  the  tearing  away  of  the  acromion,  whereby 
a  void  is  left,   Avhich  makes  people  suppose  that  the  humerus  is 

'  This  is  an  abridgment  of  §§  30  and  31  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 

-  The  language  here  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  dislocation  in  cattle  is  not  real, 
but  merely  apparent.     See  §  8  of  the  Articulations,  and  the  Annotations  on  it. 

2  Every  experienced  physician  must  have  met  with  cases  in  which  abscess  about  a 
joint  liasoccasionc<l  impairment  of  it. 


MOCIILICUS.  665 

dislocated.  The  head  of  the  humerus  is  felt  in  the  armpit,  and 
the  patient  cannot  raise  his  arm,  nor  swing  it  to  this  side  and 
that,  as  formerly.  The  other  shoulder  shows  the  difference. 
Modes  of  reduction  : — The  patient  himself  having  placed  his  fist 
in  the  armpit,  pushes  up  the  head  of  the  humerus  with  it,  and 
brings  the  hand  forward  to  the  breast.  Another: — Force  it  back- 
wards, so  that  you  may  turn  it  round.  Another: — 'Apply  your 
head  to  the  acromion,  and  your  hands  to  the  armpit,  separate 
the  head  of  the  humerus  [from  the  side  ?),  and  push  the  elbow 
in  the  opposite  direction  ;  or,  instead  of  your  knees,  another 
person  may  turn  aside  the  elbow^  as  formerly  directed.  Or, 
place  the  patient  on  your  shoulder,  with  the  shoulder  in  his  arm- 
pit. Or,  with  the  heel,  something  being  introduced  to  fill  up 
the  hollow  of  the  armpit,  and  using  the  right  foot  to  the  right 
shoulder.  Or,  with  a  pestle.  Or,  with  the  step  of  a  ladder.  Or, 
by  rotation  made  with  a  piece  of  wood  stretched  below  the  arm. 
Treatment: — As  to  attitude,  the  arm  placed  by  the  side,  the 
hand  and  shoulder  raised  ;  the  bandaging  and  adjustment  of  the 
parts  while  in  this  attitude.  If  not  reduced,  the  top  of  the 
shoulder  becomes  attenuated.^ 

6.  When  the  acromion  is  torn  away,  the  appearance  is  the 
same  as  in  dislocation  of  the  shoulder ;  but  there  is  no  impedi- 
ment, except  that  the  bone  does  not  return  to  its  position.  The 
figure  should  be  the  same  as  in  dislocation,  both  as  regards 
bandaging  and  suspending  the  limb.  The  bandaging  according 
to  rule." 

7.  '\^'^len  partial  displacement  (sub-luxation  ?)  takes  place  at 
the  elbow,  either  inside  or  outside,  but  the  sharp  point  (ole- 
cranon?)  remains  in  the  cavity  of  the  humerus,  make  extension 
in  a  straight  line,  and  push  the  projecting  parts  backwards  and 
to  the  sides. '^ 

8.  In  complete  dislocations  to  either  side,  make  extension 
while  the  arm  is  in  the  position  it  is  put  in  to  be  bandaged  for 
a  fracture,  for  thus  the  rounded  part  of  the  elbow  will  not  form 
an  obstacle  to  it.  Dislocation  most  commonh^  takes  place  in- 
wards.     The  parts  are  to  be  adjusted  by  separating  the  bones 

'  This  description  of  the  symptoms  and  treatment  of  dislocation  at  the  shoulder- 
joint  is  abridged  from  §  1-13  of  tlie  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
^  This  is  an  abridgment  of  §  14  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
'  This  is  a  repetition  of  §  17  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


(m  MOCHLICUS. 

as  mucli  as  possible^  so  that  the  end  of  the  Immerus  may  not 
come  in  contact  witli  the  olecranon,  but  it  is  to  be  carried  up 
and  turned  round,  and  not  forced  in  a  straight  line  ;  at  the  same 
time  the  opposite  sides  are  to  be  pushed  together,  and  the  bones 
reduced  to  their  place.*  In  these  cases  rotation  of  the  elbow 
cooperates ;  tliat  is  to  say,  turning  the  arm  into  a  state  of 
supination  and  pronation ;  so  much  for  the  reduction.  With 
regard  to  the  attitude  in  which  it  is  to  be  put, — the  hand  is  to 
be  placed  somewhat  higher  than  the  elbow,  and  the  arm  by  the 
side ;  this  position  suits  with  it  when  slung  from  the  neck,  is 
easily  borne,  is  its  natural  position,  and  one  adapted  for  ordi- 
nary purposes,  unless  callus  form  improperly  :  the  callus  soon 
forms.  Treatment : — By  bandages  according  to  the  common 
rule  for  articulations,  and  the  point  of  the  elbow  is  to  be  included 
in  the  bandage." 

9.  The  elbow,  when  luxated,  induces  the  most  serious  conse- 
quences, fevers,  pain,  nausea,  vomiting  of  pure  bile ;  and  this 
especially  in  dislocations  backwards,  from  pressure  on  the  nerve 
which  occasions  numbness ;  next  to  it  is  dislocation  forwards. 
The  treatment  is  the  same.  The  reduction  of  dislocation  back- 
wards is  by  extension  and  adaptation  :  the  symptom  of  this 
variety,  loss  of  the  power  of  extension  ;  of  dislocation  forwards, 
loss  of  the  power  of  flexion.  In  it  a  hard  ball  is  to  be  placed 
in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  and  the  fore-arm  is  to  be  bent  over 
this  while  sudden  extension  is  made.^ 

10.  Diastasis  of  the  bones  may  be  recognised  by  examining 
the  part  where  the  vein  M'hicli  runs  along  the  arm  divides.* 

11.  In  these  cases  calli'is  is  speedily  formed.  In  congenital 
dislocations,  the  bones  below  the  seat  of  the  injury  are  shorter 
than  natural ;  in  this  case,  the  greatest  shortening  is  in  the 
nearest,  namely,  those  of  the  fore-arm;  second,  those  of  the 
hand ;  third,  those  of  the  fingers.  The  arm  and  shoulder  are 
stronger,  owing  to  the  nourishment  Avhich  they  receive,  and  the 
other  arm,  from  the  additional  work  it  has  to  perform,  is  still 
more  strong.      The  wasting  of  the  flesh,  if  the  dislocation  was 

'  The  meaning  in  this  passage  sccnis  very  equivocal.    See  Littre,  and  our  Argument 
to  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 

^  This  is  a  repetition  of  §  18  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 

^  This  is  copied  from  §  19  of  tlie  work.  On  tlie  Articulations. 

■*  Tliis  is  literally  copied  from  §  20  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


MOCIILICUS.  CG7 

outwards^  is  on  the  inside  ;  or  if  otherwise^  on  the  side  opposite 
the  dislocation.^ 

12.  In  dislocation  at  the  elbow,  whether  outwards  or  inwards, 
extension  is  to  be  made  with  the  fore-arm  at  right  angles  to  the 
arm ;  the  arm  is  to  be  suspended  by  a  shawl  passed  through  the 
armpit,  and  a  Aveight  is  to  be  attached  to  the  extremity  of  the 
elbow  ;  or  force  is  to  be  applied  with  the  hands.  The  articular 
extremity  being  properly  raised,  the  parts  are  to  be  adjusted 
with  the  palms  of  the  hands,  as  in  dislocations  of  the  hands.  It 
is  to  be  bandaged,  suspended  in  a  sling,  and  placed,  while  in 
this  attitude." 

13.  Dislocations  backwards  are  to  be  rectified  with  the  palms 
of  the  hands  along  with  sudden  extension.  These  two  acts  are 
to  be  performed  together,  as  in  other  cases  of  the  kind.  In 
dislocation  forwards,  the  arm  is  to  bend  around  a  ball  of  cloth, 
of  proper  size,  and  at  the  same  time  replaced.^ 

14.  If  the  displacement  be  on  the  other  side  both  these 
operations  are  to  be  performed  in  effecting  the  adjustment  of 
the  arm.  With  regard  to  the  treatment, — the  position  and  the 
bandaging  are  the  same  as  in  the  other  cases.  For  all  these 
cases  maj^  be  reduced  by  ordinary  distension.^ 

15.  With  regard  to  the  modes  of  reduction,  some  act  upon 
the  principle  of  carrying  the  one  piece  of  bone  over  the  other, 
some  by  extension,  and  some  by  rotation :  these  last  consist  in 
rapidh'  turning  the  arm  to  this  side  and  that.^ 

16.  The  joint  of  the  hand  is  dislocated  inwards  or  outwards, 
but  most  frequently  inwards.  The  symptoms  are  easily  recog- 
nised ;  if  inwards,  the  patient  cannot  at  all  bend  his  fingers, 
but  if  outwards,  he  cannot  extend  them.  Reduction  : — By 
placing  the  fingers  above  a  table,  extension  and  counter-exten- 
sion are  to  be  made  by  assistants,  while,  with  the  palm  of  the 
hand  or  the  heel,  on  the  projecting  bone,  one  presses  forwards, 
and  from  behind,  upon  the  other  bone,  and  laj^s  some  soft 
substance  on  it ;  and,  if  the  dislocation  be  above,  the  hand  is 
to  be  turned  into  a  state  of  pronation;  or,  if  backwards,  into 

'  This  is  taken  from  §  21  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
^  This  is  taken  from  §  22  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
3  This  is  copied  from  §  23  of  the  work.  On  the  Articulations. 
•*  This  is  taken  from  §  24  of  the  work.  On  the  Articulations. 
^  This  is  the  same  as  §  2b  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


66  MOCHLICUS. 

a  state  of  supination.      The  treatment  is  to  be  conducted  Avith 
bandasres.^ 

17.  The  whole  hand  is  dislocated  either  inwards  or  outwards, 
but  especially  inwards,  or  to  this  side  or  that.  Sometimes  the 
epiphysis  is  displaced,  and  sometimes  there  is  displacement 
{diastasis)  of  the  one  bone  from  the  other.  Powerful  exten- 
sion is  to  be  made  in  this  case ;  and  the  projecting  part  is  to 
be  pressed  upon,  and  counter-pressure  made  on  the  opposite  side  : 
both  modes  being  performed  at  the  same  time,  both  backwards 
and  laterally,  either  with  the  hands  on  a  table,  or  with  the 
heel.  These  accidents  give  rise  to  serious  consequences  and 
deformities ;  but  in  time  the  parts  get  so  strong  as  to  admit  of 
being  used.  The  treatment  consists  of  bandages  comprehending 
the  hand  and  fore-arm,  and  splints  are  to  be  applied  as  far  as 
the  fingers  ;  when  put  in  splints,  they  are  to  be  more  frequently 
loosed  than  in  fractures,  and  more  copious  affusions  of  water 
are  to  be  used". 

18.  In  congenital  dislocations  the  hand  becomes  shortened, 
and  the  atrophy  of  the  flesh  is  generally  on  the  side  opposite 
the  dislocation.  In  the  adult  the  bones  remain  of  their  proper 
size. 3 

19.  The  symptoms  of  dislocation  of  the  finger  are  obvious, 
and  need  not  be  described.  This  is  the  mode  of  reduction  : — 
By  stretching  in  a  straight  line,  and  making  j)ressure  on  the 
projecting  part,  and  counter-j)ressure,  at  the  opposite  side,  on 
the  other.  The  proper  treatment  consists  in  the  application 
of  bandages.  "When  not  reduced,  the  parts  unite  by  callus 
outside  of  the  joint.  In  congenital  dislocations,  and  in  those 
which  occur  during  adolescence,  the  bones  below  the  dislocation 
are  shortened,  and  the  flesh  is  wasted  principally  on  the  side 
opposite  to  the  dislocation ;  in  the  adult  the  bones  remain  of 
their  proper  size.*  , 

20.  Dislocation  at  the  hip-joint  occurs  in  four  modes,  in- 
wards most  frequently,  outwards  next,  the  others  of  equal 
frequency.  The  symptoms  : — The  common,  a  comparison  with 
the  sound  leg.     The  peculiar  symptoms  of  dislocations  inwards; 

'  This  is  the  same  as  §  26  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
^  This  is  taken  from  §  27  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
^  This  is  the  same  as  §  28  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
''  This  is  taken  from  §  29  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


MOCHLICUS.  669 

tlic  head  of  the  bone  is  felt  at  the  perineum ;  the  patient 
cannot  bend  his  leg  as  formerly ;  the  limb  appears  elongated, 
and  to  a  great  extent,  unless  you  bring  both  liiiil)s  into  the 
middle  space  between  them  in  making  a  comparison  of  them ; 
and  the  foot  and  the  knee  are  inclined  outwards.  If  the 
dislocation  has  taken  place  from  bii'th,  or  during  one's 
growth,  the  thigh  is  shortened,  the  leg  less  so,  and  the 
others  according  to  the  same  rule ;  the  fleshy  parts  are 
atrophied,  especially  on  the  outside.  Such  persons  are  afraid 
to  stand  erect,  and  crawl  along  on  the  sound  limb ;  or,  if 
compelled,  they  walk  with  one  or  two  staves,  and  bear  up 
the  affected  limb ;  and  the  smaller  the  limb  so  much  the 
more  easily  do  they  walk.  If  the  accident  happen  to  adults 
the  bones  remain  of  their  proper  size,  but  the  flesh  is  wasted,  as 
formerly  described ;  the  patients  walk  in  a  wriggling  manner, 
like  oxen ;  they  are  bent  towards  the  flank,  and  the  buttock  on 
the  uninjured  side  is  prominent ;  for  the  uninjured  limb  must 
necessarily  come  below  that  it  may  support  the  body,  whilst 
the  other  must  be  carried  out  of  the  Avay,  as  it  caunot  sup- 
port the  body,  like  those  who  have  an  ulcer  in  the  foot.  They 
poise  the  body  by  means  of  a  staff  on  the  sound  side,  and 
grasp  the  affected  limb  with  the  hand  above  the  knee  so  as  to 
carry  the  body  in  shifting  from  one  place  to  another.  If  the 
parts  bcloAv  the  hip-joint  be  used,  the  bones  below  are  less 
atrophied,  but  the  flesh  more.' 

21.  The  symptoms  and  attitudes  in  dislocation  outwards  are 
the  opposite,  and  the  knee  and  foot  incline  a  little  inwards. 
When  it  is  congenital,  or  occurs  during  adolescence,  the  bones 
do  not  grow  properly ;  according  to  the  same  rule,  the  bone  of 
the  hip-joint  is  somewhat  higher  than  natural,  and  does  not 
grow  proportionally.  In  those  who  have  frequent  dislocations 
outwards,  without  inflammation,  the  limb  is  of  a  more  humid 
(flabby  ?)  temperament  than  natural,  like  the  thuml),  for  it  is 
the  part  most  frequently  dislocated,  owing  to  its  configuration ; 
in  what  persons  the  dislocation  is  to  a  greater  or  less  extent ; 
and  in  what  persons  it  is  more  difficultly  or  easily  produced ; 
in  what  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  it  can  be  speedily  reduced, 
and  in  what  not ;   and  the  remedy  for  this ;   and  in  what  cases 

'  This  is  mostly  condensed  from  §§31  and  52  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


670  MOCHLICUS. 

tlic  dislocation  frequently  happens,  and  treatment  of  this.  In 
dislocation  outwards  from  birth,  or  during  adolescence,  or  from 
disease,  (and  it  happens  most  frequently  from  disease,  in  which 
case  there  is  sometimes  exfoliation  of  the  hone,  but  even  where 
there  is  no  exfoliation,)  the  patients  experience  the  same  sym- 
ptoms, but  to  an  inferior  degree  to  those  in  dislocations  inwards, 
if  properly  managed,  so  that  in  walking  they  can  put  the  whole 
foot  to  the  ground  and  lean  to  either  side.  The  younger  the 
patient  is,  the  greater  care  should  be  bestowed  on  him ;  when 
neglected,  the  case  gets  worse ;  when  attended  to,  it  improves ; 
and,  although  there  be  atrophy  in  all  parts  of  the  limb,  it  is  to 
a  less  extent. 

22.  When  there  is  a  dislocation  on  both  sides,  the  affections 
of  the  bones  are  the  same ;  the  flesh  is  well  developed,  except 
within,  the  nates  protrude,  the  thighs  ai-e  arched,  unless  there 
be  sphacelus.^  If  there  be  curvature  of  the  spine  above  the 
hip-joint,  the  patients  enjoy  good  health,  but  the  body  docs  not 
groAv,  with  the  exception  of  the  head." 

23.  The  symptoms  of  dislocation  backwards  arc  : — The  parts 
before  more  empty,  behind  tlicy  protrude,  the  foot  straight, 
flexion  impossible,  except  with  [)ain,  extension  least  of  all :  in 
these  the  limb  is  shortened.  They  can  neither  extend  the 
limb  at  the  ham,  nor  at  the  groin,  unless  it  be  much  raised,  nor 
can  they  bend  it.  The  uppermost  joint,  in  most  cases,  takes  the 
lead :  this  is  common  in  joints,  nerves,  muscles,  intestines, 
uteri,  and  other  parts.  There  the  bone  of  the  hip-joint  is 
carried  backwards  to  the  nates,  and  on  that  account  it  is 
shortened,  and  because  the  patient  cannot  extend  it.  The  flesh 
of  the  whole  leg  is  wasted  in  all  cases,  in  which  most,  and  to 
what  extent,  has  been  already  stated.  Every  part  of  the  body 
which  performs  its  functional  work  is  strong,  but,  if  inactive, 
it  gets  into  a  bad  condition,  unless  its  inactivity  arise  from 
fatigue,  fever,  or  inflammation.  And  in  dislocations  outwards, 
the  limb  is  shoitened,  because  the  bone  is  lodged  in  flesh  wliicii 
yields ;  but,  in  dislocations  inwards,  it  is  longer,  because  the 
bone  is  lodged  on  a  projecting  bone.  Adults,  then,  who  have 
this  dislocation  unreduced,  are  bent  at  the  groins  in  walking, 

'  That  is  to  say,  unless  the  case  proceed  from  disease  of  the  bone. 
■^  Tlie  contents  of  tiiis  and  the  prcccdinu;  paragrajih  are  mostly  condensed  from 
§§  T)!,  55,  .51)  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


MOCIILICUS.  671 

;iu(l  the  other  ham  is  flexed  ;  tliey  scarcely  reach  the  ground 
witli  the  ball  of  the  foot ;  they  grasp  the  limb  with  the  hand, 
and  walk  without  a  staff  if  they  choose  ;  if  the  staff  be  too  long, 
their  foot  cannot  reach  the  ground, — if  they  wish  to  reach  the 
ground,  they  must  use  a  short  staff.  There  is  wasting  of  the 
flesh  in  cases  attended  with  pain ;  and  the  inclination  of  the  leg- 
is  forward,  and  the  sound  leg  in  proportion.  In  congenital 
cases,  or  when  in  adolescence,  or  from  disease,  the  bone  is  dis- 
located (under  what  circumstances  will  be  explained  afterwards), 
the  limb  is  particularly  impaired,  owing  to  the  nerves  and  joints 
not  being  exercised,  and  the  knee  is  impaired  for  the  reasons 
stated.  These  persons,  keeping  the  limb  bent,  walk  with  one 
staff"  or  two.      But  the  sound  limb  is  in  good  flesh  from  usage.^ 

24.  In  dislocations  forwards  the  symptoms  are  the  opposite  : 
a  vacuity  behind,  a  protuberance  before  ;  of  all  motions  they  can 
least  perform  flexion,  and  extension  best ;  the  foot  is  straight, 
the  limb  is  of  the  proper  length  at  the  heel;  at  its  extremity 
the  foot  a  little  turned  up ;  they  are  especially  pained  at  first : 
of  all  these  dislocations  retention  of  urine  occurs  most  fre- 
quently in  this  variety,  because  the  bone  is  lodged  among  im- 
portant nerves.  The  fore  parts  are  stretched,  do  not  grow,  are 
diseased,  and  are  obnoxious  to  premature  decay ;  the  back 
parts  are  wrinkled.  In  the  case  of  adults,  they  walk  erect, 
resting  merely  on  the  heel,  and  this  they  do  decidedly  if  they 
can  take  great  steps;  but  they  drag  it  along;  the  wasting  is 
least  of  all  in  this  variety  of  dislocation,  owing  to  their  being 
able  to  use  the  limb,  but  the  wasting  is  most  behind.  The 
whole  limb  being  straighter  than  natural  they  stand  in  need 
of  a  staff  on  the  affected  side.  When  the  dislocation  is  con- 
genital, or  has  occurred  during  adolescence,  if  properly  managed, 
the  patient  has  the  use  of  the  limb  as  well  as  adults  (otherwise?) 
have  of  it.  But,  if  neglected,  it  is  shortened  and  extended,  for 
in  such  cases  the  joint  is  generally  ancylosed  in  a  straight  po- 
sition. The  diminution  of  the  bones,  and  wasting  of  the  fleshy 
parts,  are  analogous." 

25.  In  reduction — the  extension  of  the  thigh  is  to  be  powerful, 

'  The  contents  of  these  two  paiagiai)hs  on  dislocation  backwards  are  condensed 
from  §§  57,  58  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 

■■'  The  coulents  of  this  paragraph  arc  condensed  from  §^  59,  60  of  the  work,  On 
the  Articulations. 


672  MOCHLICUS. 

and  the  adjustment  what  is  common  in  all  such  cases^  with  the 
hands,  or  a  board,  or  a  lever,  which,  in  dislocations  inwards, 
should  be  round,  and  in  dislocations  outwards,  flat ;  but  it  is 
mostly  applicable  in  dislocations  outw^ards.  Dislocations  in- 
wards are  to  be  remedied  by  means  of  bladders,  extending  to 
the  bare  part  of  the  thigh,  along  with  extension  and  binding 
together  of  the  limbs.  The  patient  may  be  suspended,  with 
his  feet  a  little  separated  from  one  another,  and  then  a  person, 
inserting  his  arm  within  the  affected  limb,  is  to  suspend  himself 
from  it,  and  perform  extension  and  readjustment  at  the  same 
time ;  and  this  method  is  sufficient  in  dislocatious  forwards  and 
the  others,  but  least  of  all  in  dislocations  backw-ards.  A  board 
fastened  under  the  limb,  like  the  board  fastened  below  the  arm 
in  dislocations  at  the  shonlder,  answers  in  dislocations  inwards, 
but  less  so  in  the  other  varieties.  Along  with  extension  you 
will  use  pressure  either  with  the  foot,  the  hand,  or  a  board, 
especially  in  dislocations  forwards  and  backwards.^ 

2G.  Dislocations  at  the  knee  are  of  a  milder  character  than 
those  of  the  elbow,  owing  to  the  compactness  and  regularity  of 
the  joint ;  and  hence  it  is  more  readily  dislocated  and  reduced. 
Dislocation  generally  takes  place  inwards,  but  also  outwards 
and  backwards.  The  methods  of  reduction  are — by  circum- 
flexion,  or  by  rapid  excalcitration,  or  by  rolling  a  fillet  into  a 
ball,  placing  it  in  the  ham,  and  then  letting  the  patient's  body 
suddenly  drop  down  on  his  knees:  this  mode  applies  liest  in  dis- 
locations backw^ards.  Dislocations  backwards,  like  those  of 
the  elbows,  may  also  be  reduced  by  moderate  extension.  Lateral 
dislocations  may  be  reduced  by  circumflexion  or  excalcitration, 
or  by  extension  (but  this  is  most  ai:)plicable  in  dislocation  back- 
wards), but  also  by  moderate  extension.  The  adjustment  is  what 
is  common  in  all.  If  not  reduced,  in  dislocations  backwards, 
they  cannot  bend  the  leg  and  thigh  upon  one  another,  but 
neither  can  they  do  this  in  the  others  except  to  a  small  extent; 
and  the  fore  parts  of  the  thigh  and  leg  are  Avasted.  In  dis- 
locations inwards  they  are  bandy-legged,  and  the  external 
parts  are  atrophied.  But,  in  dislocations  outwards,  they  incline 
more  outwards,  but  are  less  lame,  for  the  body  is  supported  o)i 
the  thicker  bone,  and  the  inner  parts  are  wasted.      The  con- 

'  This  paragraph  is  made  up  from  §  70  and  other  paragraplis  of  the  work,  On  the 
Articuhitions. 


MOCHLTCUS.  673 

sequences  of  a  congenital  dislocation,  or  one  occnrring  during 
adolescence,  are  analogous  to  tlie  rule  formerly  laid  down.' 

27.  Dislocations  at  the  ankle-joint  require  strong  extension, 
either  with  the  hands  or  some  such  means,  and  adjustment, 
which  at  the  same  time  effects  both  acts;  this  is  common  iu 
all  cases." 

28.  Dislocations  of  the  bones  of  the  foot  are  to  be  treated 
like  those  of  the  hand.^ 

29.  Dislocations  of  the  bones  connected  with  the  leg,  if  not 
reduced,  whether  occurring  at  birth  or  during  adolescence,  are 
of  the  same  character  as  those  in  the  hand."* 

30.  Persons  who,  in  jumping  from  a  height,  have  pitched 
on  the  heel,  so  as  to  occasion  diastasis  (separation)  of  the 
bones,  ecchymosis  of  the  veins,  and  contusion  of  the  nerves, — 
when  these  symptoms  are  very  violent,  there  is  danger  that  the 
parts  may  sphacelate,  and  give  trouble  to  the  patient  during 
the  remainder  of  his  life ;  for  these  bones  are  so  constructed  as 
to  slip  past  one  another,  and  the  nerves  communicate  together. 
And,  likewise,  in  cases  of  fracture,  either  from  an  injury  in  the 
leg  or  thigh,  or  in  paralysis  of  the  nerves  connected  with  these 
parts,  or,  Avlieu  in  any  other  case  of  confinement  to  bed  the 
heel,  from  neglect,  becomes  blackened,  in  all  these  cases  serious 
effects  result  therefrom.  Sometimes,  in  addition  to  the  spha- 
celus, very  acute  fevers  supervene,  attended  with  hiccup,  tumours, 
aberration  of  intellect,  and  speedy  death,  along  Avith  lividity  of 
the  large  blood-vessels,  and  gangrene.  The  symptoms  of  the 
exacerbations  are  these  :  if  the  ecchymosis,  the  blackened  parts, 
and  those  around  them,  be  somewhat  hard  and  red,  and  if  lividity 
be  combined  with  the  hardness,  there  is  danger  of  mortification  ; 
but,  if  the  parts  are  sublivid,  or  even  very  livid  and  diffused,  or 
greenish  and  soft,  these  symptoms,  iu  all  such  cases,  are  favor- 
able. The  treatment  consists  in  the  administration  of  hellebore, 
if  they  be  free  from  fever,  but  otherwise,  they  are  to  have 
oxyghjJaj  for  drink,  if  required.  Bandaging, — agreeably  to  the 
rule  in  other  joints ;  but  this  is  to  be  attended  to  also, — the 
bandages  should  be  numerous,  and  softer  than  usual ;  compres- 

'  The  substance  of  what  is  here  said  on  dislocations  at  the  knee,  is  taken  from 
§  82  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations,  and  §  37  of  the  work.  On  Fractures. 
2  See  On  the  Articulations,  §  83;  and  On  Fractures,  §  13. 
'  See  On  the  Articulations,  §  84.  ■•  Ibid.,  §  85. 

43 


074  MOCIILICUS. 

sioa  less;  more  water  than  usual  to  be  used  in  tlie  affusions;  to 
be  applied  especially  to  the  beel.  The  same  object  should  be 
sought  after  in  the  position  as  in  the  bandaging,  namely,  that 
the  humours  may  not  be  determined  to  the  heel ;  the  limb  to  be 
well  laid  should  have  the  heel  higher  than  the  knee.  Splints 
not  to  be  used.^ 

31.  When  the  foot  is  dislocated,  either  alone,  or  •with  the 
epiphysis,  the  displacement  is  more  apt  to  be  inwards.  If  not 
reduced,  in  the  course  of  time  the  parts  of  the  hips,  thigh,  and 
]cg,  opposite  the  dislocation,  become  attenuated,  lleduction: — 
As  in  dislocation  at  the  wrist ;  but  the  extension  rerpiires  to  be 
very  powerful.  Treatment : — Agreeably  to  the  rule  laid  down 
for  the  other  joints.  Less  apt  to  be  followed  by  serious  con- 
sequences than  the  wrist,  if  kept  quiet.  Diet  restricted,  as 
being  in  an  inactive  state.  Tliose  occurring  at  birth,  or  during 
adolescence,  observe  the  rule  formerly  stated.^ 

32.  With  regard  to  slight  congenital  dislocations,  some  of  them 
can  be  rectified,  especially  club-foot.  There  is  more  than  one 
A'ariety  of  club-foot.  The  treatment  consists  in  modelling  the 
foot  like  a  piece  of  wax ;  applying  resinous  cerate,  and  nume- 
rous bandages ;  or  a  sole,  or  a  piece  of  lead  is  to  be  bound  on, 
but  not  upon  the  bare  skin ;  the  adjustment  and  attitudes  to 
correspond.^ 

33.  If  the  dislocated  bones  cause  a  AV(mnd  in  the  skin,  and 
protrude,  it  is  better  to  let  them  alone,  provided  only  they  are 
not  allowed  to  hang,  nor  arc  compressed.  The  treatment  con- 
sists in  applying  pitched  cerate,  or  compromises  dipped  in  hot 
V,  ine  (for  cold  is  bad  in  all  such  cases),  and  certain  leaves ;  but 
in  winter  luiwashcd  wool  may  be  applied  as  a  cover  to  the  part; 
neither  cataplasms  nor  bandaging;  restricted  diet.  Cold,  great 
weight,  compression,  violence,  restricted  position^  all  such  are 
to  be  accounted  as  fatal  measures.  When  treated  moderately 
(they  escape),  maimed  and  deformed ;  for,  if  the  dislocation  be 
at  the  ankle,  the  foot  is  drawn  upwards,  and,  if  elsewhere, 
according  to  the  same  rule.      The  bones  do  not  readily  exfoliate; 

'  Tlie  contents  of  tliis  paragraph  are  copied  almost  word  for  word  from  §  86  of  tlic 
work,  On  the  Articnlations. 

^  This  is  literally  taken  from  §  87  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 

^  Tliis  is  a  very  hrief  abstract  of  the  contents  of  §  62  of  the  work,  On  the  Articu- 
lations. 


MOCIILICUS.  G75 

for  only  small  portions  of  them  are  denuded,  and  they  heal  by 
narrow  cicatrices.  The  danger  is  greatest  in  the  greatest  joints, 
and  those  highest  up.  The  only  chance  of  recovery  is,  if  they 
are  not  reduced,  except  at  the  fingers  and  hand,  and  in  these 
cases  the  danger  should  be  announced  beforehand.  Attempts 
at  reduction  to  be  made  on  the  first  or  second  dav  ;  or,  if  not 
accomplished  then,  on  the  tenth,  by  no  means  on  the  fourth. 
Reduction  by  levers.  Treatment: — As  in  injuries  of  the  bones 
of  the  head,  and  the  part  is  to  be  kept  hot ;  and  it  is  better  to 
give  hellebore  immediately  after  the  parts  have  been  reduced. 
With  regard  to  the  other  bones,  it  should  be  well  known,  that, 
if  replaced,  death  will  be  the  consequence ;  the  more  surely 
and  expeditiously,  the  greater  the  articulation,  and  the  more 
high  its  situation.  Dislocation  of  the  foot  is  attended  with 
spasm  (tetanus)  and  gangrene ;  and  if,  upon  its  being  replaced, 
any  of  these  symptoms  come  on,  the  chance  of  recovery,  if 
there  be  any  chance,  is  in  displacing  it  anewj  for  spasms  do 
not  arise  from  relaxation,  but  from  tension  of  the  parts.  ^ 

34.  Excision,  either  of  articular  bones,  or  of  pieces  of  bones, 
■when  not  high  up  in  the  body,  but  about  the  foot  or  the  hand, 
is  generally  folloAved  by  recovery,  unless  the  patient  die  at 
once  from  deliquium  animi.  Treatment: — As  in  injuries  of 
the  head ;  warmth.' 

35.  Sphacelus  of  the  fleshy  parts  is  produced  b}-  the  tight 
compression  of  bleeding  wounds,  and  by  pressure  in  the  frac- 
tures of  bones,  and  by  blackening,  arising  from  bandages. 
And  in  those  cases  in  which  a  portion  of  the  thigh  or  arm,  both 
the  bones  and  the  flesh  drop  oft',  many  recover,  the  case  being- 
less  dangerous  than  many  others.  In  cases,  then,  connected 
with  fracture  of  the  bones,  the  separation  of  the  flesh  quickly 
takes  place,  but  the  separation  of  the  bone,  at  the  boundary  of 
its  denuded  part,  is  slower  in  taking  place.  But  the  parts 
below  the'  seat  of  the  injury,  and  the  sound  portion  of  the 
body,  are  to  be  previously  taken  away  (for  they  die  previously), 
taking  care  to  avoid  producing  pain,  for  deliquium  animi  may 
occasion  death.  The  bone  of  the  thigh  in  such  a  case  came 
away  on  the  eightieth  day,  but  the  leg  was  removed  on  the 
twentieth  day.      The  bones  of  the  leg,  in  a  certain  case,  came 

'  This  is  condensed  from  §§  63-7  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 
'  See  $  68  of  the  work,  On  the  Articulations. 


C76  MOCHLICUS. 

away  at  tlie  niicldle  on  the  sixtieth  day.  In  these  cases  the 
separation  is  quick  or  slow,  according  to  the  compression 
appUed  by  the  physician.  When  the  compression  is  gently 
applied,  the  bones  do  not  drop  off  at  all,  neither  are  they 
denuded  of  flesh,  but  the  gangrene  is  confined  to  the  more 
superficial  parts.  The  treatment  of  such  cases  must  be  under- 
taken ;  for  most  of  them  are  more  formidable  in  appearance 
than  in  reality.  The  treatment  should  be  mild,  but,  with  a 
restricted  diet ;  hemorrhages  and  cold  are  to  be  dreaded ;  the 
position,  so  as  that  the  limb  may  be  inclined  upwards,  and 
afterwards,  on  account  of  the  purulent  abscess,  horizontally, 
or  such  as  may  suit  with  it.  In  such  cases,  and  in  mortifica- 
tions, there  are,  usually,  about  the  crisis,  hemorrhages  and 
violent  diarrhoeas,  which,  however,  only  last  for  a  few  days ; 
the  i)atients  do  not  lose  their  appetite,  neither  are  they  feverish, 
nor  should  they  be  put  upon  a  reduced  diet.^ 

36.  Displacement  of  the  spine,  if  inwards,  threatens  imme- 
diate death,  attended  with  retention  of  urine  and  loss  of  sensi- 
bilitv.  Outwards,  the  accident  is  free  from  most  of  these  bad 
effects,  much  more  so  than  when  there  is  merely  concussion 
without  displacement;  the  effects  in  the  former  case  being  con- 
fined to  the  spot  affected,  whereas  in  the  latter  they  are  further 
communicated  to  the  whole  body,  and  are  of  a  mortal  character. 
In  like  manner,  when  the  ribs  are  fractured,  whether  one  or 
more,  provided  there  be  no  splinters,  there  is  rarely  fever,  spit- 
ting of  blood,  and  sphacelus,  and  ordinary  treatment  without 
evacuation  will  suffice,  provided  there  be  no  fever; — bandaging, 
according  to  rule  ;  and  the  callus  forms  in  twenty  days,  the  bone 
being  of  a  porous  nature.  But  in  cases  of  contusion,  tubercles 
form,  along  with  cough,  suppurating  sores,  and  sphacelus  of  the 
ribs,  for  nerves  from  all  the  parts  run  along  each  rib.  In  manj^ 
of  these  cases  haemoptysis  and  empyema  also  take  place.  The 
management  of  this  case  consists  in  careful  treatment,  ban- 
daging according  to  rule,  diet  at  first  restricted,  but  afterwards 
more  liberal,  quiet,  silence,  position,  bowels,  and  venereal  matters 
regulated.  Even  "when  there  is  no  spitting  of  blood,  these  con- 
tusions are  more  painful  than  fractures,  and  are  more  subject 
in  time  to  relapses ;   and  when  any  mucous  collection  is  left  in 

'  This  is  condensed  from  §  G9  of  the  work,  On  tlie  Articulations. 


MOCIILICUS.  677 

the  part,  it  makes  itself  l)e  felt  in  disorders  of  the  body.  Treat- 
ment : — burning,  when  the  bone  is  affected,  down  to  the  bone, 
but  not  touching  the  bone  itself;  if  in  the  intercostal  space,  the 
burning  must  not  extend  through  it,  nor  1)e  too  superficial.  In 
sphacelus  of  the  ribs,  tents  arc  to  be  tried,  all  other  particulars 
will  be  stated  afterwards ;  but  they  should  be  learned  by  sight 
rather  than  by  Avords,  namely,  food,  drink,  heat,  cold,  attitude; 
medicines,  dry,  liquid,  red,  dark,  white,  sour,  for  the  ulcers,  and 
so  with  regard  to  the  diet.^ 

37.  Displacements  {of  the  vertebrfs)  from  a  fall  rarely  admit 
of  being  rectified,  and  those  above  the  diaphragm  are  most  diffi- 
cult to  rectify.  When  the  accident  happens  to  children,  the 
body  does  not  grow,  with  the  exception  of  the  legs,  the  arms, 
and  the  head.  Excurvation,  in  adults,  speedily  relieves  the  in- 
dividual from  the  disease  he  is  labouring  under,  but  in  time  it 
renews  its  attack,  with  the  same  symptoms  as  in  children,  but 
of  a  less  serious  nature.  Some  individuals  have  borne  this 
affection  well,  and  have  turned  out  to  be  brawny  and  fat.  But 
few  of  them  have  lived  to  the  age  of  sixty.  Lateral  cuiTatures 
also  occur,  the  proximate  cause  of  which  is  the  attitudes  in 
which  these  persons  lie.  These  cases  have  their  prognostics 
accordingly. 

38.  The  rule  for  the  reduction  and  adjustment : — The  axle, 
the  lever,  the  wedge,  pressure  above ;"  the  axle  to  separate,  the 
lever  to  push  aside.  Reduction  and  adjustment  are  to  be  ac- 
complished by  forcible  extension,  the  parts  being  placed  in  such, 
a  position  as  will  facilitate  the  conveying  of  the  displaced  bone 
over  the  extremity  of  the  bone  from  which  it  was  displaced  : 
this  is  to  be  accomplished  either  with  the  hands,  or  by  sus- 
pension, or  axles,  or  turned  round  something.  With  the  hands 
this  is  to  be  effected  properly,  according  to  the  structure  of  the 
parts.  In  the  case  of  the  wrist  and  elbow,  the  parts  are  to  be 
forced  asunder,  at  the  wrist  in  the  line  of  the  elbow,  and  the 
elbow  with  the  fore-arm  at  a  right  angle  with  the  arm,  as  when 
it  is  suspended  in  a  sling.  When  we  want  to  separate  the 
protruding  bones,  and  force  them  into  place,  in  the  case  of  the 
fingers,  the  toes,  or  the  wrist,   the  proper  separation  may  be 

'  This  and  the  next  paragraph  are  taken  paitly  from  §  41  of  the  work,  On  tlie 
Articulations,  and  partly  from  the  three  following  paragraphs  of  the  same  hook. 
-  See  On  Fractures,  §  31. 


678  MOCHLICUS. 

made  by  bauds,  wbile  tbe  projecting  part  is  forced  into  its  place 
by  pressing  down  Avitb  tbe  beel  or  tbe  pahii  of  tbe  band  upon 
some  resisting  object,  wbile  sometbing  moderately  soft  is  laid 
under  tbe  projecting  part,  but  notbiug  sucb  under  tbe  otber, 
and  tben  pressure  is  to  be  made  backwards  and  downwards, 
wdietber  tbe  dislocation  be  inwards  or  outwards.  In  lateral  dis- 
placements, pressure  and  counter-pressure  must  be  made  on  tbe 
opposite  sides.  Displacements  forwards  can  be  reduced  neitber 
by  sneezing,  nor  cougbing,  nor  by  tbe  injection  of  air,  nor  by 
tbe  cupping-instrument ;  and  if  anytbing  can  do  good  in  sucb 
a  case,  it  is  extension.  People  arc  deceived  in  fractures  of  tbe 
spinal  processes,  tbe  pain  of  wbicb  causing  tbe  patient  to  stoop 
forwards,  tbe  case  is  taken  for  dislocation  inwards  :  tbese  frac- 
tui'es  beal  speedily  and  easily.  Dislocation  outwards  is  to  be 
I'emedied  ])y  succussion,  wben  bigb  up,  towards  tbe  feet;  and 
wben  situated  low  down,  in  tbe  contrary  direction ;  tbe  part  is 
to  be  pressed  back  into  its  place,  eitber  with  tbe  foot  or  a  board. 
Dislocations  to  either  side,  if  they  admit  of  any  remedy,  are  to 
be  treated  by  extension,  and  suitable  attitudes,  with  regimen. 
The  Aybole  apparatus  should  be  broad,  soft,  and  strong;  or  other- 
wise, tbey  should  be  wriippcd  in  rags ;  before  being  used,  they 
should  all  be  prepared  proportionately  to  tbe  length,  b eight,  and 
breadth.  In  applying  extension  to  the  thigh,  for  example,  the 
bands  should  be  fastened  at  the  ankle  and  above  the  knee,  these 
stretching  in  tbe  same  direction,  another  band  to  be  passed  by 
the  loins,  and  around  tbe  armpits,  and  by  the  perineum  and 
thigh,  one  end  passing  up  the  breast,  and  the  other  along  the 
back,  these  all  stretching  in  the  same  direction,  and  Ijeing 
fastened  either  to  a  piece  of  wood  resembling  a  pestle,  or  to  an 
axle.  When  this  is  done  on  a  couch,  either  of  its  feet  is  to  be 
fastened  to  the  threshold,  and  a  strong  block  of  w^ood  is  to  be 
laid  across  tbe  other,  and  the  pieces  of  wood  resembling  a  pestle 
are  to  be  raised  on  these,  to  make  extension  and  counter- 
extension  ;  the  naves  of  a  wheel  are  to  be  fastened  in  the  floor, 
or  a  ladder  is  to  be  adjusted,  so  that  extension  may  be  made  in 
both  directions.  Tbe  thing  commonly  used  is  a  bench  six 
cubits  long,  two  cubits  broad,  one  fathom  in  thickness,  having 
two  low  axles  at  this  end  and  that,  and  having  at  its  middle  two 
moderate-sized  pillars,  to  which  is  to  be  adjusted  a  transverse 
piece  of  ^^ood  like  the  step  of  a  ladder,  wbicb  is  to  receive  the 


MOCHLICUS.  679 

piece  of  wood  tied  below  the  liml),  as  is  done  in  dislocation  at 
the  shoulder;  and  the  bench  is  to  liave  excavations  like  trays, 
smooth,  four  inches  in  breadth  and  depth,  and  at  such  an  in- 
terval as  to  leave  room  for  the  lever  used  to  reduce  the  limb. 
In  the  middle  of  the  bench  a  square  hole  is  to  be  scooped  out 
to  receive  a  small  pillar,  whieli^  being  adjusted  to  the  perineum, 
will  obviate  the  tendency  of  the  body  to  slip  doAvnwards,  and 
being  rather  loose  may  act  somewhat  as  a  lever.  In  certain 
occasions  a  piece  of  wood  is  required,  which  is  inserted  into  a 
hole  scooped  out  of  the  wall;  the  other  end  of  it  is  then  to  be 
pressed  down,  something  moderately  soft  being  placed  under  it.^ 

39.  In  those  cases  where  the  bone  of  the  palate  has  exfo- 
liated, the  nose  sinks  in  its  middle.  In  contusions  of  the  head 
without  a  Mound,  either  from  a  fall,  a  fracture,  or  pressure,  in 
certain  of  these  cases  acrid  humours  descend  from  the  head  to 
the  throat,  and  from  the  wound  in  the  head  to  the  liver  and 
thigh." 

40.  The  symptoms  of  sub-luxations  and  luxations,  and  where, 
and  how,  and  how  much  these  differ  from  one  another.  And 
the  cases  in  which  the  articular  cavity  has  been  broken  off, 
and  in  which  the  ligament  has  been  torn,  and  in  which  the 
epiphysis  has  been  broken  off;  and  in  which,  and  how,  when 
the  limb  consists  of  tAA  o  Ijones,  one  or  both  are  broken  :  in 
consequence  of  these  the  dangers,  chances  in  which  bad,  and 
when  the  injuries  will  result  in  death,  and  when  in  recovery. 
A¥hat  cases  are  to  be  reduced  or  attempted,  and  when,  and 
which,  and  when  not ;  the  hopes  and  dangers  in  these  cases. 
Which  and  when  congenital  dislocations  are  to  be  undertaken  : 
the  parts  in  a  state  of  growth,  the  parts  fully  grown,  and  why 
sooner,  or  slower :  and  why  a  part  becomes  maimed,  and  how, 
and  how  not :  and  why  a  certain  part  is  atrophied,  and  where, 

'  The  contents  of  this  paragraph  are  taken  from  various  jiarts  of  the  worlis,  On 
Fractures,  and  On  the  Articulations,  but  more  especially  from  §  47  of  the  latter. 

■•^  The  greater  part  of  this  paragraph  is  founded  on  the  work,  On  lujiuies  of  the 
Head.  See  Epidem.  iv,  19,  and  vi,  3,  for  cases  of  exfoliation  of  the  bones  of  the 
nose.  These  are  evidently  cases  of  malhjnant  sloughing  about  the  mouth  and  nose, 
connected  no  doubt  with  the  pestilential  constitution  then  prevalent.  The  notice  of 
this  affection,  given  in  the  Sixth  Book,  is  to  this  effect :  "  In  those  cases  in  which  the 
bone  of  the  palate  exfoliates,  the  middle  of  the  nose  sinks  down ;  l)ut  in  those  in 
which  the  sloughing  is  abont  the  teeth,  the  ridge  is  flattened."  At  Epid.  iv,  the  case 
is  related  more  circumstantially. 


680  MOCHLICUS. 

and  liow,  and  in  what  cases  to  a  less  extent.  And  why  fractured 
parts  unite  sooner  or  slower,  how  distortions  and  callosities 
form,  and  the  remedy  for  them.  In  what  cases  there  are 
external  wounds,  either  at  first  or  afterwards  :  in  what  fractures 
the  hones  are  shortened,  and  in  what  not :  in  what  cases  the 
fractured  bones  protrude,  and  when  they  protrude  most :  in 
what  cases  dislocated  bones  protrude.  That  phj-sicians  are 
deceived,  and  by  what  means,  in  what  they  see,  and  in  what 
they  devise,  regarding  aft'ections,  and  regarding  cures.  Esta- 
blished rules  with  regard  to  bandaging  :  preparation,  presen- 
tation of  the  part,  extension,  adjustment,  friction,  bandaging, 
suspension  and  placing  of  the  limb,  attitude,  seasons,  diet. 
The  most  porous  parts  heal  fastest,  and  vice  versa.  Distortions, 
where  the  bones  are  crooked.  Flesh  and  tendons  wasted  on 
the  side  of  the  dislocation.  The  force  used  in  reduction  to  be 
applied  at  as  great  a  distance  as  possible  from  the  seat  of  the 
displacement.  Of  nerves  {lir/aments  f),  those  which  are  in 
motion  and  in  humidity  [flabb^j  ?)  are  of  a  yielding  nature ; 
those  that  are  not,  less  so.  In  every  dislocation  the  most 
speedy  reduction  is  best.  Reduction  not  to  be  made  while 
the  patient  is  in  a  febrile  state,  nor  on  the  fourth  or  fifth  day ; 
and  least  of  all,  in  those  of  the  elbow,  and  all  cases  which  in- 
duce torpor  ;  the  soonest  the  best,  provided  the  inflammatory 
stage  be  avoided.  Parts  torn  asunder,  whether  nerves,  or 
cartilages,  or  epiphyses,  or  parts  separated  at  symphyses,  cannot 
possil^ly  be  restored  to  their  former  state ;  but  callus  is  quickly 
formed  in  most  cases,  yet  the  use  of  the  limb  is  preserved. 
Of  luxations,  those  nearest  the  extremities  are  least  dangerous. 
Those  joints  which  are  most  easily  dislocated  are  the  least 
subject  to  inflammation.  Those  which  have  been  least  inflamed, 
and  have  not  been  subjected  to  after-treatment,  are  most  liable 
to  be  dislocated  anew.  Extension  should  be  made  in  the 
position  most  calculated  to  enable  the  one  bone  to  clear  the 
extremity  of  the  other,  attention  being  paid  to  configuration 
and  place.  Adjustment  to  be  made  in  the  direction  of  the 
displacement ;  to  push  the  displaced  limb  straight  backwards 
and  sidewavs.  Parts  suddenlv  drawn  aside  are  to  be  suddenly 
drawn  back  by  a  rotatory  motion.  Articulations  which  have 
been  oftenest  dislocated  are  the  most  easily  reduced ;  the  cause 
is  the  conformation  of  the  nerves  {/i(/aments  ?)  or  of  the  bones  ; 


MOCIILICUS.  681 

of  the  ligaments,  that  they  are  long  and  yielding  ;  and  of  the 
bones,  the  shallowness  of  the  articular  cavity,  and  roundness 
of  the  head  [of  the  bone  that  enters  it] .  Usage,  by  its  friction, 
forms  a  new  socket.  The  cause — the  disposition,  and  habit, 
and  age.  A  part  somewhat  mucous  is  not  subject  to  in- 
flammation.^ 

41.  In  those  cases  where  there  are  wounds,  either  at  first, 
or  from  protrusion  of  the  bones ;   or  afterwards,  from  pruritus, 
or  irritation;  in  the  latter  case  vou  are  immediately  to  unloose 
the  bandages,  and  having  applied  pitched  cerate  to  the  wound, 
bandage  the  limb,  placing  the  head  of  the  roller  upon  the  wound, 
and  proceeding  otherwise  as  if  there  were  no  wound  in  the  case  ; 
for  thus  Avill  the  swelling  be  reduced  as  much  as  possible,   and 
the  wound  will  suppurate  most  quickly,  and  the  diseased  parts 
will  separate,   and  when  it  becomes  clean  the  wound  will  most 
quickly  heal.      Splints  are  not  to  be  applied  to  the  place,   nor 
is  it  to  be  bound  tight.      Proceed  thus  when  no  large  bones 
exfoliate,  but  not  in  the  latter  case,   for  then  there  is  great 
suppuration,  and  the  same  treatment  is  not  applicable,  but  the 
parts  require  to  be  exposed  to  the  air  on  account  of  the  ab- 
scesses.     In  such  cases  where  the  bones  protrude,  and  whether 
reduced  or  not,   bandaging  is  not  befitting,   but   distension  is 
to  be  practised  by  means  of  rolls  of  cloth,  made  like  those  used 
upon  shackles ;   one  of  these  is  to  be  placed  at  the  ankle,   and 
the  other  at  the  knee ;  they  are  to  be  flattened  towards  the 
leg,  soft,  strong,  and  hanng  rings ;   and  rods  made  of  cornel, 
and  of  a  proper  length  and  thickness   are  to  be  adjusted  to 
them,   so  as  to  keep  the  parts  distended ;  and  straps,   attached 
to  both  extremities,    are  to  be  inserted  into  the  rings,  so  that 
the  extremities  being  fixed  into  the  rolls,  may  effect  distension." 
Treatment: — Pitched  cerate,  in  a  hot  state;  the  attitudes, position 
of  the  foot  and  hip  ;   regulated  diet.      The  bones  which  have 
protruded   through  the  skin  are  to  be   replaced  the  same  day, 
or  next  ;  not  on  the  fourth  or  fifth,  but  when  the  swelling  has 
subsided.      Reduction  is  to  be  performed  with  levers;   Avhen 
the  bone  does  not  present  any  place  upon  which  the  lever  can 

'  The  contents  of  this  paragraph  are  taken  from  various  parts  of  the  works,  On 
Fractures,  and  On  the  xVrticulations. 

-  Tliis  method  of  treating  fractures  by  continued  distension  is  al)ridged  from 
Fractures,  j  30.     See  also  the  figures  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


C82  MOCHLICUS. 

rest^  a  portion  of  the  part  which  prevents  this  is  to  be  sawed 
off.  But  tlie  denuded  parts  will  drop  off,  and  the  limb  become 
shortened.^ 

42.  Dislocations  at  the  joints  are  to  a  greater  and  less 
extent.  Those  that  are  to  a  less  extent  are  the  most  easily 
reduced ;  those  that  are  to  a  greater  extent  occasion  lesions  of 
the  bones,  of  the  ligaments,  of  the  joints,  of  the  fleshy  parts, 
and  of  the  attitudes.  The  thigh  and  arm  resemble  one  another 
very  much  in  their  dislocations." 

'  Tills  is  condenserl  from  various  parts  of  the  work,  On  Fractures. 

-  The  opinions  here  expressed  occur  both  in  the  treatise  On  Fractures,  and  in 
the  work  On  the  Articulations.  The  analogy  between  the  joints  of  the  upper  and 
lower  extremities  is  adverted  to  in  ^^  8,  9  of  the  work,  On  Fractures,  and  in  other 
parts  of  that  work  aud  the  treatise,  Ou  the  Articulations.  Sec  the  note  on  §  18,  On 
Fractures. 


APHORISMS 


APHORISMS. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

We  now  come  to  the  examination  of  a  work  so  celebrated, 
that  Suidas,  wlio  lived  more  than  seventeen  centuries  after  the 
time  of  Hippocrates,  and  no  doubt  spoke  the  established  opinion 
of  his  age,  does  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  to  be  "  a  perform- 
ance surpassing  the  genius  of  man/'  In  short  it  is  a  work 
which^  from  his  own  time  down  to  within  a  very  recent  period, 
when  ancient  authority  in  medicine  came  to  be  unjustly  dis- 
carded, was  always  looked  upon  as  being  one  of  the  most 
important  productions  which  have  come  down  to  ns  from 
antiquit3^  It  has  been  translated  (I  believe  I  may  say)  into 
all  the  learned  languages  on  earth  :  into  the  Hebrew,  Arabic, 
Latin,  English,  Dutch,  Italian,  German,  and  French  languages; 
it  has  been  commented  upon,  from  the  earliest  time  down  to  the 
present  day,  by  a  whole  host  of  commentators,  some  of  whom 
are  remarkable  for  their  learning  and  practical  acquaintance 
with  their  profession ;  and  it  has  been  published  so  frequently, 
and  in  so  many  different  forms,  that  the  titles  alone  of  tlie 
various  editions  occupy  ten  pages  in  the  edition  of  Littre,  and 
still  more  in  that  of  Kiihn.  I  shall  be  readily  believed,  then,  to 
be  sincere,  when  I  state  that  it  is  with  much  diffidence  that 
I  approach  this  part  of  my  task,  more  especially  as  every 
previous  attempt  to  confer  upon  this  great  work  its  proper 
position  in  the  English  literature  of  medicine  has  proved  a 
complete  failure.  Of  these  insignificant  translations  into 
English  I  have  already  given  some  account  in  the  Preliminary 
Discourse,  and  I  shall  now  merely  state  in  a  few  words  the 
plan  upon  which  I  myself  have  proceeded.  The  work  in 
question  being  remarkal)le  for  condensation  of  thought  and 
brevity  of  style,  the  necessitj-  of  some  explanatory  notes,  in 


6SG  APHORISMS. 

order  to  adapt  the  subject-matters  to  the  tastes  of  modern 
readers,  was  felt  by  me  to  be  so  strong,  that  I  resolved  upon 
giving  on  each  of  the  Aphorisms  a  brief  commentary,  founded 
on  a  careful  study  of  all  the  commentaries  and  annotations 
which  I  myself  have  had  an  opportunity  of  consulting.  It  will 
be  seen  that  my  commentaries  are  remarkably  brief,  when  their 
bulk  is  contrasted  with  that  of  many  of  my  predecessors ;  but 
I  may  be  permitted  to  say  in  this  place,  that  I  shall  feel  much 
disappointed  if  it  be  found  that  I  have  not  given  a  sufficient 
amount  of  illustration  to  render  the  understanding  of  all  parts 
of  the  work  an  easy  task  to  a  careful  reader.  Illustrated  in 
this  manner,  it  is  hoped  that  my  readers  will  find  no  difficulty 
in  comparing  the  views  of  our  author  with  those  entertained  by 
the  profession  at  the  present  time. 

I  have  now  to  give  a  general  exposition  of  the  nature  of  the 
work,  and  a  brief  analysis  of  its  contents.  First,  then,  with 
regard  to  the  nature  and  scope  of  the  present  work  :  the  three 
ancient  commentators,  Theophilus,  INTeietius,  and  Stephanus,^ 
have  all  virtually  given  the  same  definition  of  what  is  meant 
by  an  apliorism,  namely  (to  give  a  literal  translation  of  their 
quaint  language),  that  "  it  is  a  succinct  sa3ang,  comprehending 
a  complete  statement,"  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  is  "a  saying 
poor  in  expression,  but  rich  in  sentiment."  They  say  it  is 
called  an  aphorism  because  (agreeably  to  the  derivation  of  the 
word  in  Greek)  "  the  thought  in  every  instance  is  defined  and 
distinctly  separated  from  what  goes  before  and  succeeds  it." 
Galen,  in  like  manner,  pronounces  an  aphorism  to  be  "  a 
writing  of  great  poAver,  comprehended  in  few  Avords,"  that  is 
to  say,  in  more  modern  language,  that  it  is  a  writing  remark- 
able for  brevity  and  point."  V\^ith  regard  to  the  scope  and 
object  of  our  author  in  this  work,  the  same  commentators  do 
not  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  to  have  been  to  embrace  the  heads 
of  the  whole  Art  and  the  operations  of  Nature,  by  which  is 
probably  meant,  to  give  an  exposition  in  brief  terms  of  all  the 
principles  of  medicine,  physiology,  and  physical  philosophy  ; 
for  the  two  latter  branches  of  science  were  generally  held  to  be 
inseparably  connected  with  the  Art  of  medicine.  Hence  the 
work  embraces  many  things  relating  to  the  seasons,  the  risings 

'  See  the  edition  of  their  Scholia  by  Dietz,  vol.  ii.     Regimont.  Pruss.,  1834. 
~  Comment.  IV,  in  Diact.  Morb.  Acut. 


ARGUMENT.  687 

of  the  starSj  tlic  nature  of  waters,  the  symptoms  of  disease,  and 
the  modes  of  combating  them.  Stcphanus,  in  particubir, 
passes  a  high  eulogium  on  the  -work,  as  being  useful  to  the 
perfect  scholar,  and  to  the  uninitiated, — to  those  who  have 
been  late  in  beginning  their  studies,  and  to  those  who  have 
been  familiar  with  them  from  their  youth, — to  travellers,  and 
to  those  who  reside  in  cities, — to  men  of  excellent  parts,  and 
to  those  of  obtuse  understanding, — to  the  enterprising  and 
the  indolent, — to  persons  whose  knowledge  is  complete,  as 
putting  them  in  mind  summarily  of  those  things  which  they 
formerly  knew,  and  to  those  who  are  imperfect  in  knowledge, 
as  giving  them  in  a  brief  space  what  had  been  previously 
delivered  to  them  in  a  diffuse  style. 

From  a  careful  examination  of  the  work,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
perceive  that  our  author's  object  was  to  collect  the  conclusions 
to  which  his  investigations  on  various  subjects  had  conducted 
him,  or,  in  other  words,  to  give  in  a  general  view  all  the  grand 
results  of  his  preceding  inquiries.  That  the  work  in  question 
was  the  production  of  his  advanced  age,  is  frequently  stated 
by  Galen,^  and,  indeed,  from  the  nature  of  it,  we  might  con- 
fidently affirm,  that  no  one  could  have  written  it  but  a  person 
who  had  been  long  familiarly  acquainted  with  the  phenomena 
of  disease,  and  had  maturely  reflected  on  all  the  various  sub- 
jects to  which  the  several  books  of  Aphorisms  relate.  A  very 
considerable  portion  of  the  sentences  which  occur  in  it  are 
evidently  taken  from  the  treatises  with  which  we  have  been 
already  occupied,  especially  '  The  Prognostics,^  ^  On  the  Articu- 
lations,^ and  '  On  Airs,  AVaters,  and  Places.'  But  here,  on  the 
outset,  we  are  met  with  a  puzzle,  namely,  how  to  account  for 
the  books  of  Aphorisms  containing  many  extracts  from  works 
W'liich  we  have  set  down  as  being  of  a  spurious  nature  ?  Are 
these  interpolations  ?  or,  have  these  sentences  been  taken  from 
the  books  of  Aphorisms,  and  transferred  to  the  other  w'orks  in 
w  hich  they  appear  ?  These  are  questions,  which  it  is  much  to 
be  regretted  that,  in  mau}^  instances,  we  have  no  means  of 
answering  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Indeed,  it  must  be  admitted 
that,  with  the  most  positive  evidence  in  favour  of  the  general 
authenticity  of  the  Aphorisms,  it  is  unfortunately  but  too  well 

'  See  De  Crisibus,  i,  G. 


688  APHORISMS. 

ascertained  that  a  certain  portion  of  tliem  are  unquestionably 
interpolations;  and  of  a  good  many  more  it  is  often  difficult  to 
pronounce  wlietlier  they  be  genuine  or  not.  With  these  draw- 
backs, from  which  it  is  to  be  lamented  that  few  Avorks  which 
have  descended  to  us  from  remote  antiquity,  are  altogether 
exempt,  we  must  proceed  to  examine  the  book  as  we  now  possess 
it,  and  to  give  a  succinct  analysis  of  its  subject-matters. 

I  must  mention,  however,  in  the  first  place,  that  the 
Aphorisms  were  differently  divided  by  the  commentators  in 
ancient  times.  Thus,  Soranus  divided  them  into  three  sections, 
Ruffus  into  four,  and  Galen  into  seven.  In  modern  editions 
they  are  usually  divided  into  eight  sections,  but  those  con- 
tained in  the  last  of  them  are  generally  admitted  to  be  apo- 
cryphal, with  the  exception  of  a  few  which  have  been  added  to 
the  seventh  section  by  Foes  and  Littrc. 

SECTION    I. 

The  work  opens  with  a  memorable  Aphorism,  in  which  the 
iiutlior  strikingly  contrasts  the  shortness  of  human  life  with 
the  prolixity  of  Art;  proclaims  the  necessity  of  prompt  decision, 
while  he  states  the  difficulty  of  forming  a  correct  judgment, 
owing  to  the  fallaciousness  of  medical  experience ;  and  evinces 
his  practical  acquaintance  with  the  business  of  the  profession, 
by  announcing  that  it  is  not  sufiicient  for  the  physician  to  be 
prepared  to  do  his  duties  himself,  unless  he  disposes  those  who 
surround  the  patient  to  cooperate  with  him  in  the  performance 
of  his  task  (§1). 

The  following  Aphorisms,  down  to  the  20th,  relate  principally 
to  dietetics,  or,  at  least,  they  bear  more  or  less  upon  that 
subject.  In  the  2cl,  it  is  stated  that,  as  in  natural  evacuations, 
if  the  discharges,  whether  upwards  or  downwards,  be  such  as 
the  system  requires  to  get  rid  of,  they  do  good,  and  are  easily 
supported,  but  if  otherwise,  the  contrary  is  the  case;  so  the  same 
rule  applies  to  evacuations  produced  by  the  administration  of 
medicines.  The  next  states  the  danger  of  too  full  and  too 
spare  a  diet  in  the  persons  of  the  Athletes,  and  hence  follows 
the  natural  conclusion,  that  a  very  full  or  ver}^  spare  diet 
is  equally  dangerous  in  the  case  of  convalescents  (§§  3,  I,  5). 
The  rules  of  diet  in  diseases  are  next  given  with  great  pre- 
cision ;  the  propriety  of  using  the  sparest  diet  when  the  disease 


ARGUMENT.  689 

is  sit  its  acrae_,  is  stated  ;  and  in  particular  it  is  laid  down 
as  a  general  rule,  that  the  administration  of  food  is  to  be 
avoided  at  the  stage  of  the  exacerbations  in  intermittent  fevers, 
attention,  however,  being  paid  to  the  strength  of  the  patient, 
so  that  it  may  not  be  allowed  to  sink  for  want  of  proper  support. 
See  §§  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11.  The  symptoms  by  which  the  exacer- 
bations and  remissions  of  fever  may  be  judged  of,  are  tersely 
but  distinctly  stated  in  &  12.  The  system  of  diet  best  suiting: 
the  different  ages,  founded  on  the  grand  principle  of  the 
differences  of  the  innate  or  animal  heat  in  youth  and  old  asre, 
are  stated  in  §§  13,  14,  and  the  regimen  befitting  the  different 
seasons  in  §  15.  In  §  16  is  announced  the  great  principle 
upon  which  the  regimen  in  acute  diseases  is  to  be  regulated, 
namely,  that  a  diluent  diet,  that  is  to  say,  a  diet  consisting 
principally  of  liquids,  is  the  most  suitable  in  all  such  cases. 
In  the  17th,  18tli,  and  19th  are  given  some  further  directions 
Avith  regard  to  the  times  of  administering  food.  One  of  the 
rules  there  laid  down,  deserves  to  be  kept  in  constant  remem- 
brance :  "  something  is  to  be  conceded  to  habit,  to  season,  to 
country,  and  to  age." 

The  remaining  Aphorisms  in  this  section  from  the  20th  to 
the  25th,  relate  entirely  to  purging,  the  rules  of  which  are 
here  accurately  laid  down.  One  of  them  is  most  important, 
namely,  that  when  the  strength  permits,  evacuation  in  certain 
cases  should  be  carried  the  length  of  inducing  ckUqulum  animi. 
(See  §  2.) 

SECTION    II. 

The  first  eight  Aphorisms  of  this  section  relate  principally 
to  the  rules  of  prognosis,  especially  those  regarding  sleep, 
fasting,  and  repletion,  §§  1-6  :  then  there  are  two  relating  to 
the  effect  of  food  in  convalescence,  which  leads  to  the  remark 
that  when  food  does  not  recruit  the  body,  we  know  that 
evacuation  is  required  (§  8) ;  and  hence  our  author  proceeds  to 
give  directions  about  purgings  (§§1  9,  10),  and  then  he  remarks 
upon  the  mode  of  recruiting,  which  he  recommends  to  be  done 
with  liquid  food  (§  11)  ;  and  the  consequences  of  allowing  the 
peccant  humours  to  remain  in  the  system  are  stated  in  §  12. 
Next  follow  two  Aphorisms  touching  the  crisis  (§§  13,  14)  ; 
and  afterwards  ingenious  directions  arc  given  for  determining 

41 


()90  APHORISMS. 

whether  au  abscess  in  the  throat  or  elsewhere^  be  of  a  local 
nature,  or  Avhether  it  affect  the  constitution  (§  15)  ;  then 
follow  three  Aphorisms  regarding  hunger  and  the  administration 
of  food  in  convalescence  (^§  16,  17,  18);  with  an  important  advice 
as  to  the  necessity  of  being  cautious  in  giving  a  prognosis  in 
acute  diseases  (§  19)  ;  in  the  next  (§  20),  is  given  a  statement, 
not  very  intelligible,  regarding  the  condition  of  the  bowels  in 
youth  and  old  age ;  then,  after  a  short  aphorism,  in  which  wine 
is  declared  to  be  the  cure  of  hunger  (§  21),  the  author  states  the 
grand  rule  of  all  rational  therapeutics,  namely,  that  diseases  are 
to  be  cured  by  their  contraries  (§  22) ;  three  Aphorisms  (§§  23, 
21',  25)  then  follow,  relative  to  crises  (the  26th,  in  which  the 
combination  of  fever  with  spasms  is  stated,  seems  rather  out  of 
place) ;  after  this  there  arc  two  Aphorisms,  relative  to  pro- 
gnostics in  febrile  diseases  (^§  27,  28);  the  next  two  Aphorisms 
are  devoted  to  the  exposition  of  the  times  at  which  remedial 
measures  are  to  be  used  in  fevers,  these  are  the  beginning  and 
decline,  avoiding  the  acme  (§§  29,  30) ;  the  two  following 
(§§  31,  32)  relate  to  the  regimen  in  conA^alescence ;  in  the 
next,  the  importance  of  a  sound  intellect  and  good  appe- 
tite in  all  diseases  is  stated  (§  33);  the  following  one  refers 
to  prognostics,  and  states  the  comparative  immunity  from 
danger  in  diseases,  when  they  are  in  accordance  Avith  ages, 
constitutions,  and  habits  (§  31)  ;  the  next  one  relates  to  the 
state  of  the  hypochondrium  in  diseases, — a  point  in  semeiology 
to  which  our  author  paid  great  attention  (§  35)  ;  in  §§  36,  37, 
the  deleterious  effects  of  purgatives,  when  unseasonably  admi- 
nistered, are  pointedly  declared ;  in  §  38,  the  propriety  of 
consulting  the  palate  in  laying  down  the  rules  of  regimen  is 
distinctly  stated  ;  the  comparative  effects  of  diseases  on  the  old 
and  young  are  given  in  §  39;  and  the  danger  of  pectoral  com- 
plaints in  the  old  are  stated  in  §  40,  The  danger  attending 
sudden  swoonings  is  proclaimed  in  ^  41,  and  hence,  naturally 
apoplexy,  and  the  danger  with  which  it  is  accompanied,  form 
the  subject  of  §  12;  probably  from  some  fancied  connexiofi 
between  the  subjects,  the  author  next  states  the  appearances 
from  which  one  may  judge  whether  or  not  a  person  who  has 
been  strangled  may  be  resuscitated  (§  43).  The  comparative 
degree  of  danger  when  disease  attacks  the  fat  and  the  lean  is 
declared  in  §  ii.      The  45tli  relates   to  the  influence  which 


ARGUMENT.  691 

changes  of  age,  place,  and  circumstances  have  on  epileptics. 
The  46th  contains  the  announcement  of  an  important  principle 
in  the  natural  treatment  of  diseases,  namely,  that  a  milder 
attack  of  pain  is  obscured  by  a  more  severe.  The  47tli 
embraces  the  symptoms  which  accompany  the  formation  of  pus 
in  an  abscess  ;  in  the  48th  is  stated  the  well-known  fact  of  the 
need  of  rest  in  all  disorders  of  the  body.  The  next  four  relate 
to  changes,  and  the  dangers  attending  them:  the  49th  proclaims 
the  efl'ect  of  habit  in  making  the  weak  endure  more  than  the 
strong;  the  oOtli  embraces  the  same  subject  in  a  more  compre- 
hensive form ;  in  the  51st  the  danger  of  sudden  changes  is 
depicted ;  and  in  the  52d,  the  medical  practitioner  is  cautioned 
not  to  alter  his  plan  of  treatment  without  a  suitable  indication. 
The  o3d  is  a  repetition  of  the  20th,  and  the  last  proclaims  the 
advantages  of  tallness  in  youth,  and  the  disadvantages  in  old  age. 
From  the  outline  now  given,  it  Avill  be  readily  perceived  that 
very  important  subjects  in  semeiology,  therapeutics,  and  pro- 
gnostics, are  touched  upon  in  this  section,  but  that  it  is  often 
difficult  to  trace  any  connexion  between  the  different  parts  of 
which  it  is  composed. 

SECTION     III. 

This  section,  as  is  stated  by  Theophilus,  the  Commentator, 
is  principally  devoted  to  two  subjects :  the  one  being  the  tem- 
perature of  the  seasons  and  the  diseases  connected  with  them ; 
and  the  other,  the  different  ages  and  the  diseases  peculiar  to  them. 
The  first  sixteen  relute  almost  entirely  to  the  seasons,  and  the 
states  of  the  weather,  with  the  diseases  to  which  they  give  rise, 
and  the  constitutions  best  and  worst  adapted  to  particular 
seasons.  The  changes  of  the  seasons,  and  the  changes  of  the 
weather  in  the  different  seasons,  are  declared  to  be  the  prin- 
cipal causes  of  disease.  Autumn  is  held  to  be  the  most  un- 
healthy of  the  seasons.  The  17th  resumes  the  subject  of  the 
effects  of  the  seasons  in  different  states  of  the  health,  and  in  the 
18th,  19th,  20th,  21st,  22d,  and  23d,  the  diseases  which  pre- 
vail most  in  particular  seasons  are  enumerated.  The  remain- 
ing Aphorisms  in  this  section  are  devoted  to  the  consideration 
of  the  diseases  peculiarly  incident  to  certain  periods  of  life. 

A  large  portion  of  the  Aphorisms  in  this  section  are  taken 


692  APHOUISMS. 

from  the  works  '  On  Airs^  Water,  and  Places/  and  '  On 
Humours/  that  is  to  say,  provided  the  latter  be  genuine,  which 
is  not  now  generally  admitted.  If  it  is  not  recognised  to  be 
genuine,  we  must  suppose  that  the  parallel  passages  have  been 
transferred  from  the  Aphorisms  to  the  other  work. 

SECTION     IV. 

A  great  portion  of  this  section  relates  to  semeiology,  but  the 
first  .21  Aphorisms  are  restricted  to  the  consideration  of  purgings, 
and  the  circumstances  under  which  they  are  to  be  performed. 
In  purgings,  it  is  directed  (§  2)  to  eject  only  those  humours 
which  it  is  advantageous  for  the  system  to  get  rid  of.  In 
summer  the  system  is  to  be  purged  upwards,  and  in  autumn 
doAvnwards  (§  4)  ;  and  during  the  great  heat  of  the  dog- 
days,  purgings  are  to  l)e  entirely  avoided  (§  5) ;  and  many 
directions  are  given  respecting  the  administration  of  the 
hellebores  (§§  13-16). 

From  §§  21-28,  the  prognostics  founded  on  the  alvine  dis- 
charges are  given.  The  dangers  attending  the  evacuations  of 
black  bile  are  strongly  stated  in  §§  22,  23,  24<. 

The  29th  and  30th  relate  principally  to  crises.  The  31st, 
32d,  and  33d  contain  a  statement  of  the  circumstances  under 
which  deposits  or  abscesses  take  place  on  particular  parts,  and 
the  marks  bv  which  thev  are  to  be  recognised.  In  the  34th  and 
35th,  two  acute  aftections  of  the  neck  are  noticed  in  very  striking 
terms.  The  next  three,  namely,  the  36th,  37th,  and  38th,  are 
semeiotic,  and  relate  to  sweats.  The  39tli  and  40th  are  allied 
to  them,  and  the  same  subject  is  resumed  in  the  41st  and  42d. 
The  43d,  44th,  45th,  46th,  and  47th  relate  to  remittent  fevers, 
and  the  usual  terminations  and  complications  of  fevers  in  gene- 
ral. The  Aphorisms  from  §§  48-74  all  relate  to  the  prognostics 
in  fever,  and  contain  many  important  observations  on  this  sub- 
ject. A  considerable  proportion  of  them  are  taken  from  '  The 
Prognostics,^  and  '  The  Coan  Pranotions.^  From  the  74th  to 
the  end  of  the  section,  the  Aphorisms  relate  principally  to 
prognostics  founded  on  the  appearances  of  the  urine. 

From  what  has  now  been  stated,  it  will  be  readily  perceived 
that  this  section  relates  mainly  to  semeiology  and  prognostics. 


ARGUMENT.  693 


SECTION    V 


TlicopliiluSj  the  Commentator,  states,  in  general  terms,  that 
our  author  deHvers  diagnostic  and  prognostic  rules  in  this  section. 
It  contains  a  variety  of  matters,  Avhich  may  be  thus  arranged. 
From  '^^  1-6,  the  danger  of  convulsions  from  purging  by  helle- 
bore, from  a  wound,  from  loss  of  blood,  from  immoderate  purg- 
ings,  and  from  diinking,  is  clearly  stated.  A  favorable  prognosis 
is  given  in  the  case  of  persons  before  puberty  who  are  seized 
with  e])ilepsy,  but  an  unfavorable,  in  the  case  of  those  who  have 
passed  their  25th  year  (§  7). 

From  §§  8-15,  various  prognostics  relating  to  empyema  and 
phthisis  are  given.  The  danger  of  the  case  in  which  angina 
passes  down  to  the  lungs  is  strongly  expressed  (§  10). 

The  medicinal  effects  of  heat  and  cold  in  a  varietj'  of  diseases 
are  delivered  with  much  precision  from  §§  16-29.  The  danger 
of  applying  snow  and  ice  to  the  chest  is  strongly  expressed 
(§  24) ;  and  the  benefit  of  the  affusion  of  cold  water  in  diseases 
of  the  joints  is  stated  with  much  force  (§  25). 

Then  follows  an  interesting  series  of  Aphorisms  relating  to 
pregnant  women,  and  the  diseases  of  pregnancy,  from  §§  28-62. 
The  63d  relates  to  the  causes  of  impotence  in  men.  The  good 
and  bad  effects  of  milk  are  given  in  §  64.  The  65th  relates 
to  the  translations  of  swelling  from  the  external  to  the  internal 
parts.  To  this  the  next  two  Aphorisms  are  nearly  allied,  that 
is  to  say,  they  relate  to  swellings  consequent  upon  severe 
wounds.  The  68th  contains  an  important  rule  in  therapeutics, 
namely,  that  when  the  back  part  of  the  head  is  pained,  it  is  re- 
lieved by  bleeding  from  the  frontal  vessels.  The  6yth  relates 
to  the  rationale  of  rigors  in  women  and  in  men.  The  70th 
announces  a  most  important  principle  in  natural  therapeutics, 
namely,  that  a  quartan  may  prove  a  cure  of  convulsions.  The 
71st  relates  to  the  indications  from  the  state  of  the  skin;  and 
the  72 d  to  the  nature  of  jaundice. 


094  APHORISMS. 


SECTION     VI. 

This  section  relates  principally  to  a  class  of  cases  wliicli^  in 
tlie  ancient  system  of  prognostics,  were  called  superventions.^ 
By  this  term  was  meant  a  disease  supervening  or  coming  on 
another  disease,  as  a  fever  upon  pleurisy  ;  or  a  symptom  on  a 
disease,  as  headache  on  fever ;  or  a  disease  on  a  symptom,  as 
dryness  on  headache ;  or  a  symptom  on  a  symptom,  as  head- 
ache on  insomnolency.  These  superventions  are  scattered  over 
the  section,  in  what  would  appear  to  be  a  disorderly  manner, 
and  are  also  mixed  up  wdth  other  important  Aphorisms  on  totally 
different  subjects.  The  Aphorisms  iu  the  present  section,  then, 
do  not  well  admit  of  any  distinct  grouping;  but  M,  Littre 
lias  attempted  an  arrangement  of  them,  which  I,  in  part,  shall 
follow. 

The  first  class  of  superventions  contains  cases  in  which  the 
symptom  or  disease  Avhich  supervened  proved  favorable.  These 
are  §§  1,  10,  11,  13,  14, 15,  17,  21,  2.5,  26,  37,  40,  41,  48,  and 
51 .  Of  these,  some  suggest  valuable  indications  as  to  the  proper 
method  of  cure,  such  as  (^  37)  that  an  external  swelling  coming 
on  in  a  case  of  quinsy  relieves  the  latter ;  and  (§  17)  that  it  is  a 
good  thing  in  ophthalmy  when  a  diarrhea  comes  on  ;  and  (§  15) 
that  spontaneous  vomiting  relieves  diarrhoea ;  and  (§  11)  that 
dropsy  is  carried  off  by  a  watery  discharge  from  the  bowels. 

The  second  class  contains  cases  in  which  the  new  disease,  or 
symptom  proves  an  aggravation  of  the  disease.  These  are 
§§  3,  16,  35,  42,  43,  54,  56.  Of  these,  some  of  the  most  in- 
teresting are — (§  16)  that  in  confirmed  pleurisy  and  pneu- 
monia a  looseness  of  the  bowels  aggravates  the  disease ;  and 
(§  43)  that  dj-sentcry  is  a  fatal  disease  when  it  supervenes  on 
enlargement  of  the  spleen. 

Of  the  others  it  is  difficult  to  give  any  arrangement ;  and 
I  shall  merely  advert  to  a  fcAv  which  appear  to  me  particularly 
deserving  of  notice,  such  as  (§  5)  that  one  should  consider  the 
nature  of  pains  in  the  side,  and  other  parts  of  the  body,  w4iethcr 
they  difier  from  one  another;  and  (§  7)  that  pains  in  the  abdo- 

'  A  modern  writer,  Leonard  lacchinus,  in  his  work  entitled  Methodus  Prsecog- 
noscendi,  has  an  interesting  cJiajiter  on  tlie  Supervcnientia  (c.  viii).  In  a  word,  this 
formed  a  very  important  part  of  the  ancient  system  of  prognostics. 


ARGUMENT.  695 

niinal  region  arc  formidable  in  proportion  as  they  are  deep 
seated;  and  (§  12)  that  in  removing  hemorrhoids,  one  should 
be  left,  as  a  safety  valve,  so  to  speak,  to  the  system ;  that 
(§  18)  wounds  in  certain  parts  of  the  body,  of  Avhich  a  list  is 
given,  are  deadly ;  that  (§  19)  bone  and  certain  other  structures 
of  the  body,  when  excised,  arc  not  restored  ;  that  (§  20)  extra- 
vasated  blood,  in  certain  cavities  of  the  body,  becomes  purulent ; 
that  (§  27)  it  is  dangerous  to  evacuate  the  fluid  rapidly  in 
empyema  and  ascites.  In  §§  29,  30,  55  are  given  some  im- 
portant statements  respecting  gout.  In  §  31  there  is  an 
important  list  of  all  the  various  remedies  for  ophthalmy.  At 
§§  36  and  48  venesection  is  pronounced  to  be  a  remedy  in  acute 
pains  of  the  bladder  and  side.  In  §  38  the  danger  of  meddling 
with  cancerous  diseases  is  stated.  In  §  39  the  doulile  nature 
of  convulsions  is  distinctly  indicated.  In  §  47  it  is  laid  down 
as  a  rule,  that  persons  requiring  bleeding  or  purging,  should 
be  bled  or  purged  in  spring.  The  last  two  Aphorisms  relate 
to  morbus  coxarius,  and  are  very  interesting,  as  showing  how 
well  acquainted  our  author  Avas  Avith  this  disease  in  all  its  stages. 

SECTION   VII. 

In  this  section,  also,  a  large  portion  of  the  Aphorisms  belong 
to  the  class  called  superventions,  namely,  from  §§  1-27,  29,  41, 
47,  49,  70,  75,  76,  77,  78,  79,  80,  84,  85^,  86.  It  appears,  then, 
that  nearly  the  half  partake  of  this  character.  In  this  list  it 
is  generally  a  symptom  Avhicli  supervenes  on  a  disease,  as  (§  1) 
coldness  of  the  extremities  on  an  acute  disease;  and  (§  3) 
hiccup  on  vomiting  ;  or  (§  7)  rigor  and  delirium  upon  intoxica- 
tion ;  and  (§  14)  stupor  and  delirium  on  injury  of  the  head  ; 
and  (§15)  purulent  expectoration  on  haemoptysis;  and  (§  16) 
purulent  expectoration  on  phthisis. 

Another  class  is  mostly  prognostic,  as  §§  31,  32,  33,  37,  38, 
44,  45,  52,  82.  Of  these,  ^§  31,  32,  and  33  relate  to  the 
characters  of  the  urine  in  fevers,  and  are  very  interesting. 

Another  class  are  diagnostic,  as  §§  30,  31,  35,  36,  39,  40,  62, 
and  69. 

Other  Aphorisms  contained  in  this  section  are  deserving  of 
being  well  considered,  such  as  §§  66,  67,  68,  69,  in  Avhich  the  im- 
portance of  attending  to  the  excretions  is  pointedly  stated.    In 


G'JG  APHORISMS. 

§  72j  the  prognosis  founded  on  coldness  of  the  cxtremiticSj 
while  the  internal  parts  are  warm,  in  intermittent  fcverSj  is 
distinctly  pointed  out. 

Many  of  the  Aphorisms  in  the  latter  part  of  the  work  are  pro- 
bably sujjposititious ;  and,  moreover,  they  are  possessed  of  little 
value.  The  last,  as  given  here,  and  in  the  editions  of  Foes  and 
Littre,  is  memorable,  from  its  containing  a  notable  statement  of 
the  proportional  powers  of  medicines,  the  knife,  and  the  actual 
cautery  as  remedial  means. 

This,  then,  is  a  brief  outline  of  a  work  which,  whether  we 
regard  the  value  of  the  subject-matters  of  which  it  is  composed, 
or  the  influence  which  they  have  exerted  on  professional  practice 
during  a  long  lapse  of  ages,  may  be  confidently  pronounced  to 
be  one  of  the  most  remarkable  works  in  the  viliole  compass  of 
Medical  Literature.  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  further  respect- 
ing it,  that  whoever  is  possessed  with  any  proper  degree  of 
liberal  curiosity  to  understand  the  real  state  of  professional 
knowledge  at  the  time  when  its  scattered  fragments  were  first 
embodied  into  a  regular  system ;  and  whoever  would  wish  to 
have  his  mind  thoroughly  imbued  with  those  enduring  prin- 
ciples wliich  have  formed  the  groundwork  of  medical  theory  and 
practice  during  the  many  revolutions  of  professional  opinions, 
in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty-four  centuries,  should  give 
his  days  and  nights  to  the  study  of  these  Aphorisms.  But 
I  feel  that  any  formal  eulogy  on  a  Avork  of  so  undisputed  a 
reputation  would  be  entirely  out  of  place ;  and  that  if  I  were 
to  attempt  it,  I  might  be  stopped  short  at  once  Avith  the  per- 
tinent interrogatory,  Quis  cidpuvU  ? 


697 


A  P  II  OKI  SMS. 

SECTION   I. 

1.  Life  is  short,  and  tlic  Art  long;  tlic  occasion  fleeting; 
experience  fallacious,  and  judgment  difficult.  The  pliysiciau 
must  not  only  be  prepared  to  do  what  is  right  himself,  but 
also  to  make  the  patient,  the  attendants,  and  externals  co- 
operate. 

The  exordium  of  this  work  bespeaks  at  once  the  reflective  philosopher  and  the 
practised  physician.  It  commences  by  contrasting  the  shortness  of  human  life  with 
the  extent  of  the  Medical  Art,  the  parts  of  which,  as  Theophihis,  the  commentator, 
remarks,  are  diversified,  and  some  of  them  require  long  and  tedious  investigation. 
"The  occasion  is  fleeting,"  that  is  to  say,  the  season  during  which  remedies  may  be 
successfully  applied  is  soon  past ;  as  the  poet  says,  "  fugit  irreparabile  tempus." 
Some  render  this  clause  by  "  the  time  is  urgent,"  and  this  interpretation  is  quite 
apposite.  The  following  clause  might  be  rendered  :  "  experiment  is  dangerous,  and 
decision  is  difficult;"  and  this  appears  to  be  the  meaning  which  Galen  puts  upon  it. 
He  remarks  that  it  is  evidently  hazardous  to  experiment  in  a  case  which  involves  the 
life  of  a  human  being,  and  that  it  is  difKcult  to  catch  the  truth  in  medicine,  as  is 
evident  from  the  circumstance  of  the  profession  being  divided  into  so  many  opposite 
sects.  The  last  part  of  the  Aphorism  evinces  liow  well  he  had  a]i])rcbended  the  diffi- 
culties which  beset  the  practitioner  of  Medicine,  who  must  not  only  be  well  acquainted 
with  the  part  which  he  himself  has  to  act,  but  ought  also  to  possess  the  talent  of  making 
the  patient,  the  assistants,  and  all  around,  cooperate  with  him  in  the  performance 
thereof.  The  whole  of  Galen's  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism  is  replete  with  philo- 
sophical reflection,  but  is  written  in  too  diffuse  a  style  for  my  limits.  The  same 
objection  partly  applies  to  those  of  Theophihis,  Damascius,  and  Meletius.  Compare 
Loc.  in  Ilom.  1,  1;  ib.  liv,  1 ;  II  Prccdict.  xix,  13,  xxix,  8;  I  Mori),  iv,  1-2;  I  Morb. 
Mul.  Lwi,  13 ;    Humor,  i,  C,  7  ;   Artie,  ix,  7;    I  Epid.  ii,  93,  9G ;   VI  Epid.  ii,  78-82.' 

2.  In  disorders  of  the  bowels  and  vomitings,  occurring 
spontaneously,  if  the  matters  purged  be  such  as  ought  to  be 
pnrged,  they  do  good,  and  are  well  borne;  but  if  not,  the  contrary. 
And  so  artificial  evacuations,  if  they  consist  of  such  matters  as 
should  be  evacuated,  do  good,  and  are  well  borne ;  but  if  not, 
the  contrary.  One,  then,  ought  to  look  to  the  country,  the 
season,  the  age,  and  the  diseases  in  which  they  are  proper  or  not. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  this  Aphorism  consists  of  two  divisions  :  in  the  former 
of  these  the  effects  of  natural,  that  is  to  say,  spontaneous  evacuation,  are  described  ; 
and  in  the  latter,  those  of  artificial,  that  is  to  say,  such  as  are  produced  by  medicinal 

'  The  reader  is  requested  to  obsene  that  in  the  .Annotations  on  the  Aphorisms 
the  references,  for  convenience  sake,  are  all  made  to  the  edition  of  Van  der  Linden, 
unless  otherwise  stated. 


G98  APHORISMS. 

means.  I  have  arlopted  the  interpretation  approved  of  In-  Galen,  al)out  the  correctness 
of  which  I  cannot  entertain  a  douht.  The  last  clause  of  it  contains  a  precept  which  is 
evidently  of  great  importance  in  medical  practice,  and  yet  I  fear  it  is  often  overlooked 
at  the  present  day.  We  now  seldom  find  the  question  mooted  whether  or  not  it  he 
safe  to  practise  severe  evacuations  in  hot  seasons  or  in  hot  countries ;  in  a  word,  we 
forget  the  precept  of  Hippocrates,  who  directs  us  "  to  look  to  the  country  and  to  the 
season."  A  few  years  ago  it  was  the  fashion  in  this  counti7  for  us  to  deride  the 
Itahan  physicians  hecause  they  would  not  hleed  heroically,  as  was  the  practice  with 
us.  Now,  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that  the  Italians  v.ere  not  so  far  wrong  as  we 
supposed,  and  that  their  practice  was  adapted  to  their  own  climate.  They  had  not 
forgot  the  rule  laid  down  l)y  their  ancient  countryman  :  "  differunt  pro  natura  locorum 
genera  medicina;."  (Celsus,  Pracf.)  Compare  Aphor.  i,  25;  Humor,  ii,  49 ;  VI  Epid. 
iv,  30. 

3.  In  the  athlctfc,  embonpoint,  if  carried  to  its  utmost  limit, 
is  dangerous,  for  tliey  cannot  remain  in  the  same  state  nor  be 
stationary;  and  since,  then,  they  can  neither  remain  stationary 
nor  improye,  it  only  remains  for  them  to  get  worse ;  for  these 
reasons  the  embonpoint  should  be  reduced  ^Tithout  delay,  that 
the  body  may  again  haye  a  commencement  of  reparation. 
Neither  should  the  cyacuations,  in  their  case,  be  carried  to  an 
extreme,  for  this  also  is  dangerous,  but  only  to  such  a  point  as 
the  person's  constitution  can  endure.  In  like  manner,  medi- 
cinal cyacuations,  if  carried  to  an  extreme,  are  dangerous  ;  and 
again,  a  restoratiye  course,  if  in  the  extreme,  is  dangerous. 

In  the  Life  of  Hippocrates  we  have  stated  that  he  was  initiated  in  medicinal 
gymnastics  under  llerodicus;  in  this  school,  then,  it  is  to  he  supposed  that  he  learned 
the  facts  which  he  enunciates  in  this  Aphorism.  The  two  following  modern  authors 
have  written  very  IcarneiUy  on  the  gymnastics  of  the  ancients:  Hicron.  Mercurialis 
(de  Arte  Gymnast.Veter.);  Schulze  (Hist.  Med.,  and  dc  Athletis  Veteriun).  Hippocrates 
evidently  points  out  what  happens  in  the  case  of  the  athletje,  as  a  lesson,  to  show  the 
dangerous  effects  of  repletion  ;  he  also  takes  occasion  to  state  the  danger  of  carrying 
depletion  to  an  extreme.  Altout  the  meaning  of  the  different  parts  of  this  Aphorism 
there  can  scarcely  he  any  douht ;  and  none  of  the  coinnicntaries,  ancient  or  modern, 
supi)ly  much  interesting  information  under  this  head.  Compare  IV  Morb.  xi,  15, 16  ; 
Aphor.  ii,  51 ;  Vet.  Med.  xviii,  1;  Vict.  Acut.  xvii,  10 ;  and  Celsus,  ii,  2. 

4.  A  slender   and   restricted   diet   is    always    dangerous   in 

chronic   diseases,   and  also  in  acute   diseases,   where  it  is   not 

requisite.      And  again,  a  diet  brought  to  the  extreme  point   of 

attenuation  is  dangerous ;  and  repletion,  when  in  the  extreme, 

is  also  dangerous. 

As  Galen,  in  his  Conmientary,  remarks,  our  author,  having  pointed  out  the  dangerous 
effects  of  too  great  repletion  and  depletion  on  the  health,  in  the  present  Aphorism 
defines  the  effects  of  a  slender,  an  extremely  spare,  and  a  full  diet,  in  diseases.  Any 
difficulty  which  the  reader  may  meet  in  this  Aphorism,  he  will  find  cleared  tip  sati-^fac- 


APHORISMS.  G99 

torily  by  Ileurnius  and  Berends,in  their  very  sensible  Commentaries  on  the  Aphorisms 
of  Hippocrates.     Compare  Vict.  Acut.  xx,  6,  7;  Aph.  vi,  39  ;  and  Celsus,  iii,  2. 

5.  In  a  restricted  diet,  patients  wlio  transgress  are  thereby 
more  hurt  (than  in  any  other  ?) ;  for  every  such  transgression, 
whatever  it  may  be,  is  followed  by  greater  consequences  than 
in  a  diet  somewhat  more  generous.  On  this  account,  a  very 
slender,  regulated,  and  restricted  diet  is  dangerous  to  persons 
in  health,  because  they  bear  transgressions  of  it  more  difficultly. 
For  this  reason,  a  slender  and  restricted  diet  is  generally  more 
dangerous  than  one  a  little  more  liberal. 

There  have  been  different  interpretations  of  the  first  clause  of  this  Aphorism, 
but  I  am  satisfied  that  Galen  and  Theophilus  are  correct  in  explaining  it  as  I  have 
rendered  it,  namely,  that  a  patient  who  is  put  upon  too  strict  a  regimen  is  apt  to 
transgress  the  rules  prcscriljcd  to  him,  and  in  this  way  he  is  more  injured  than  if  he 
had  been  allowed  a  fuller  diet.  Damascius  also  understands  Hippocrates  to  mean 
that  when  patients  are  much  restricted  as  to  regimen,  they  are  apt  to  deceive  their 
physicians,  and  to  take  things  that  are  very  prejudicial  to  them.  Lefel)ure,  liowever, 
understands  Hippocrates  to  mean  that  the  physician  commits  a  mistake  by  putting 
his  patient  upon  too  restricted  a  diet,  whereby  he  suffers.  As  I  have  stated,  however, 
I  prefer  the  interpretation  given  by  the  old  commentators,  to  which,  I  should  mention, 
Bosquillon  also  inclines.  "With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  latter  part  of  the 
Aphorism,  and  the  correctness  of  the  opinions  there  stated,  there  can,  to  my  mind, 
be  no  question.  On  the  propriety  of  using  a  varied  regimen,  see  Celsus,  i,  1 .  Compare 
Vet.  Med.  xv,  9-14  ;  Vict.  Acut.  xx,  6,  7,  11. 

6.  For  extreme  diseases,  extreme  methods  of  cure,  as  to  re- 
striction, are  most  suitable. 

By  extreme  diseases  it  will  be  readily  understood  is  meant,  extremely  acute,  as 
is  explained  by  Galen,  Theophilus,  Damascius,  and  Stephanus.  By  extreme  methods 
of  cure  these  commentators  all  understood  an  extremely  restricted  regimen.  Heurnius, 
however,  gives  a  wider  latitude  to  our  author's  rule  of  practice,  and  understands  him 
to  mean  that,  in  very  dangerous  diseases,  the  physician  is  warranted  in  using  "  dia;ta 
quam  tenuissima,  pharmacia  exquisita,  et  crudeli  chirurgia."  This  mode  of  inter- 
pretation is  ingenious,  but  it  is  unsupported  by  any  of  the  ancient  medical  authorities, 
who  may  be  supposed  the  best  j\u]ges  of  our  author's  meaning.  At  the  same  time  it 
must  be  admitted  that  Cicero  seems  to  have  adopted  this  interpretation  ;  for  it  would 
appear  to  be  this  passage  which  he  alludes  to  (de  Officiis,  i,  24).  Our  earlier  modern 
authorities  in  surgeiy  also  adopted  this  interpretation.  See  Angelus  Bologninus,  de 
Ulcer.     Compare,  further,  Loc.  in  Homin.  xxxvi,  14,  Iv,  7-11 ;  Artie,  i,  9. 

7.  When  the  disease  is  very  acute,  it  is  attended  with  ex- 
tremely severe  symptoms  in  its  first  stage ;  and  therefore  an 
extremely  attenuating  diet  must  be  used.  AVlien  this  is  not 
the  case,  but  it  is  allowable  to  give  a  more  generous  diet,  we= 
may  depart  as  far  from  tire  severity  of  regimen  as  the  disease, 
by  its  mildness,  is  removed  from  the  extreme. 


700  APHORISMS. 

The  meaning  here  seems  quite  obvious,  and  the  rule  of  practice  judiciously  laid 
down.  The  ancient  commentators  agree  in  explaining  "  a  very  acute  disease"  to 
mean  one  that  is  finished  in  four  days.  As  Galen  remarks,  inflammations  and  fevers 
are  the  classes  of  disease  principally  comprehended  under  this  order.  Compare 
Aph.,  iv,  10;  I  Epid.,iii,  29,  33  ;  II  Epid.,  i,  24  ;  Celsus,  iii,  6. 

8.  When  tlie  disease  is  at  its  height,  it  will  then  be  neces- 
sary to  use  the  most  slender  diet. 

Theophilus,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks,  that  there  are  four  stages  of  a  disease  : 
the  beginning,  the  increase,  the  height  {or  acme),  and  the  decline.  That  there 
ought  to  be  least  food  administered  when  the  disorder  of  the  system  is  at  its  height, 
and  consequently  when  the  body  is  in  the  worst  possible  condition  to  digest  it,  is 
evidently  a  proper  rule  of  practice,  and  consistent  with  reason.  Compare  Aph.  ii,  28; 
Vict.  Acut.  xvii,  11,  xx,  1-G. 

9.  We  must  form  a  particular  judgment  of  the  patient, 
whether  he  will  support  the  diet  until  the  acme  of  the  disease, 
and  whether  he  will  sink  previously  and  not  support  the 
diet,  or  the  disease  will  give  way  previously,  and  become  less 
acute. 

This  Aphorism  is  evidently  a  corollary,  as  it  were,  to  the  preceding  one,  indeed, 
the  two  are  joined  together  by  Dietz  along  with  the  commentaries  of  Damascius  and 
Theophilus.  As  the  former  of  these  remarks,  when  the  physician  calculates  that  the 
strength  of  the  patient  will  not  endure  tluough  all  the  stages  of  the  disease,  it  is 
evidently  his  duty  to  give  a  more  nourishing  diet  than  would  otherwise  be  allowed. 
Berends,  in  his  Commentary,  draws  attention  to  the  term  here  used  by  our  author 
{(jviTiKi^iatpsffOai),  the  meaning  of  which  rests  on  the  distinction  between  a  general 
symptom  (,T(j;wpTo)')  and  a  special  one  {rfKfinpmc).  Tlie  physician,  then,  is  supposed 
to  form  his  judgment  in  this  case  from  his  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  constitution  of 
his  patient.  From  this  we  see  the  importance  of  a  pliysician  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  habits  and  constitution  of  his  patient.  This  is  very  pointedly  stated  hy 
Celsus  in  his  Preface.  (See  ]>.  IG,  ed.  Milligan.)  Compare  Vict.  Acut.  xix,  5-10; 
Aph.  i,  23  ;     Humor,  iii,  87. 

10.  In  those  cases,  then,  Avhich  attain  their  acme  speedily, 
a  restricted  diet  should  be  enjoined  at  first ;  but  in  those  cases 
M'hich  reach  their  acme  later,  we  must  retrench  at  that  period 
or  a  little  before  it ;  but  previously  avc  must  allow  a  more 
generous  diet  to  support  the  patient. 

The  meaning  here  is  so  obvious,  that  even  Galen  is  very  brief  under  this  head. 
Damascius  states  that  it  was  considered  to  be  an  early  acme  when  it  happened 
during  the  first  seven  days.     Compare  Vict.  .\cut.  xix,  8,  9 ;    Affect,  xlii,  3. 

11.  We  must  retrench  during  paroxysms,  for  to  exhibit  food 

would   be    injurious.      And   in    all   diseases   having    periodical 

paroxysms,  we  must  restrict  during  the  paroxysms. 

Tiiis  rule  follows,  as  a  natural  consequence,  fromAphor.  i,  7.  I  would  beg  here 
to  refer  the  reader  to  the  admirable  chapter  of  Celsus,   On  Regimen  in  Fevers,  iii,  4. 


APHORISMS.  701 

See,  further,  Aph.  i,  19;    Nat.  Horn,  xviii,  30,  31 ;    Humor.,  iii,  82;    Loc.  in  lloin. 
xxxix,  1 ;    Affect,  xlii,  3,  Iii,  14. 

12.  The  exacerbations  and  remissions  will  be  indicated  by 
the  diseases,  the  seasons  of  the  year,  the  reciprocation  of  the 
periods,  whether  they  occur  every  day,  every  alternate  day,  or 
after  a  longer  period,  and  by  the  supervening  symptoms ;  as, 
for  example,  in  plenritic  cases,  expectoration,  if  it  occur  at  the 
commencement,  shortens  the  attack,  but  if  it  appear  later,  it 
prolongs  the  same ;  and  in  the  same  manner  the  urine,  and 
alvine  discharges,  and  sweats,  according  as  they  appear  along 
with  favorable  or  unfavorable  symptoms,  indicate  diseases  of  a 
short  or  long  duration. 

The  general  meaning  here  is  obvious,  although  there  be  differences  of  opinion 
respecting  certain  terms  which  are  used  in  this  Aphorism.  On  them  see,  in  particular, 
lleurnius  and  Berends,  by  which  I  have  been  assisted  in  making  my  translation.  That 
the  changes  in  any  disease  are  to  be  calculated  from  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and 
from  the  symptoms  which  come  on  in  its  later  stages  (the  epiphsenomena,  the  super- 
ventions of  our  author),  seems  quite  clear.  Galen's  lengthy  and  elaborate  Commentary 
on  this  head  may  be  read  with  some  advantage,  although  one  cannot  see  much  neces- 
sity for  it,  seeing  that  the  meaning  is  sufficiently  transparent  without  such  illustration. 
Compare  II  Epid.  i,  26-30;  Aph.  v,  8,  15;  Prsenot.  xiii,  1,  12,  xiv,  12;  Coac.  iii, 
132,  143 ;  III  Morb.  xxi,  33,  34. 

13.  Old  persons  endure  fasting  most  easily ;  next,  adults ; 
young  persons  not  nearly  so  well ;  and  most  especially  infants, 
and  of  them  such  as  are  of  a  particularly  lively  spirit. 

This  Aphorism  is  beset  with  considerable  difficulties.  Celsus  woidd  appear,  at 
first  sight,  to  controvert  decidedly  the  rule  laid  down  by  Hippocrates.  He  says, 
"  quod  ad  aetates  vero  pertinet,  inediam  facillime  sustinent  medise  states,  minus 
juvenes,  minime  pueri  et  senectute  confecti."  (i,  3.)  In  fact,  it  stands  to  reason,  and 
is  conformable  to  common  experience,  that  persons  in  extreme  old  age  could  not 
long  endure  a  total  abstinence  from  food;  for,  as  the  poet  Sophocles  beautifully  ex- 
presses it,  "a  slight  turn  of  the  scale  settles  aged  persons  (<7/u/cpa  —aXula  (jiojicit 
ivva'^ti  poTTT],"  (Ed.  Tyr.  961).  Berends  thinks  the  view  which  Galen  takes  of  our 
author's  meaning  is  the  only  one  which  solves  the  difficulties.  Galen  holds  that 
Hippocrates  did  not  mean  "  total  abstinence  from  food,"  but  merely  "  a  spare  diet," 
and  by  "  aged  persons,"  that  he  did  not  understand  "  persons  in  extreme  old  age," 
but  "  persons  of  advanced  years."  I  am  inclined  to  adopt  this  interpretation. 
Sanctorius,  however,  (Aph.,  i,  83)  and  Kaau  Boerhaave  (Persp.  Diet,  llippocrat.) 
held  that  it  is  true  that  old  men  bear  fasting  better  than  men  at  any  other  age. 

14.  Growing  bodies  have  the  most  innate  heat ;  they  there- 
fore require  the  most  food,  for  otherwise  their  bodies  are 
wasted.  In  old  persons  the  heat  is  feeble,  and  therefore  they 
require   little  fuel,  as   it  were,  to   the   flame,   for  it   Mould   be 


702  APHORISMS. 

extinguished  by  much.  On  this  account^  also,  fevers  in 
old  persons  are  not  equally  acute,  because  their  bodies  are 
cold. 

Tliis  Aphorism  contains  the  physiological  explanation  of  the  facts  assumed  in 
the  preceding  one ;  namely,  that  the  vital  flame,  so  to  speak,  is  strongest  in  growing 
bodies,  and  gradually  becomes  weaker  as  life  advances,  until  in  extreme  old  age  it 
becomes  quite  feeble.  I  refer  the  reader  to  what  I  have  stated  in  the  Third  Section 
of  the  Preliminary  Discourse,  on  the  connexion  between  heat  and  vitality.  The 
ancient  philosophers  all  held  that  every  animal  and  vegetal^le  substance  is  endued 
with  a  calidum  innatum,  which  serves  as  the  first  instrument  by  which  its  vital 
operations  are  performed.  On  this  physiological  opinion  Galen  has  written  with 
great  ingenuity  and  earnestness,  more  especially  in  his  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism, 
and  in  his  work,  Against  Lycus.  (Opera,  torn,  v,  329  ;  ed.  Basil.)  The  term  calidum 
innatum  occurs  frequently  in  the  works  of  Ilarvey  and  his  contemporaries.  We  now 
use  "  animal  heat"  in  place  of  it,  as  applied  to  animals ;  but  we  seem  to  want  a  term 
to  comprehend  the  corresponding  tepidity  of  vegetables.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  in  short, 
that  physiologists  should  have  dropped  the  use  of  the  term  "  calidum  innatum."  On 
this  subject,  one  of  the  best  works  which  the  reader  can  consult  is  the  one  entitled 
Perspiratio  dicta  llippocrati,  of  Kaau  Boerhaavc.  Compare  De  Arte,  xxii,  2  ;  I  Diait. 
xxviii,  5,  G,  7  ;    Nat.  Human,  xxiv,  7,  8  ;    Aph.  iii,  7  ;    I  Morb.  xx,  15,  16,  xxi,  10. 

15.  In  winter  and  spring  the  bowels  are  naturally  the  hottest, 
and  the  sleep  most  prolonged  ;  at  these  seasons,  then,  the  most 
sustenance  is  to  be  administered  ;  for  as  the  belly  has  then  most 
innate  heat,  it  stands  in  need  of  most  food.  The  well-known 
facts  with  regard  to  young  persons  and  the  athletse  prove  this. 

This  Aphorism,  in  like  manner,  turns  upon  the  ancient  doctrine  of  calidum  in- 
natum, which,  according  to  Hippocrates  and  the  other  authorities,  is  most  abundant 
in  winter  and  spring ;  and  hence  the  greatest  supply  of  food  is  required  at  these 
seasons.  In  confirmation  of  the  opinions  here  stated,  he  appeals  to  the  well-known 
facts  in  reference  to  infants  and  the  athletas,  who,  being  possessed  of  a  large  amount 
of  the  calidum  innatum,  require  a  corresponding  supply  of  food.  Berends'  Com- 
mentary on  this  Aphorism  is  vei-y  sensible  and  instructive.  Compare  Humor,  v,  4  ; 
Aer.,  Aq.,  Loc.  ii,  2  ;    Aplior.  i,  IS  ;    Salubr.  Dia;t.  i,  2,  20 ;    IV  Morb.  xvii,  9. 

16.  A  humid  regimen  is  befitting  in  all  febrile  diseases,  and 
particularly  in  children,  and  others  accustomed  to  live  on  such 
a  diet. 

That  a  humid  or  diluent  diet  is  the  kind  best  adapted  for  febrile  diseases,  is  an 
important  conclusion  derived  by  our  author  from  his  disquisition.  On  the  Regimen  in 
Acute  Diseases.  I  need  scarcely  remark  that  it  is  one  of  the  mostini])ortant  facts  in 
the  practice  of  medicine.  It  is  well  expressed  by  Celsus  :  "  Cibus  autem  fcbricitan- 
tibus  luunidus  est  ajitissimus,  aut  humori  certe  quam  proximus,"  &c.  (iii,  0.)  The 
rationale  of  this  practice,  according  to  Galen,  is,  that  a  fever  being  an  aftection  of  a 
hot  and  dry  nature,  the  proper  indication  in  the  cure  of  it  is  to  administer  things  of 
a  cooling  and  humectating  nature.  Galen  informs  us  that  some  of  the  adversaries 
of  Hippociates  objected  to  this  Aphorism  as  not  containing  a  truth  of  general  appii- 


APHORISxMS.  703 

cability,  since,  as  they  argued,  such  a  regimen  would  be  very  improper  in  fevers  of  a 
dropsical  nature ;  but,  as  Berends  justly  remarks,  modern  experience  in  the  treat- 
ment of  dropsy  is  quite  in  favour  of  tlie  diluent  treatment  even  in  that  case.  Com- 
pare Insonin.  xv,  12,  lo,  1(3,  17;    III  Morb.  xxxi,  11  ;    Sahibr.  Diajt.  ii,  5,  11. 

]  7.  We  must  consider,  also,  in  wliicli  cases  food  is  to  be 
given  once  or  twice  a  day,  and  in  greater  or  smaller  quantities, 
and  at  intervals.  Something  must  be  conceded  to  liabitj  to 
season,  to  country,  and  to  age. 

In  the  work.  On  Ancient  Medicine,  our  autlior  adverts  to  the  differences  which 
prevail  in  regard  to  tlie  nund)er  of  meals  among  persons  in  good  healtli.  He  seems 
here  to  lay  it  down  as  a  rule,  that  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  habit  in  adminis- 
tering food  to  persons  in  disease.  Compare  Vict.  Acut.  v,  19,  20,  xix,  G ;  Vet. 
Med.  xviii,  4  ;    III  Diset.  i,  10. 

18.  Invalids   bear  food  worst   during  summer  and  autumn, 

most  easily  in  winter,  and  next  in  spring. 

There  will  be  little  doubt,  I  suppose,  that  the  opinion  here  stated  is  M^ell  founded. 
This  Aphorism  is  nearly  allied  to  the  fifteenth ;  indeed  Tlieojjhilus  informs  us  that 
some  had  held  it  to  be  merely  a  repetition  of  that  xVphorism.  Compare  also,  Humor, 
viii,  21 ;  and  Celsus,  i,  3. 

19.  Neitlier  give  nor  enjoin  anything  to  persons  during 
periodical  paroxysms,  but  abstract  from  the  accustomed  allow- 
ance before  the  crisis. 

This  Aphorism  is  so  like  the  eleventh,  that  I  am  much  disposed,  with  Lefebure 
and  Berends,  to  set  it  down  as  an  interpolation.  Galen  and  Heurnius  attempt  to 
make  out  a  distinction,  but  it  is  not  obvious  after  all.    See  also.  Humor,  viii,  24. 

20.  When  things  are  at  the   crisis,    or  when  they  have  just 

passed  it,  neither  move  the  bowels,   nor   make  any  innovation 

in  the  treatment,  either  as  regards  purgatives  or  any  other  such 

stimulants,  but  let  things  alone. 

Our  author,  it  will  be  seen,  here  recommends  the  expectant  method,  when  things 
are  at  a  crisis.  It  would  be  dithcult  to  controvert  this  practice  even  at  the  present 
day.  By  other  stimulants,  he  means  clysters  and  suppositories.  Compare  Humor, 
iii,  83  ;    Nat.  Hum.  xix,  8. 

21.  Those  things  which  require  to  be  evacuated  should  be 

evacuated,  wherever  they  most  tend,  by  the  proper  outlets. 

That  is  to  say,  by  the  stomach,  or  bowels,  or  uterus.  See  the  Commentaries  of  Galen 
and  Theophilus ;  also  Humor,  i,  2,  24,  iii,  85 ;   VII  Epid.  xxxii,  4  ;   Aph.  vii,  Gl. 

22.  We  must  purge  and  move  such  humours  as  are  con- 
cocted, not  such  as  are  unconcocted,  unless  thev  are  strufralins; 
to  get  out,  which  is  mostly  not  the  case. 

The  only  dithculty  in  this  Aphorism  is  about  the  expression,  which  I  have 
rendered  "struggling  to  get  out"  {opy^).     As  Galen  explains,  its  original  meaning 


il 


704  APHORISMS. 

is  "  in  a  state  of  orgasm,"  that  is  to  say,  in  a  state  of  excitement  and  irritability,  or 
in  a  turgid  state.  See  Heurnius  and  Berends ;  also  Humor,  iii,  84;  Aph.  iv,  13, 
vii,  68. 

23.  The  evacuations  are  to  be  judged  of  not  by  their  quantity, 
but  whether  they  be  such  as  they  shoukl  be^  and  how  they  are 
borne.  And  wlien  proper  to  carry  the  evacuation  to  deliquium 
aniini,  this  also  should  be  done,  provided  the  patient  can  sup- 
port it. 

I  need  scarcely  remark  that  this  is  a  very  important  rule  of  practice,  and  one 
that  deserves  to  he  maturely  weighed  and  comprehended.  The  commentators  at- 
teirtpt  to  detine  the  cases  in  which  evacuation  is  to  be  carried  the  length  of  inducing 
deliquium  aniini.  They  instance  strong  inflammations,  violent  fevers,  and  very  severe 
pains.  See  the  Commentaries  of  Galen,  Theophilus,  and  Damascius.  It  will  be  re- 
marked that  our  author  guards  his  recommendation  of  this  practice  by  restricting  it 
to  those  cases  in  which  the  powers  of  the  patient  are  sufficient  to  support  it.  The 
commentators  understood  that  the  evacuation  here  meant  is  venesection,  but  I  incline 
to  think  it  is  purging  by  drastic  medicines.  This  Aphorism  seems  to  be  taken  from 
the  work,  On  Humours,  iii,  86,  87.  See  also,  Aph.  i,  25;  Loc.  in  Horn,  xxxix,  9; 
Vict.  Acut.  Iii,  8,9;    H  Morb.  Mulier.  xxix,  9. 

24'.  Use  purgative  medicines  sparingly  in  acute  diseases,  and 
at  the  commencement,  and  not  without  proper  circumspection. 
Tliis  rule  of  practice  here  laid  down  is  a  natiu-al  inference  from  Aphor.  xxii;  in- 
deed Berends  arranges  this  Aphorism  immediately  after  it.  Galen  admires  our 
author's  cautious  spirit  in  forbidding  jjurging  altogether  in  acute  diseases,  unless 
when  proper  circumspection  has  been  used  He  seems  to  lay  it  down  as  a  rule  that 
we  are  to  purge  only  when  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  more  good  will  be  derived 
from  the  evacuation  of  the  offending  matters,  than  harm  from  the  administration  of 
the  purgative  medicines.  This  seems  a  very  safe  and  sensible  rule ;  but,  I  need 
scarcely  remark,  that  we  are  now  much  bolder  in  the  use  of  purgative  medicines ; 
and  accordingly  Berends  seems  at  a  loss  to  decide  in  this  case  between  modern  usage 
and  the  authority  of  Hippocrates.  This  Aphorism  is  in  accordance  with  Humor, 
iii,  97.     See  Purg.  iv,  1,  v,  4  ;   Aph.  i,  22  ;    I  Morb.  Mul.  xxiii,  9. 

25.  If  the  matters  Avhicli  are  purged  be  such  as  should  be 
purged,  the  evacuation  is  beneficial,  and  easily  borne ;  but,  if 
otherwise,  with  difficultv. 

All  the  commentators  point  out  the  resemblance  between  this  and  the  second 
Aphorism.  Although  certainly  in  so  far  a  repetition,  it  is  evidently,  as  stated  by 
Galen,  a  timely  remembrancer,  in  this  place,  of  a  truth  formerly  announced  and  ap- 
plying to  the  present  occasion.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  this  place,  it  forms 
an  excellent  conclusion  to  the  four  preceding  Aphorisms  on  the  use  of  piu'gative 
medicines.     Compare  further,  Humor,  ii,  49  ;   VI  Epid.  iv,  30. 


APHORISMS.  705 


SECTION    II. 

1.  In  whatever    disease   sleep  is   laborious,    it   is    a   deadly 
symptom  ;   but  if  sleep  does  good,  it  is  not  deadly. 

The  meaning  of  "laborious,"  as  an  epithet  to  sleep,  Galen  remarks,  is  elcarly  in- 
dicated l)y  the  last  clause  of  the  sentence  to  wliich  it  is  a  contrast.  As  tlie  nieaiiing 
there  is  clearly  stated  to  l)e  "  to  do  good,"  there  can  be  no  doul)t  tliat,  in  the  former 
clause, it  signifies  "to  do  harm."  The  term  "deadly,"  too, it  deserves  to  be  remarked, 
is  only  a  strong  expression  for  "  dangerous."  This  is  pointed  out  by  Cakm,  Foes, 
and  Berends.  Galen  acutely  remarks  fiu-tlier  under  this  head,  that  sleep,  being  some- 
times the  commencement  of  coma  in  disease,  is,  in  such  a  case,  the  very  reverse  of  a 
favorable  symptom.  He  further  explains  the  cause  of  sleep  having  these  effects,  upon 
physiological  principles :  the  innate  beat,  he  remarks,  being  more  concentrated  in- 
wardly during  sleep,  if  it  does  not  do  good,  it  must  necessarily  do  harm.  I  Epid.  iii ; 
Mg.  vii,  83;    II  Epid.  iii,  12;    Apb.  iv,  67  ;    I  Predict,  xv,  5,  17;    VI  Ejnd.  viii,  5. 

2.  Wlien  sleep   puts   an   end    to    delirium,    it    is    a  good 
symptom. 

As  remarked  by  Galen  and  the  others,  the  truth  embodied  in  this  Aphorism 
follows  naturally  from  the  preceding  one.  Lefebnre  mentions  an  addition  to  this 
Aphorism,  which  is  found  in  certain  MSS.  to  tliis  effect :  "  but  when  it  increases  (the 
delirium),  it  is  deadly" — okov  St  Trapkxii,  Bai'arujStg.  This  reading  does  not  appear 
to  be  recognised  by  any  of  the  ancient  commentators,  and  therefore  it  may  l)e  re- 
garded as  an  interpolation.  Compare  I  Epid.  iii ;  /Eg.  vii,  13,  IG  ;  II  Epid.  iii,  11,  12  ; 
also  Celsus,  iii,  18. 

3.  Both  sleep  and  insorauolcncy,  when  immoderate,  are  bad. 

Few  experienced  physicians  will  be  disposed  to  question  the  opinion  here 
stated,  and  yet  Galen  informs  us  that  some  of  tlie  commentators  had  denied  that 
sleep  could  ever  be  a  symptom  of  bad  omen.  Galen  and  the  other  commentators 
hold  that  sleep  is  produced  by  the  cooling  of  the  first  sensorium,  that  is  to  say,  of 
the  brain,  and  insomnoleney  by  a  heated  state  of  the  same.  This  physiological 
dogma  seems  plausible,  and  our  modern  physiologists  have  neither  confirmed  nor 
controverted  it.  Compare  Apb.  vii,  71 ;  Humor,  iii,  78  ;  I  Coac.  ii,  35;  VI  Epid. 
vi,  6. 

4.  Neither  repletion,  nor  fasting,  nor  anything  else,  is  good 
when  more  than  natural. 

The  propriety  of  the  rule  "  ne  quid  nimis"  will,  of  course,  not  be  questioned.  I 
need  scarcely  remark  that  it  is  a  truth  which  the  poets  have  frequently  proclaimed 
to  mankind.  Compare  VI  Epid.  viii,  16;  II  Morb.  xvi,  13;  Apli.  ii,  21,  61;  Vet. 
Med.  XV,  13,  15. 

5.  Spontaneous  lassitude  indicates  disease. 

This  Aphorism  announces  an  important  and  now  generally  admitted  fact.  On 
the  kinds  of  lassitude  described  by  the  ancient  authorities,  see  Paulus  iEciNETA, 
Book  I,  22,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

45 


\\ 


;/ 


70G  APHORISMS. 

G.  Persons  who  have  a  painful  affection  in  any  part  of  the 
body,  and  arc  in  a  great  measure  insensible  of  the  pain,  are 
disordered  in  intellect. 

This  also  is  the  announcement  of  an  important  and  unquestionable  fact.  Galeu 
instances  erysipelas,  inflammation,  a  \YOund,  a  brnise,  a  rupture,  and  a  sprain,  as  cases 
in  which  it  is  an  unfavorable  symptom  when  the  patient  does  not  feel  pain,  and  when 
delirium  may  accordingly  be  apprehended.     Compare  Celsus,  ii,  2,  7. 

7.  Those  bodies  which   have  been  slowly  emaciated  should 

be    slowly   recruited;    and    those  which    have    been    quickly 

emaciated  should  be  quickly  recruited. 

This  appears  a  very  judicious  rule  of  practice,  the  rationale  of  which,  as  pointed  out 
by  Bercnds,  seems  to  be,  that,  in  emaciation  resulting  from  acute  disease,  the  diges- 
tive functions  are  only  impaired  for  a  time ;  whereas  in  chronic,  the  depravation  of 
them  is  of  a  more  inveterate  character.  The  ancient  commentators  have  nothing 
interesting  under  this  head.     Compare  Aliment,  xi,  6,  7 ;    Aph.  ii,  11,  18. 

8.  When  a  person  after  a  disease  takes  food,  but  does  not 
improve  in  strength,  it  indicates  that  the  body  uses  more  food 
than  is  proper ;  but  if  this  happen  when  he  does  not  take  food, 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  evacuation  is  required. 

That  there  have  been  ditferences  of  opinion  regarding  the  text  and  import  of  this 
Aphorism,  may  be  seen  upon  consulting  the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Berends,  and 
the  note  of  M.  Littre.  It  appears  to  me  that  our  author  evidently  refers  to  the 
treatment  of  the  depraved  appetite,  and  anorexia  of  convalescents.  Compare  Aph. 
ii,  22,  31 ;    Coac.  i,  170  ;   Aph.  iv,  41,  4.'!,  vii,  64. 

9.  "When  one  wishes  to  purge,  he  should  put  the  body  into 
a  fluent  state. 

That  is  to  say,  the  body  should  be  put  into  a  state  to  admit  readily  of  evacuations. 
For  this  purpose  Galen  mentions  hydromel,  in  which  some  hyssop,  marjoram,  or  the 
like,  has  been  boiled.  He  arranges  this  Aphorism  immediately  before  the  last  of  the 
first  section,  as  well  as  here.  Theophilus  says  the  body  is  to  be  prepared  for  eva- 
cuations by  gi\'ing  attenuant  and  emollient  articles.  Compare  Aph.  iv,  13,  vii,  70  ; 
IV  Morb.  ix,  1 ;   also  Celsus,  iii,  18. 

10.  Bodies  not  properly  cleansed,  the  more  you  nourish  the 
more  you  injure. 

The  meaning  here  is  clear,  and  the  rule  of  practice  unexceptionable.  Compare 
Aph.  vii,  65,  67  ;   Vet.  Med.  xii,  11,  12,  xix,  10-14,  &c. 

11.  It  is  easier  to  fill  up  with  drink  than  with  food. 

The  meaning  is,  that  it  is  easier  to  recruit  an  emaciated  body  with  liquid  than 
with  solid  food.  Among  liquid  articles  of  food  Galen  enumerates  particularly  thick 
and  red  wines.  Berends  has  a  most  interesting  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism, 
but  I  regret  that  it  is  too  bulky  for  my  limits.  See  also,  Vet.  Med.  xii,  3,  9; 
Aliment,  xi,  3. 


APHORISMS.  707 

12.  What  remains  in  diseases  after  the  crisis  is  apt  to  pro- 
duce relapses. 

That  relapses  are  to  ])c  apprehended  wlicn  the  body  is  left  in  an  unsound  state  by  the 
illness,  is  sufficiently  obvious.     Compare  Humor,  vii,  IG,  17  ;    II  Epid.  i,  81,  iii,  72. 

13.  Persons  in  whom  a  crisis  takes  place  pass  the  night  pre- 
ceding the  paroxysm  uncomfortably,  but  the  succeeding  night 
generally  more  comfortably. 

That  a  crisis  is  preceded  by  disturbance  in  the  system  is  remarked  by  all  the 
later  authorities.  See  in  particular  Paulus  /Egineta,  Book  II,  10.  This  truth  is 
illustrated  by  an  example  related  in  the  VI  Epidem.  ii,  42.  Galen  informs  us 
that  the  last  part  of  the  Aphorism  was  wanting  in  certain  copies.  Celsus  gives  a 
version  of  the  whole  sentence  (iii,  5).  See  further,  I  Epid.  iii;  /Eg.  vii,  13; 
III  Epid.  iii,  GG. 

14.  In  fluxes  of  the  bowels,  a  change  of  the  dejections  does 
good,  unless  the  change  be  of  a  bad  character. 

Heurnius  and  Prosper  Martian  understand  this  Aphorism  as  referring  to  critical 
diarrhoeas.  When  these,  then,  are  of  varied  characters,  they  purge  the  body  the 
more  effectually.  The  bad  characters  of  the  dejections  are  minutely  given  in  tlie 
Prognostics  (10),  and  Aphor.  iv,  21. 

15.  When  the  throat  is  diseased,  or  tubercles  [plnjmata)  form 

on  the  body,  attention  must  be  paid  to   the  secretions  ;   for  if 

they  be  biUous,  the  disease  afiects  the  general  system ;  but  if 

they  resemble  those  of  a  healthy   person,   it  is  safe  to  give 

nourishing  food. 

Upon  reference  to  the  Commentaiy  of  Berends  and  the  notes  of  Heurnius,  it 
will  be  seen  that  there  have  been  different  readings  and  interpretations  of  this 
Aphorism.  Heurnius  supposes  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  critical  abscesses  in  the 
parotid  gland,  of  which  an  interesting  description  is  given  in  the  Third  Book  of  the 
Epidemics.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  our  author  merely  means  to  state  the 
symptoms  by  which  it  may  be  determined  whether  glandular  swellings  about  the 
neck  be  of  a  local  nature,  or  whether  they  are  connected  with  constitutional  disorder. 
A  belter  rule  for  solving  this  question  cannot  well  be  imagined  than  to  pay  attention 
to  the  characters  of  the  secretions;  for  liy  attending  to  this  direction  one  need 
seldom  commit  mistakes  in  such  a  case.     See  further,  Aph.  iii,  26. 

16.  AYhen  in  a  state  of  hunger,  one  ought  not  to  tmdertake 
labour. 

This  Aphorism  is  well  rendered  by  Celsus :  "  Si  quibus  de  causis  futura  inedia  est, 
labor  omnis  vitandus  est."  (i,  2.)  Galen  veiy  ingeniously  applies  this  rule  to  the 
treatment  of  invalids,  and  infers  from  it  that  when  the  system  is  debilitated  from 
want  of  food,  it  is  unsafe  to  pursue  any  active  treatment,  such  as  venesection, 
purging,  vomiting,  or  any  other  means  which  would  produce  a  great  change  in  the 
body.  He  praises  Hippocrates  for  always  attending  to  the  preservation  of  the  vital 
powers. 


•  1 


I! 


708  APHORISMS. 

17.  When  more  food  than  is  proper  has  been  taken,   it  oc- 
casions disease ;  this  is  shown  by  the  treatment. 

Galen,  in  a  longtliy  and  very  elaljorate  Commentary,  gives  what  he  holds  to  he 
the  meaning  of  this  Aphorism,  namely,  that  it  is  meant  as  a  particular  illustration  of 
the  general  truth  announced  in  the  fourth  Aphorism  of  this  section,  and  that  it  is 
intended  to  teach  that  too  much  food,  like  too  much  of  anything,  is  hurtful  to  the 
body,  and  that  this  is  shown  hy  the  mode  of  cure,  which  consists  in  evacuation. 
Ileurnius  thinks  that  it  app.lics  to  the  regimen  of  convalescents.  Lefehure  emends 
the  text,  and  instead  of  voTicroi'  irniiei  reads  vaviyirjv  Trnihi,  and  for  hjnig  reads 
h'7](TiQ,  " inanition."  He  would  then  translate  it  thus:  "when  too  much  food  is 
taken,  it  induces  nausea;  inanition  shows  this."  I  see  no  reason  for  departing  from 
the  interpretation  given  hy  Galen,  which  is  adopted  by  Theophihis  and  Damascius. 
Compare  Aph.  ii,  22;  Vet.  Med.  viii,  IG,  xii,  10,  xiii,  11,  24,  xix,  6,  31  ;  I  Diait. 
XXX,  15  ;   III  Diffit.  xv,  IG ;    Loc.  in  Ilom.  lii,  8,  9. 

18.  From  food  wliicli  proves   nourisliing  to  the  body  cither 

immediately  or  shortly,  the  dejections  also  are  immediate. 

Galen  and  the  other  Greek  commentators  understand  this  Aphorism  to  mean,  that 
as  liquid  food,  and  especially  wine,  is  soon  digested  and  furnishes  nourishment  to 
the  body,  so  is  it  speedily  evacuated ;  whereas  solid  food,  such  as  beef  and  shell-fish, 
as  it  is  slowly  digested,  so  is  it  also  slowly  evacuated.  This  would  appear  to  me  to 
be  decidedly  the  meaning.  For  the  interpretation  of  Lefehure,  see  Berends's  Com- 
mentary.    Compare  Aliment,  xi,  4,5;   VI  Epid.  v,  37,  53. 

19.  In  acute  diseases  it  is   not  quite  safe  to  prognosticate 
eitlier  death  or  recovery. 

Dr.  Rush  gives  a  similar  advice  to  young  practitioners  of  the  Art ;  that  is  to  say, 
not  to  treat  any  febrile  case  as  being  slight,  nor  abandon  any  one  as  hopeless.  No 
doubt  it  is  a  prudent  maxim.     Compare  Decent.  Ornat.  x,  7,  8  ;   and  Celsus,  ii,  6. 

20.  Those  who   have  watery  discharges   from   their   bowels 

Avhen  young  have  dry  when  they  are  old ;   and  those  who  have 

dry  discharges  when   they  are  young  will   have   Avatery  when 

they  are  old. 

Galen  and  the  other  Greek  commentators  wrote  very  long  dissertations  on  this 
Aphorism,  which,  however,  enunciates  as  a  general  fact  what  will  scarcely  be  ad- 
mitted as  such  by  any  experienced  physician  of  the  present  day.  Lefehure  accord- 
ingly rejects  it  entirely  as  unworthy  of  the  great  Hippocrates.  See  further  Berends. 
It  is  evidently  closely  connected  with  Aphorism  53  of  this  section. 

21.  Drinking  strong  wine  cures  hunger. 

By  hunger,  in  this  place,  Galen,  Theophihis,  and  Damascius  understand  an  ab- 
normal appetite  for  food.  Galen,  however,  docs  not  approve  of  restricting  the  term 
hunger  here  to  the  signitication  of  bulimia.  That  strong  wine,  when  drunk,  removes 
liungcr,  all  are  agreed.     See  Celsus,  i,  3. 

22.  Diseases  which  arise  from  repletion  are  cured  by  de- 
pletion ;    and  those  that   arise  from  depletion  are  cured  by 


APHORISMS.  /(»9 

repletion ;    and  in   general,  diseases  arc  cnred   l)y   their  con- 
traries. 

Tliat  diseases  arc  cured  by  tlieir  contraries — or  as  it  is  expressed  in  1-atin,  "  con- 
traria  contrariis  curaiitur,"  is  a  general  rule  frequently  announced  iii  the  llipiwcratic 
works,  as  in  the  treatise,  De  Locis  in  Ilomine.  See  the  notice  of  that  work  in  tlie 
Preliminary  Discourse.  Tnat  this  rule  is  announced  here  would  appear  probable  to 
nie,  but  Berends  is  not  satisfied  with  tliis  interpretation.  See  his  Coninienlary.  Sec 
'   i      further,  Nat.  lluiuan.  xvii,  11,  12,  13;  San.  tueud.  ad  Dem.  8;   VI  Epidcni.  viii,  IG; 

il  Apb.  ii,  8;    Flat,  i',  9-10,  iii,  2,  3. 
23.  Acute  diseases  come  to  a  crisis  in  fourteen  days. 
^Ve  have  here  a  distinct  definition  of  what  is  meant  by  an  acute  disease,  and  of  the 
time  within  which  it  will  come  to  a  crisis.     See  further,  Aph.  ii,  9  ;  Judicat.  iv,  12  ; 
Coac.  i,  190,  211. 

21'.  The  fourth  day  is  indicative  of  the  seventli ;  the  eighth 
is  the  comraeucemeut  of  the  second  Meek  ;  and  hence,  the 
eleventh  being  the  fourth  of  the  second  week,  is  also  in- 
dicative ;  and  again,  the  seventeenth  is  indicative,  as  l)cing 
tthe  fouith  from  the  fourteenth,  and  the  seventh  from  the 
eleventh. 

For  the  ancient  opinions  on  the  Critical  Days,  see  Paui.us  .Eginet.a,  Book  II,  7, 
Syd.  Soc.  edit.  Compare  Aph.  iv,  30,  71 ;  Sept.  viii,  6  ;  Judicat.  ii,  7-12  ;  Prsenot. 
XX,  5-10;   and  Celsus,  iii,  4. 

25.  The  summer  quartans  are,  for  the  most  part,  of  short 
duration;  hut  the  autumnal  are  protracted,  especially  those 
occurring  near  the  approach  of  winter. 

That  summer  fevers  are  generally  short  and  mild  is  a  well-known  fact,  at  least 
with  respect  to  those  of  warm  climates.  Compare  Nat.  Human,  xxix,  5,  G,  7  ; 
I  Epid.  iii,  17  ;    Coac.  i,  23G. 

26.  It  is  better  that  a  fever  succeed  to  a  convulsion,  than  a 
convulsion  to  a  fever. 

Galen  and  the  other  commentators  explain  the  rationale  of  this  rule  as  follows  : 
Convulsions  are  connected  either  with  repletion  or  inanition  ;  when,  then,  in  the 
former  case,  a  convulsion  takes  place,  a  fever  succeeding  removes  the  thick  humours 
M  which  occasioned  tlie  convulsion,  and  in  so  far  proves  beneficial ;  whereas,  in  the 
latter  case,  when  a  convulsion  seizes  the  body  in  a  debilitated  state  from  the  fever,  it 
Iw  is  likely  to  prove  fatal  at  once.  Compare  Coac.  i,  232,  iii,  80,  82  ;  I  Mori),  vi,  13,  14  ; 
^1  San.  tuend.  ad  Dem.  10. 

■I  27.  AVe  should  not  trust  ameliorations  in  diseases  when  they 
Ljg  are  not  regular,   nor  be  much  afraid   of  bad  symptoms  which 

occur  in  an  irregular  form  ;  for  such  are  commonly  inconstant, 
^^and  do  not  usually  continue,  nor  have  any  duration. 

'     The  meaniug  here  is  sufficiently  obvious.     Ileurnius,  although  a  remarkably  good 


I 


710  APHORISMS. 

expounder  of  our  author's  sense  in  most  cases,  gives  a  most  absurd  interpretation  of 
the  first  clause  of  this  Aphorism,  as  if  it  were  meant  to  exchide  tlie  use  of  amulets, 
and  other  superstitious  modes  of  working  upon  the  imagination,  which,  although  they 
produce  a  temporary  amendment,  are  not  followed  by  any  good  consequences.  This 
interpretation  is  altogether  fanciful.  Our  author,  like  a  man  of  sense  and  experience, 
merely  warns  the  physician  not  to  form  a  wrong  judgment  in  febrile  cases  from  any 
irregular  symptoms,  either  good  or  bad,  which  may  come  on.  Compare  I  Praedict. 
\i,  IG,  vii,  7  ;    II  Pra.Hlict.  xxix,  6 ;    Coac.  i,  73,  iii,  100,  109,  110  ;    II  Epid.  iii,  132. 

28.  lu  fevers  wliicli  are  not  altogetlier  sliglit,  it  is  a  bad 
symptom  for  the  body  to  remain  without  any  diminution  of 
bulk^  or  to  be  wasted  beyond  measure;  for  the  one  state  in- 
dicates a  protracted  disease,  and  the  other  weakness  of  body. 

The  Greek  commentators  explain  the  facts  here  stated  thus : — When  the  body  is 
not  wasted  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of  the  fever,  this  proceeds  from  the  thickness 
of  the  morbific  particles,  or  the  condensation  of  the  patient's  cuticle ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  the  emaciation  is  rapid,  it  is  connected  with  thinness  of  the 
humours  and  rarity  of  the  skin,  either  of  which  conditions  is  obviously  unfavorable. 
Celsus  renders  these  rules  as  follows : — He  ranks  it  among  the  symptoms  of  a  pro- 
tracted fever,  "  uhi  a;ger  pro  spatio  parum  cmacrescit,"  (ii,  5) ;  and  says  elsewhere, 
"  mali  etiam  niorbi  signum  est,  nimis  celeriter  emacrescere."  (ii,  4.)  Compare  Humor, 
iii,  17  ;   Aph.  v,  55 ;    Humor,  iii,  52  ;   also  Celsus,  ii,  2. 

29.  If  it  appear  that  evacuations  are  required,  they  should 
be  made  at  tlie  commencement  of  diseases  ;  at  the  acme  it  is 
better  to  be  quiet. 

The  rationale  of  this  rule  of  practice  is  sufficiently  explained  in  the  next  Aphorism. 
Compare  Aph.  i,  24,  ii,  30  ;    Loc.  in  Ilom.  xxxviii,  9,  10,  11 ;    Purgant.  iv,  1. 

SO.   Towards  the  commencement  and  end  of  diseases  all  the 

symptoms  are  weaker,  and  towards  the  acme  they  are  stronger. 

The  facts  here  stated  are  so  obvious,  that  even  Galen  dismisses  this  Ajihorism  with 
a  very  brief  Commentary. 

31.  "When  a  person  who  is  recovering  from  a  disease  has  a 
good  appetite,  but  his  body  does  not  improve  in  condition,  it 
is  a  bad  symptom. 

The  opinion  here  stated  is  consistent  with  general  observation.  Nowadays,  in 
such  a  case,  we  should  suspect  organic  disease  in  some  part  of  the  body.  Compare 
Aphor.  ii,  8  ;   and  Coac.  i,  179. 

32.  For  the  most  part,  all  persons  in  ill  health,  who  have  a 
good  appetite  at  the  commencement,  but  do  not  improve,  have  a 
bad  appetite  again  towards  the  end  ;  v.hereas,  those  Avho  have  a 
very  bad  appetite  at  the  commencement,  and  afterwards  acquire 
a  good  appetite,  get  better  off. 

This  Aphorism  refers  to  convalescents ;  and  it  is  a  very  important  observation  of 


APHORISMS.  711 

our  author,  tluil  too  good  au  appetite  at  liist  iu  their  case  is  anything  but  a  fuvoiable 
circumstance,  since  tlie  appetite  is  gicater  than  the  digestion.  Ileurnius  points  out 
that,  by  "  commencement,"  in  this  place,  is  meant  the  Ijcgirming  of  convalescence. 
See  further,  Coac.  i,  170 ;   Aph.  vii,  0. 

33.  Iu  every  disease  it  is  a  good  sign  when  tlie  patient's 
intellect  is  sound,  and  he  is  disposed  to  take  whatevcf  food  is 
oft'ered  to  him ;  but  the  contrary  is  bad. 

Tlie  facts  stated  in  this  Apliorism,  I  need  scarcely  remark,  are  impoitant  and 
unquestional)le.  They  arc  expressed  by  our  author  with  wouilerfid  brevity  and  force. 
Compare  De  Medic,  iii,  D ;    Coac.  i,  72  ;   and  Celsus,  ii,  3. 

3-1.   In  diseases,  there  is  less  danger  Avhen  the  disease  is  one 

to  Avhich  the  patient's  constitution,  habit,  age,  and  the  season 

are  allied,  than  when  it  is  one  to  which  they  are  not  allied. 

The  meaning  here  is  obvious,  and  when  fairly  interpreted,  there  seems  no  reason  to 
dispute  the  facts  announced  in  it ;  yet  it  would  appear  that  his  immediate  successor. 
Diodes,  had  strongly  attacked  our  author  on  the  score  of  the  facts  being  incorrect. 
See  the  Commentary  of  Galen,  and  that  of  Stephanus.  (Dietz,  tom.  ii,  p.  327.)  Surely, 
for  example,  the  diseases  of  infancy  are  more  dangerous  when  they  attack  the  old  than 
wlien  they  occur  in  the  young ;  and  it  implies  a  more  serious  cause  when  the  diseases 
of  summer  take  place  in  winter,  and  rice  versa.  Compare  further,  Aph.  vii,  82  ; 
Humor,  vi,  1-5  ;   Dies  Judic.  i,  11-15  ;    YI  Epid.  viii,  43-4G  ;    Atfect.  vii,  3,  40. 

35.  In  all  diseases  it  is  better  that  the  umbilical  and  hypo-      .  j 
gastric  regions  preserve   their  fulness ;   and    it   is  a   bad  sign 
when  they  are  very  slender  and  emaciated ;  in  the  latter  case 

it  is  dangerous  to  administer  purgatives. 

From  the  reports  of  the  cases  contained  iu  the  Books  of  the  Epidemics,  it  will  be 
remarked  that  our  author  paid  great  attention  to  the  condition  of  the  upper  region  of 
the  abdomen  iu  febrile  diseases  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  part  which  he  calls  the  hypo- 
chondria; in  this  place  he  directs  attention  also  to  the  hyi)ogastric  region,  by  which 
he  meant  the  part  of  the  abdomen  between  the  umbilicus  and  pubes.  See  Galen  and 
Heurnius.  That  it  is  a  bad  symptom  when  the  abdomen  is  excessively  emaciated, 
every  practical  physician  must  know.  Celsus  renders  this  Aphorism  thus :  "  Inter 
mali  morbi  testimonia  esse,  nimis  celeriter  emacrescere,  et  cutem  circa  umbilicum 
pubemque  macram  esse."  (ii,  3.)  That  purgatives  are  contraindicated  under  such 
circumstances  will  readily  be  understood ;  and  Galen  wonders  that  our  author  did  not 
also  forbid  emetics,  but  supposes  that  he  took  it  for  granted  that  they  also  would 
be  understood  to  be  proscribed.  Compare  Prsn.  x,  2  ;  Aph.  ii,  28  ;  I  Morb.  Mulicr. 
Ixxvii,  9  ;    Celsus,  ii,  3. 

36.  Persons   in    good  health  quickly  lose   their  strength  by 
taking  purgative  medicines,  or  using  bad  food. 

This  Aphorism  announces  an  important  fact,  which  deserves  to  be  always  kept 
in  mind  ;  but,  although  obvious  when  fairly  staled,  we  often  see  it  neglected.  I 
once  knew  an  excellent  runner  lose  a  race  in  consetpieuce  of  being  previously  weak- 
ened by  taking  purgative  medicines.  Compare  Aph.  i,  3,  ii,  37,  iv,  IG;  Yerat.  Usus, 
i,  12. 


/1 2  APHORISMS. 

37.  Purgative  medicines  agree  ill  with  persons  in  good  health. 
This,   according  to  Galen,  is  merely   an   announcement  in  more  general  terms  of 

the  particular  fact  resjiecting  purgatives  which  is  stated  in  the  preceding  Aphorism. 
As  he  remarks,  hy  the  operation  of  a  purgative  medicine,  the  fluids  of  the  hody  are 
evacuated,  and  the  solids  melted  down.  Compare  Aph.  ii,  36,  iv,  16;  Verat.  Usus,  i, 
5,  12. 

38.  An  article  of  food  or  drink  which  is  slightly  worse,  hut 

more  palatable,  is  to  be  preferred  to  such  as  are  better  but  less 

palatable. 

This  is  evidently  a  wise  rule  in  regimen,  since,  as  Galen  in  his  Commentary 
remarks,  what  is  palatahle  is  likely  to  he  more  readily  digested  hy  the  stomach. 
Berends  prudently  ohserves,  further,  that  a  physician  often  shows  his  skill  most  par- 
ticularly hy  applying  this  rule  in  making  a  proper  selection  of  those  things  which  are 
peculiarly  adapted  to  the  tastes  of  his  patient.  See  Sydenham,  p.  344,  Syd.  Soc. 
edit.  Compare  de  Arte,  xii,  10  ;  VI  Epid.  iv,  26  ;  IV  Morh.  xii,  7  ;  Aft'ect.  xlii,  1,2; 
Vect.  Acut.  XV,  1,  2,  xviii,  24. 

39.  Old  people,  on  the  whole,  have  fewer  complaints  than 
young ;  but  those  chronic  diseases  which  do  befall  them  gene- 
rally never  leave  them. 

One  reason,  as  Galen  remarks,  why  old  people  have  fewer  complaints  than  young 
is.  that  they  are  generally  more  guarded  in  their  course  of  life.  That  chronic  com- 
plaints in  old  age  generally  prove  fatal,  is  confirmed  hy  daily  experience.  Damascius, 
in  his  Commentary  on  the  next  Aphorism,  says,  in  illustration,  that  nephritis,  gout, 
arthritis,  and  ischiatic  disease  are  incurahle  in  old  age.  Compare  I  Morh.  xx,  13, 15; 
Aph.  V,  7  ;    Cclsus,  ii,  1-8. 

40.  Catarrhs  and  coryzai  in  very  old  people  are  not  con- 
cocted. 

This  Aphorism,  as  Galen  remarks,  contains  an  illustration  of  the  truth  stated  in 
the  precerling  one.  By  coryza  is  to  he  understood  a  catarrh  seated  in  the  nose. 
Tiiat  these  complaints  in  old  age  are  never  entirely  got  rid  of  is  a  well-known  fact. 

41.  Persons  who  have  had  fiequent   and  severe  attacks  of 

swooning,  without  anj-  manifest  cause,  die  siuldenly. 

This,  I  need  scarcely  say,  is  now  a  well-known  fact,  it  heing  ascertained  hy  post- 
mortem inspections,  that  in  such  cases  there  is  generally  some  cardiac  disease.  One 
cannot  hut  admire  the  accurate  ohscrvation  of  Hippocrates,  who  ascertained  the  fact 
so  correctly,  although  he  had  not  the  same  opportunities,  as  wc  now  have,  of  account- 
ing for  it.  To  him  may  he  applied  the  general  J^laxim  of  Cicero:  "  Sufficit  si  quid 
fiat  intelligamus,  etsi  quommodo  quidve  fiat  nesciannis."  I  may  mention  here,  how- 
ever, that  although  the  ancient  physicians  cannot  have  practised  insjjcctioncs  caua- 
verum  very  frequently,  there  can  he  no  douht  that  they  did  so  occasionally ;  and  it  is 
a  remarkahle  circiunstance,  that  in  the  cases  of  sudden  death  they  referred  the  cause, 
as  we  now  generally  do,  to  cardiac  disease.  Theophihis,  in  his  Commentary,  men- 
tions that  Galen  inferred  this  from  finding  disease  of  the  heart  in  the  inferior  animals 
that  died  suddenly.  See  Dietz,  t.  ii,  p.  332,  and  P.\ulus  ^Egixeta,  B.  Ill,  34, 
Syd.  Soc.  edit.     Compare  Coac.  i,  83. 


i\ 


APHORISMS.  713 

42.  It  is  impossible  to  remove  a  strong  attack  of  apoplexy, 

and  not  easy  to  remove  a  weak  attack. 

The  experience  of  twenty-two  centuries  and  upwards  affords  no  reason  to  call 
in  question  the  prognosis  here  aniiouucrd  l)y  our  author.  It  is  thus  rendered  hy 
Celsus  :  "  Isque  morbus  nicdiocris  vix  sanatur,  vchcuicus  sanari  noii  potest."  (ii,  8.) 
Galen  has  an  interesting  Couiuientary  under  this  head,  in  w  liicli  he  attempts  to  explain 
how  it  haj)pens  that  the  respiratory  muscles  in  attacks  of  apoplexy,  often  continue 
to  perform  their  oliice,  although  the  others  are  paralysed. 

43.  Of  persons  wlio  have  been  suspended  by  the  neck,  and    ; 

are  in  a  state  of  insensibility,  but  not  quite  dead,  those  do  not    ' 

recover  who  have  foam  at  the  mouth.  ' 

There  are  great  diversities  of  opinion  as  to  the  reading  and  interpretation  of  this 
Aphorism,  hut  upon  these  I  have  not  room  to  enter.  I  may  just  mention,  however, 
that  1  would  have  preferred  reading  KaraSvoiiti'iov  as  applying  to  persons  who  have 
been  immersed  in  water,  but  dare  not  adopt  it,  as  it  appears  not  to  be  sanctioned  by 
any  of  the  MSS.  On  this  Aphorism  see  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  /Egineta,  B. 
Ill,  28,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.     Galen's  Commentary  is  well  worth  being  consulted. 

44.  Persons  who  are  naturally  very  fat  are  apt  to  die  earlier    \\ 
than  those  Avho  are  slender. 

There  seems  no  great  reason  to  question  the  prognostic  rule  here  laid  down.  Galen 
explains  the  rationale  of  it,  upon  the  principle  that  fat  persons  have  smaller  blood- 
vessels, and  consequently  are  less  liberally  supplied  with  the  pneuma,  or  vital  spirit, 
than  leaner  persons.     Compare  Celsus,  ii,  1. 

45.  Epilepsy  in  young  persons  is  most  frequently  removed  by 

changes  of  age,  of  country,  and  of  modes  of  life. 

We  may  well  exclaim  with  Berends,  that  this  Aphorism  embodies  a  most  impor- 
tant statement  of  facts  !  His  lengthy  Commentary  on  this  passage  contains  much 
interesting  matter,  which  I  regret  that  my  limits  preclude  me  from  availing  myself  of : 
those  of  the  ancient  commentators  contain  nothing  but  what  is  common-place.  Com- 
pare Aph.  V,  7  ;    II  Praedict.  xvi,  123  ;    Morb.  Sac.  xiii,  6 ;   VI  Epid.  vi,  3G. 

46.  Of  two  pains  occurring  together,   not  in  the  same  part 

of  the  body,  the  stronger  weakens  the  other. 

Experience,  I  need  scarcely  say,  has  amply  confirmed  the  truth  of  the  maxim  here 
announced.  It  is  a  principle  of  extensive  applicability  in  the  practice  of  medicine. 
Consult  Galen  and  Berends.     Compare  Humor,  xi,  16, 17  ;    Aliment,  i,  11. 

47.  Pains  and  fevers  occur  rather  at  the  formation   of  pus 

than  when  it  is  already  formed. 

This  also  is  an  announcement  of  an  important  and  indisputable  fact.  Galen  and 
the  other  ancient  commentators  all  hold  that  pus  is  formed  from  blood.  Compare 
Vet.  Med.  xxxiii,  8 ;    Pra^not.  xvii,  6  ;    Ulcer,  ii,  8-11. 

48.  In  every  movement  of  the  body,    whenever  one  begins    lA 

to  endure  pain,  it  will  be  relieved  by  rest.  \\ 

This  is  a  self-evident,  but,  as  Berends  remarks,  not  an  unimportant  fact.  See  Aph. 
ii,  22;    Prfficept.  xiii,  4;    Nat.  Human,  xvii,  11,  15;    Flat,  ii,  14. 


w 


"1-4  APHORISMS. 

49.  Those  who  are  accustomed  to  endure  habitual  hdjours, 
although  they  be  weak  or  old,  bear  them  better  than  strong 
and  young  persons  who  have  not  been  so  accustomed. 

This  Aphorism,  it  will  readily  be  seen,  is  founded  on  the  well-known  effects  of 
habit.  It  is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus  :  "  Omnem  laborem  facilius  vel  puer,  velsenex, 
quam  insuetus  homo  snstinet."  (i,  3.)     See,  also,  Cicero  Tuscul.  Disput.  ii,  17. 

50.  Those  things  which  one  has  been  accustomed  to  for  a 
long  timCj  although  worse  than  things  which  one  is  not  ac- 
customed to,  visually  give  less  disturbance ;  but  a  change  must 
sometimes  be  made  to  things  one  is  not  accustomed  to. 

This  Aphorism  contains  a  very  proper  exception  to  the  general  rule  announced  in 
the  preceding  Aphorism.  Celsus  describes  very  fully  the  most  proper  course  of  life, 
which,  it  will  be  remarked,  he  directs  not  to  be  tied  down  to  too  strict  rules  (i,  1),  at 
the  beginning.  Compare  Vict.  Acut.  xviii,  2,  6  11  Diret.  xliv,  4  ;  Humor,  iii,  115  ; 
Humid.  Us.  iii,  8. 

51.  To  evacuate,  fill  up,  heat,  cool,  or  otherwise  move  the 
body  in  any  way  much  and  suddenly,  is  dangerous ;  and  what- 
ever is  excessive  is  inimical  to  nature ;  but  whatever  is  done 
b}^  little  and  little  is  safe,  more  especially  when  a  transition  is 
made  from  one  thing  to  another. 

The  rule  of  practice  here  stated  is  very  tersely  given  by  Celsus  :  "  Ergo,  quum 
quis  mutare  aliquid  volet,  paulatini  debeliit  assucscere."  (i,  3.)  Berends,  in  his 
Commentary,  remarks,  that  although  the  propriety  of  this  rule  may  appear  to  be  self- 
evident,  we  often  see  it  improperly  transgressed.  Compare,  in  particular,  VI  Epid. 
ii,  27  ;  Vict.  Acut.  v,  22,  x,  8.  The  same  subject  is  often  handled  in  the  Hi})pocratic 
treatises.  See  further,  Aph.  iii,  1,  v,  IG,  vi,  39 ;  II  Diaet.  xliv,  5 ;  Humor,  viii, 
17,  18;    Humid.  Us.  iii,  7  ;    VI  Epid.  ii,  2  7. 

53.  When  doing  everything  according  to  indication,  although 
things  may  not  turn  out  agreeably  to  indication,  we  should 
not  change  to  another  while  the  original  appearances  remain. 

This  Aphorism  shows  decidedly  that  our  author's  system  of  treatment  was  not 
empirical,  but  founded  ujion  reason.  ^Yhat  he  directs  here  evidently  is  not  to  change 
one's  plan  of  treatment  when  grounded  on  a  proper  indication,  although  it  may  not 
turn  out  according  to  expectation.  This  is  a  rule  which  every  physician  must  follow 
who  would  wish  to  support  the  dignity  of  the  profession,  and  it  is  further  consonant 
to  reason.     See  further,  Loc.  in  lloiu.  xx,  11,  12;    and  Celsus,  iii,  2. 

53.   Those   persons   who    have  Avatery  discharges  from   the 

bowels  when  they  are  young,    come  olf  better  than  those  who 

have  dry  ;  but  in  old  age  they  come  off  worse,    for   the  bowels 

in  aged  persons  are  usually  dried  up. 

Galen  dismisses  this  Aphorism  with  the  remark  that  it  is  evident,  and  refers  tlie 
reader  to  Aph.  ii,  20.  Celsus,  with  great  propriety,  has  joined  the  two  together: 
"  Quiliu^  juvcuiljus  tluxit  alviis,  plcnuuque  in  scucctute  contrahitur.     Quiliiis  in  ado- 


APHORISMS.  71:, 

lescentia  fuit  adstricta,  srcpe  in  senectute  solvitur.  Melius  autem  in  juvene  fusior,  in 
sene  astrlctior."  (i,  3.)  There  can  be  no  ilotiht  about  the  latter  rule  being  generally 
true,  but  the  former  is  subject  to  many  exceptions.  Perhaps  what  our  author  means 
to  say  is,  that  the  best  rule  of  health  is  that  the  bowels  should  be  rather  loose  in 
youth  and  rather  confined  in  old  age.  That  this  generally  holds  true  there  can  be  no 
doubt. 

51.  Largeness  of  person  in  youth  is  noble  and  not  unbe- 
coming ;  but  in  old  age  it  is  inconvenient^  and  worse  than  a 
smaller  stature. 

Celsus  renders  this  Apliorism  as  follows  :  "  longa  statura,  ut  in  juventa  decora  est, 
sic  matura  senectute  conficitur."  (i,  I.)  All  the  Greek  commentators  remark  that 
old  men  are  subject  to  gibbosity,  that  is  to  say,  become  bent  forwards.  See  further, 
Precept,  xi,  10. 


SECTION    III. 

1.  The  changes  of  the  seasons  mostly  engender  diseases,  and  v- 
in  the  seasons  great  changes  either  of  heat  or  of  cold_,  and  the  ! 
rest  agreeably  to  the  same  rule. 

This  is  an  announcement  of  a  fact  pretty  generally  acknowledged  and  admitted  in  all 
ages,  namely,  that  diseases  or  disorders  in  the  constitution  are  mostly,  or  at  least  fre- 
cpiently,  produced  by  changes  of  the  seasons  and  changes  of  the  weather.  Berends 
has  well  remarked,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism,  that  our  author  here  lays 
the  foundation  of  the  doctrines  more  fully  expanded  and  explained  by  Sydenham, 
Stoll,  and  other  modern  authorities.  This  Apliorism  agrees  with  Humor,  viii,  15. 
Compare  further,  Aiir.  Aq.  Loc.  i,  19  ;  Vict.  Acut.  xvii,  9  ;    Morb.  Sac.  xii,  7. 

2.  Of  natures  [temperaments  ?),  some  are  well-  or  ill-adapted 

for  summer,  and  some  for  winter. 

Galen  and  Theophilus,  by  "  natures,"  in  this  place,  understand  "  temperaments." 
That  some  of  these  agree  better  with  summer  and  others  with  winter  is  indisputable. 
This  is  in  accordance  with  the  work  Humor,  viii,  20.  See  also.  Vet.  Med.  xxxvii,  14  ; 
I  Diffit.  XXV,  12  ;    III  Diait.  i,  6  ;    Aer.  Aq.  Loc.  xxxiv,  9. 

3.  Of  diseases  and  ages,  certain  of  them  are  well-  or  ill- 
adapted  to  different  seasons,  places,  and  kinds  of  diet. 

As  here  stated,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  announced  in  this  Ajihorism.  But 
Galen  complains  that  it  is  rather  confusedly  expressed  in  the  original.  Compare 
Humor,  viii,  21 ;    and  Celsus,  ii,  1. 

4.  In  the  seasons,  when  during  the  same  day  there  is  at  one 
time  heat  and  at  another  time  cold,  the  diseases  of  autumn  may 
be  expected. 

The  meaning  here  would  apjiear  to  be,  that  very  changeable  weather  at  any  season 
will  induce  diseases  similar  to  those  of  autumn,  which  is  a  very  changeable  and  un- 
healthy season.     See  the  Commentaries  of  Stephanas  and  Theophilus,  and  of  Ileurnius 


ri6  APHORISMS. 

and  Berends,  among  the  modern  annotators.  That  autumn  is  an  unhealthy  season 
is  declared  hy  the  poet  Horace  as  follows :  "  Frustra  per  autumnos  nocentem  Cor- 
poribus  metuemus  austrum."  Ovid,  in  like  manner,  expresses  the  effects  of  change- 
able weather  on  the  health  very  correctly  and  strikingly: 

"  Cum  modo  frigorilnis  premimur,  modo  solvimur  aestu, 
Tempore  non  certo,  corpora  languor  habet." 
On  this  subject,  see  further  Humor,  viii,  21. 

5.  South  winds  induce  dullness  of  hearing,  dimness  of  vision, 
heaviness  of  the  head,  torpor,  and  languor ;  when  these  pre- 
vail, such  symptoms  occur  in  diseases.  But  if  the  north 
wind  prevail,  coughs,  affections  of  the  throat,  hardness  of  the 
bowels,  dysuria  attended  with  rigors,  and  pains  of  the  sides  and 
breast  occur.  When  this  wind  prevails,  all  such  symptoms  may 
be  expected  in  diseases. 

The  same  announcement  is  made  at  Humor,  viii,  1.  I  shall  merely  notice  a  few 
things  which  appear  to  be  somewhat  obscure.  By  "hardness  of  the  bowels,"  about 
the  meaning  of  which  expression  Galen  informs  us  that  there  had  been  some  differ- 
ence of  opinion  among  the  commentators,  would  appear  to  be  meant  constipation  of 
the  bowels.  See  also  Tlieophilus.  Dysuria,  as  they  remark,  is  no  doubt  produced 
by  the  cold  occasioning  a  determination  inwardly.  Celsus  translates  this  Aphorism 
literally,  (ii,  1.) 

6.  When  summer  is  like  spring,  much  sweating  may  be  ex- 
pected in  fevers. 

See,  in  like  manner,  Humor,  viii,  1.  The  reason  assigned  l)y  Galen  for  the  preva- 
lence of  sweats  under  the  circumstances  described  is,  that  they  are  jjroduced  by  the 
prevalence  of  humidity,  and  the  absence  of  the  heat  wliich  used  to  dissipate  it. 

7.  Acute  diseases  occur  in  droughts;  and  if  the  summer  l)e 
particularly  such,  according  to  the  constitution  which  it  has 
given  to  the  year,  for  the  most  part  such  diseases  may  be  ex- 
])ected. 

According  to  Tlieophilus,  in  his  very  interesting  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism, 
by  acute  fevers  in  this  place  Ruffus  understood  "  pestilential,"  namely,  such  as  are 
connected  with  buboes ;  for  that  these  are  occasioned  in  Libya  by  the  excessive  heat. 
(Dietz.  ii,  353.)  But  none  of  the  other  commentators,  ancient  or  modern,  under- 
stand it  as  applying  to  pestilential  fevers.  Compare  Humor.,  vii,  1 1 ;  and  Celsus,  30  ; 
ed.  Milhgan. 

8.  In  seasons  which  are  regular,  and  furnish  the  productions 
of  the  season  at  the  seasonable  time,  the  diseases  are  regular, 
and  come  readily  to  a  crisis ;  but  in  inconstant  seasons,  tlie 
diseases  are  irregular,  and  come  to  a  crisis  with  difficulty. 

This  agrees  with  Humor,  vii,  3,  15.  The  meaning  appears  certainly  to  be,  that 
vlien  the  weather  is  suitable  to  the  season  of  the  year,  that  is  to  say,  hot  in  summer, 
cold  in  winter,  and  ^o  turtli ;  and  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are  ))rotluec(i  seasonably, 


APHORISMS.  717 

the  complainfs  are  mild  ami  regular;  but  when  the  weather  is  unseasonable,  the 
diseases  are  of  an  irregular  character.  This  truth  is  admirably  illustrated  in  the 
First  and  Third  Books  of  the  Epidemics. 

9.  In  autumn,  diseases  are  most  acute,  and  most  mortal,  on 

the  whole.      The  spring  is  most  healthy,  and  least  mortal. 

See  Epidem.  ii,  1 ;  and  Prorrhet.  ii,  13,  1.  These  characters  of  the  two  seasons 
are  thus  given  by  Celsus :  "  Igitur  saluberrimum  ver  est : — autumnus  longe  pericu- 
losissimus."  (ii,  1.)  On  this  subject  I  believe  all  the  ancient  authorities,  professional 
and  non-professional,  are  perfectly  agreed.  I  might  quote  Horace,  Juvenal,  and  a 
whole  host  of  poets,  who  have  celebrated  the  hcalthfulncss  of  spring,  and  described 
the  insalubrity  of  autumn.  The  rule,  however,  as  is  well  known,  does  not  apply  to 
northern  latitudes. 

10.  Autumn  is  a  bad  season  for  persons  in  consumption. 
Popular  opinion,  at  least,  is  in  this  country  quite  in  unison  with  what  is  here  stated 

by  our  author;  and  many  medical  authorities  in  modern  times  have  declared  in  favour 
of  it.  See  Riverius  in  Prax.  xvii ;  De  Hectica,  3  ;  Dolaeus  de  Phthisi,  ii,  4.  I  am 
not  aware  that  recent  experience  has  furnished  any  ground  for  questioning  this 
opinion. 

1 1 .  With  regard  to  the  seasons,  if  the  winter  be  of  a  dry 
and  northerly  character,  and  the  spring  rainy  and  southerly, 
in  summer  there  will  necessarily  be  acute  fevers,  oplithalmies, 
and  dysenteries,  especially  in  women,  and  in  men  of  a  humid 
temperament. 

This  is  manifestly  taken  from  the  work,  On  Airs,  &c.,  §  10.  It  is  thus  rendered 
by  Celsus :  "  Si  hiems  sicca  septemtrionales  ventos  habuit,  ver  autem  austros  et 
pluvias  exhibet,  fere  subeunt  lippitudines,  tormina,  febres,  maximcque  in  mollioribus 
corporibus,  ideoque  praecipne  in  rauliebribus."  (ii,  1.)  Galen  has  an  interesting  but 
rather  lengthy  Commentary  upon  it. 

12.  If  the  winter  be  southerly,  rainy,  and  calm,  but  the 
spring  dry  and  northerly,  women  whose  term  of  delivery  should 
be  in  spring,  have  abortions  from  any  slight  causey  and  those 
who  reach  their  full  time,  bring  forth  children  who  are  feeble, 
and  diseased,  so  that  they  either  die  presently,  or,  if  they  live, 
are  puny  and  unhealthy.  Other  people  are  subject  to  dysen- 
teries and  oplithalmies,  and  old  men  to  catarrhs,  which  quickly 
cut  them  off. 

This,  in  like  manner,  is  taken  from  the  work.  On  Airs,  &c.,  xxvi,  §  10,  ed.  Linden. 
It  is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus  :  "  Si  vero  austri  pluviaeque  hieraem  occuparunt,  ver 
autem  frigidum  et  siccum  est,  grandae  quidem  feminac  quibus  tum  adest  partus,  abortu 
periclitantur ;  ea;  vero  qui  gignunt,  imbecillos,  vixque  vitales  edunt :  ceteros  lippitudo 
arida,  et,  si  seniores  sunt,  gravidites  male  habent."  (ii,  1.) 

13.  If  the  summer  be  dry  and  northerly,  and  the  autumn 


718  APHORISMS. 

rainy  and  southerly,  headaches  occur  in  winter,  with  coughs, 

hoarsenesses,  coryzae,  and  in  some  cases  consumptions. 

This  also  is  taken  from  the  same  chapter  of  the  work,  On  Airs,  &c.,  and  is  thus 
rendered  by  Celsiis:  "At  si  sicca  restas  aquilones  habuit,  autumno  xoro  imbres 
austrique  smit,  tota  bieme,  qua;  proxima  est,  tussis,  distillatio,  raucitas,  in  quibusdam 
etiam  tabes  oritur."  (ii,  1.) 

14.  But  if  the  autumn  be  northerly  and  drv,  it  agrees  well 
with  persons  of  a  humid  temperament,  and  with  women  ;  but 
others  will  be  subject  to  dry  ophthalmies,  acute  fevers,  coryzse, 
and  in  some  cases  melancholy. 

This  is  taken,  with  a  few  alterations,  from  the  same  chapter  as  the  preceding.  It 
is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus :  Sin  antem  autumnus  quoquc  reque  siccus  iisdera  aqui- 
lonibus  perflatur,  omnibus  quidem  moUioribus  corporibus,  inter  quaj  rauliebria  esse 
proposui,  secunda  valetudo  contingit :  durioribus  vero  instare  possunt  et  aridae  lippi- 
tudines,  et  febres  partim  acuta?,  partim  longK,  et  ii  morbi,  qui  ex  atra  bile  nascuntur." 
(ii,  1.) 

15.  Of  the  constitutions  of  the  year,  the  dry,  upon  the 
whole,  are  more  healthy  than  the  rainy,  and  attended  with  less 
mortality. 

This  is  partly  taken  from  the  j  4  of  the  work.  On  Airs.  Celsus  thus  tersely 
renders  it :  "  saluberrimi  sunt  sereni  dies."  (ii,  1.)  That  the  fact  is  correctly  stated 
by  our  author,  no  one,  I  suppose,  will  pretend  to  question.  That  dry  seasons  and 
dry  countries  are  more  healthy  than  humid,  is  consistent  with  universal  experience 
and  observation.  The  reason  of  this,  as  stated  by  the  ancient  commentators,  is,  that 
in  hot  weather  the  humours  are  dissipated;  whereas,  in  humid,  that  is  to  say,  rainy, 
the  humours  are  collected  within  the  body,  and  engender  putrid  diseases.  There  is 
no  doubt,  however,  as  to  the  fact,  in  whatever  way  it  is  to  be  accounted  for. 

16.  The  diseases  Avhich  occur  most  frequently  in  rainy  seasons 
are,  protracted  fevers,  fluxes  of  the  bowels,  mortifications,  epi- 
lepsies, apoplexies,  and  quinsies ;  and  in  dry,  consumptive 
diseases,  ophthalmies,  arthritic  diseases,  stranguries,  and 
dysenteries. 

Galen  explains  at  considerable  length,  upon  the  principles  of  the  humoral  pathology, 
bis  ideas  respecting  the  manner  in  which  rainy  or  dry  weather  produce  the  various 
diseases  enumerated  under  tliis  head.  It  will  be  seen  from  his  Commentary,  and 
that  of  Theophilus,  that  some  connected  the  epithet  "  consumptive"  with  ophthalmies, 
and  understood  the  meaning  to  be,  "  ophthalmies  which  lead  to  the  destruction  of 
the  eye."     Compare  Celsus,  ii,  1. 

17.  With  regard  to  the  states  of  the  weather  which  continue 
but  for  a  day,  that  which  is  northerly,  braces  the  body,  giving 
it  tone,  agility,  and  colour,  improves  the  sense  of  hearing,  dries 
up  the  bowels,  pinches  the  eyes,  and  aggravates  any  previous 


APHORISMS.  719 

pain  which  may  have  been  seated  in  the  clicst.  But  the 
southerly  relaxes  the  body  and  renders  it  humid,  brings  on 
dullness  of  hearing,  heaviness  of  the  head,  and  vertigo,  impairs 
the  movements  of  the  eyes  and  the  whole  body,  and  renders  the 
alvine  discharges  watery. 

It  is  to  he  Iiorne  in  mind,  that  onr  author  here  touches  upon  the  effects  of  tempo- 
rary conditions  of  the  weather  upon  tlie  licalth.  As  Theophilus  then  remarks,  he  lias 
been  unjustly  blamed  for  tautology  in  this  place.  Celsus  briefly  renders  the  first  part 
of  this  sentence  as  follows :  "  Aquilo  sanum  corpus  spissat,  et  mobilius  atque  expe- 
ditius  reddit."  (ii,  1.)  The  latter  clause  is  rendered  rather  freely:  "  Auster  aures 
hebetat,  sensus  tardat,  capitis  dolorem  movet,  alvura  solvit,  totum  corpus  efficit 
hehes,  humidum,  languidum."  (Ibid.)     See  further,  Aph.  v,  26. 

18.  "With  regard  to  the  seasons,  in  spring  and  in  the  com- 
mencement of  summer,  children  and  those  next  to  them  in  age 
are  most  comfortable,  and  enjoy  best  health ;  in  summer  and 
during  a  certain  portion  of  autumn,  old  people ;  during  the  re- 
mainder of  the  autumn  and  in  winter,  those  of  the  interme- 
diate ages. 

There  is  no  obscurity  about  this  Aphorism,  nor  any  reason  to  controvert  the  facts 
as  stated  in  it.  It  is  thus  elegantly  rendered  by  Celsus :  "  Quod  ad  aetates  vero 
pertiuet,  pueri  proximique  iis  vere  optime  valent,  et  sestate  prima  tutissimi  sunt ; 
senes  sestate  et  autumni  prima  parte :  juvenes  hyeme,  quique  inter  juventam 
senectutemque  sunt.  Inimicior  senibus  hyems,  aestas  adolescentibus  est."  (ii.  1.) 
The  Greek  commentators  explain  all  the  facts,  as  stated  in  this  Aphorism,  upon  their 
principles  regarding  the  temperaments  and  humours.     See  Galen  and  Theophilus. 

19.  All  diseases  occur  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  but  certain 
of  them  are  more  apt  to  occur  and  be  exacerbated  at  certain 
seasons. 

As  Berends  remarks,  this  Aphorism  contains  an  undoubted  and  most  important 
truth.  Galen  remarks  in  his  Commentary,  that  if  diseases  had  been  connected  solely 
with  the  temperament  of  the  atmosphere,  all  would  have  been  affected  with  such 
diseases  as  are  peculiar  to  particular  seasons  ;  but  since  many  diseases  arise  from  errors 
of  diet,  these  occur  at  all  seasons.  Constitution,  as  he  further  states,  has  much  to  do 
with  the  occurrence  of  disease.  That  certain  diseases  are  more  disposed  to  happen  at 
certain  seasons,  he  declares  in  the  subsequent  Aphorisms.  Compare  Praenot.  xxvi,  4 ; 
Aph.  iii,  1 7  ;    and  Celsus,  ii,  Praef. 

20.  The  diseases  of  spring  are,  maniacal,  melancholic,  and 

epileptic    disorders,   bloody   flux,    quinsy,    coryza,    hoarseness, 

cough,  leprosy,  lichen,  alphos,  exanthemata  mostly  ending  in 

ulcerations,  tubercles,  and  arthritic  diseases. 

I  have  little  to  say  on  the  subject  of  this  Aphorism,  as  the  meaning  is  sufficiently 
plain,  and  the  nature  of  the  diseases  here  enumerated  may  be  readily  ascertained  upon 
reference  to  the  Index  of  the  Sydenham  Society's  edition  of  Paulus  tEgi.veta. 


720  APHORISxMS. 

Celsiis  gives  a  translation  of  it,  hut  not  very  literal ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  tliat 
he  vaguely  includes  all  the  cutaneous  diseases  here  noticed  under  the  single  term 
"  pustula;."  He  has  also  chronic  ophthalmy  (or  lippitudines),  which  does  not  occur 
iu  our  author's  list,  (ii,  1.) 

21.  Of  summer^  certain  of  tliese^  and  continued,  ardent,  and 
tertian  fevers,  most  especially  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  ophthalmy, 
pains  of  the  ears,  ulcerations  of  the  mouth,  mortifications  of  the 
privy  parts,  and  the  sudaraina. 

On  most  of  the  diseases  contained  in  this  list  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  make  any 
remarks.  I  may  mention,  however,  that  the  gangrene  of  the  genital  organs  here 
noticed  is  minutely  described  in  the  Books  of  the  Epidemics  of  which  I  have  given  a 
translation.  Berends  mentions,  that  some  had  regarded  it  as  being  of  a  venereal 
nature,  but  without  any  good  reason.  The  sudamina  are  described  by  Galen  as  being 
a  cutaneous  disease  of  the  skin  produced  by  excessive  sweating.  By  the  way,  Celsus 
translates  it  in  such  terms,  as  would  seem  to  imply  that  he  did  not  at  all  understand 
it :  "  et  quicquid  sudore  hominem  resolvit."  (ii,  1.) 

22.  Of  autumn,  most  of  the  summer,  quartan,  and  irregular 

fevers,   enlarged  spleen,   dropsy,   phthisis,   strangury,    lientery, 

dysentery,  sciatica,  quinsy,  asthma,  ileus,  epilepsy,  maniacal  and 

melancholic  disorders. 

Celsus  gives  an  elegant  version  of  this  Aphorism,  on  which  I  have  only  to  remark, 
that  he  has  omitted  the  maniacal  and  melancholic  disorders  from  his  list  of  summer 
diseases,  (ii,  1.)  How  this  happened  it  is  impossible  to  find  out.  That  these  are 
engendered  by  black  l)ile,  and  that  it  prevails  in  autumn,  was  held  l)y  all  the  ancient 
authorities.     See  the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus. 

23.  Of  winter,  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  coryza,  hoarseness,  cough, 

pains  of  the  chest,  pains  of  the  ribs  and  loins,  headache,  vertigo, 

and  apoplexy. 

About  this  Aphorism  there  can  be  no  doubt  nor  diihculty.  I  have  again  to  remark, 
that  it  is  rendered  by  Celsus  in  so  vague  and  indefinite  terms,  as  would  almost  lead 
one  to  doubt  whether  he  apprehended  correctly  the  meaning  of  our  author :  "  Hyems 
autcm  capitis  dolores,  tussim,  et  quidquid  in  faucibus,  in  lateribus,  in  visceribus  mali 
contrahitur,  irritat."  (ii,  1.) 

24.  In  the  different  ages  the  following  complaints  occur: 
to  little  and  new-ljorn  children,  aphthae,  vomiting,  coughs, 
sleeplessness,  frights,  inflammation  of  the  navel,  watery  dis- 
charges from  the  ears. 

There  is  little  in  this  list  of  the  common  disorders  which  attack  new-born  children 
that  requires  comment.  Celsus,  in  his  translation,  omits  "  frights,"  for  what 
reason  cannot  be  ascertained.  Both  Galen  and  Theophilus  state,  that  these  are 
connected  with  the  stomach.  I  may  mention  that  Rhases,  the  Arabian,  gives  a 
pretty  full  treatise  on  the  diseases  of  infancy.  He  describes  twenty-four  diseases 
altogether. 


APilORISMS.  721 

25.  At  the  approach  of  dentition,  pruritus  of  the  gums, 
fevers,  convulsions,  diairhoca,  especially  when  cutting  the 
canine  teeth,  and  in  those  who  are  particularly  fat,  and  have 
constipated  bowels. 

Among  the  Ilippocratic  treatises  there  is  one  on  Dentition,  of  wliich  I  have  given 
a  brief  analysis  in  tlie  Preliminary  Discourse.  Celsns,  in  his  version  of  this  Aphorism, 
renders  the  disease  named  bSatirrjioc  '\v  our  author,  and  which  Galen  and  Damascius 
distinctly  explain  to  mean  "  pruritus  of  tlie  gums,"  by  "  gingivarum  exulcerationes." 
This  seems  another  instance  of  mistranslation. 

26.  To  persons   somewhat  older,   affections  of  the  tonsils, 

incurvation   of   the    spine   at    the   vertebra  next   the    occiput, 

astlnna,  calculus,  round  worms,  ascarides,  acrochordon,  satyri- 

asmus,  struma,    and  other  tubercles   (phymata),  but  especially 

the  aforesaid. 

There  are  many  things  in  this  Aphorism  which  it  might  be  interesting  to  examine, 
did  not  our  limits  preclude ;  in  particular,  the  affection  of  the  vertebrae  here  enu- 
merated. Did  our  author  mean  the  disease  described  by  Sir  Charles  Bell  under 
the  head  of  "  Inflammation  and  Ulceration  in  the  Atlas  and  Vertebra  Dentata?" 
(Institutes  of  Surgery,  p.  144.)  See,  also,  V.  Swieten,  Comment,  in  Boerhaav. 
Aph.  t.  ii,  de  Angina  Convulsiva.  Or  did  he  apply  it  to  the  less  formidable  affection 
called  "  the  crick  of  the  neck  .'"  I  am  inchned  to  adopt  the  latter  conjecture.  See  the 
Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus.  All  the  other  terms  will  be  found  explained  in 
the  Comment.  ouPaulus  ^Egineta.  See  the  Index.  According  to  Ileurnins  and 
Berends,  the  satyriasmus  here  noticed  was  an  affection  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. 
See,  also,  the  note  of  M.  Littre. 

27.  To  persons  of  a  more  advanced  age,  and  now  on  the  verge 
of  manhood,  the  most  of  these  diseases,  and,  moreover,  more 
chronic  fevers,  and  epistaxis. 

According  to  Damascius,  the  period  of  life  here  referred  to  is  that  immediately  fol- 
lowing 14  ;  but  Galen  ai)plies  it  to  the  term  of  puberty,  which,  he  says,  may  Ije  at  12, 
13,  or  14.  That  epistaxis  is  common  at  this  period  of  life  is  well  known ;  but  why 
fevers  should  be  more  protracted  then  than  usual,  does  not  appear  clear.  Heurnius 
ascribes  them  to  voracity,  v.hich  gives  rise  to  a  pituitous  crudity,  and  to  a  certain 
acrimony  which  occasions  putridity.  Theophilus  and  Damascius  seem  to  point  to  a 
similar  explanation. 

28.  Young  people  for  the  most  part  have  a  crisis  in  their 
complaints,  some  in  forty  days,  some  in  seven  months,  some  in 
seven  years,  some  at  the  approach  to  puberty ;  and  such  com- 
plaints of  children  as  remain,  and  do  not  pass  away  about 
puberty,  or  in  females  about  the  commencement  of  menstru- 
ation, usually  become  chronic. 

There  is  little  that  requires  elucidation  in  this  Aphorism.  It  will  be  remarked  that 
our  author  seems  to  attach  a  religious  importance,  so  to  speak,  to  the  number  seven. 

.       46 


722  APHORISMS. 

I  have  made  some  observations  on  this  su1)ject  in  the  Analysis  of  the  Ilippocratic 
Treatise  bearing  this  title.     See  Preliminary  Discourse,  §  II.     Seefurther  Aph.ii,  45; 

II  Predict,  xvi,  1,  3. 

29.  To  persons  past  boyhood,  liremoptysis^  phthisis,  acute 
fevers,  epilepsy,  and  other  diseases,  hut  especially  the  afore- 
mentioned. 

With  respect  to  the  diseases  mentioned  in  this  Aphorism,  the  only  one  which  we 
would  hesitate  in  recognising  as  being  particularly  common  at  this  period  of  life,  is 
epilepsy.  Galen,  in  fact,  wonders  that  his  author  placed  it  here,  seeing  he  had 
formerly  ranked  epilepsy  among  the  diseases  of  infancy,  which  sometimes  disappear 
at  puberty.  A  modern  commentator,  Riegerus,  suggests,  that  by  epilepsy  he  probably 
meant  the  hysterical  convulsion.  But  perhaps  it  is  better  to  consider  our  author's 
meaning  to  be,  that  cpileptical  convulsions  are  apt  to  l)e  exacerbated  at  this  period. 
That  haemoptysis  and  jihthisis  are  most  common  at  this  period  has  been  accurately 
determined  by  recent  statistics.  By  the  way,  the  period  of  life  here  treated  of  is  not 
so  satisfactorily  determined  as  could  he  wished.  In  M.  Littre's  translation,  it  is 
marked  "  from  21  to  25,"  but  surely  this  last  is  a  misprint  for  35.  It  comprehends 
the  "  adolescentia"  and  "jnvenes"  of  Celsus.  (ii,  1.)  Compare  Aph.  v,  9,  viii,  7; 
Coac.  iii,  2G0  ;    Morb.  Sac.  xiii,  1. 

30.  To  persons  beyond  that  age,  asthma,  pleurisy,  pneu- 
monia, lethargy,  phrenitis,  ardent  fevers,  chronic  diarrhoea, 
cholera,  dysentery,  lientery,  Inemorrhoids. 

The  period  here  treated  of  is  that  from  35  to  50.  See  Galen  and  Theophilus. 
There  is  not  much  in  it  requiring  illustration.  Galen  is  rather  surprised  that  our 
author  has  omitted  "melancholy"  in  this  list  of  diseases.  Compare  Coac.  iii,  395; 
Ai^r.,  Aq.,  Loc.  iv,  7  ;    VII  Epid.  xl,  19. 

31.  To  old  peojjle  dyspnoea,  catarrhs  accompanied  with 
coughs,  dysuria,  pains  of  the  joints,  nephritis,  vertigo,  apoplexy, 
cachexia,  pruritus  of  the  whole  body,  insomnolency,  defluxions 
of  the  bowels,  of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  nose,  dimness  of  sight, 
cataract  (glaucoma),  and  dullness  of  hearing. 

There  is  little  to  remark  on  the  Lontents  of  this  Aphorism,  most  of  the  diseases 
here  enumerated  being  notoriously  those  of  old  age.  I  may  mention  that,  as  Galen 
states,  the  terms  here  used  in  reference  to  diseases  of  the  eyes  apply  both  to  amau- 
rosis and  cataract  (u7z6x>'iJ-a-)     Compare  Affection,  xxix,  10;   Coac.  iii,  395. 

SECTION     IV. 

1.  We  must  purge  pregnant  women,  if  matters  be  turgid  (in 
a  state  of  orgasm  ?),  from  the  fourth  to  the  seventh  month,  but 
less  freely  in  the  latter  ;  in  the  first  and  last  stages  of  preg- 
nancy it  should  be  avoided. 

The  term  significative  of  "  being  in  a  state  of  orgasm"  occurs  at  Aphor.  i,  22.  It 
would  appear  to  mean  that  the  fluids,  that  is  to  say,  the  contents  of  the  vessels,  are 


APHORISMS.  723 

ready  to  Ixirst  forth  with  plethora.  Tliat  purging  is  unsafe  in  the  earlier  ami  later 
stages  of  pregnancy  is  consistent  witli  conunon  <)t)servatiou  at  the  present  day.  I 
have  translated  the  latter  clause  agreeably  to  the  interpretation  of  it  given  by 
Thcophilus.     Compare  Aph.  i,  22,  v,  29  ;    Morb.  .Mul.  xlii,  8. 

2.  In  purging  wc  should  bring  away  such  matters  from  the 

body  as  it  woukl  be  advantageous  had  they  come  away  spon- 

taneously,  but  those  of  an  opposite  cliaracter  should  be  stopped. 

The  meaning  is  obvious,  and  the  propriety  of  the  rule  will  scarcely  be  challenged. 
As  Daniascius  remarks,  the  j)ractice  in  tliis  case  imitates  Nature,  (ialen  further 
remarks,  that  upon  this  principle  we  administer  cholagogues  in  diseases  of  a  bilious 
nature.     Compare  Aph.  i,  2. 

3.  If  the  matters  which  are  purged  be   such  as  should  be 

purged,   it  is  beneficial  and  well  borne;  but  if  the  contrary, 

with  difficulty. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  the  rule  of  practice  given  in  Aphor.  i,  2.5.  It  is  evidently 
very  much  in  place  here,  where  the  rules  of  practice  respecting  purging  are  treated  of. 
Galen,  however,  mentions  that  some  of  the  editors  had  expunged  it. 

4.  Vie  should  rather  purge  upwards  in  summer,  and  down- 
wards in  winter. 

This  appears  to  be  a  very  proper  rule  of  practice,  and  it  is  accordingly  approved  of 
by  all  the  ancient  commentators.  Celsus,  hov.ever,  seems  to  controvert  it ;  he  says : 
"  Vomitus  utilior  est  hieme  quam  eestate."  (i)  3.)  Whether  he  opposes  Hippocrates 
designedly  or  in  ignorance,  cannot  be  determined. 

5.  About  the  time  of  the  dog-days,  and  before  it,  the  admi- 
nistration of  purgatives  is  unsuitable. 

It  is  an  important  rule  of  practice,  followed  by  all  the  Greek  and  Arabian  authori- 
ties, not  to  give  purgative  medicines  in  hot  weather.  Accoi'ding  to  Galen,  it  is 
fighting  against  Nature  to  determine  inwardly  by  purgative  medicines,  while  the  heat 
is  determining  outwardly.  Damascius  says,  that  the  body  being  then  enfeebled,  can- 
not bear  purgatives.     Compai-e  Aer.,  Aq.,  Loc.  xxx,  2,  5,8;    Purg.  v,  8. 

6.  Lean  persons  who  are  easily   made   to  vomit  should  be    |[ 

■  .    "  i 

purged  lapwards,  avoiding  the  winter  season.  j  | 

Galen  and  Theophilus  approve  of  this  rule  of  practice ;  the  rationale  of  which 
they  explain  by  stating  that  slender  persons  are  bilious.  They  both,  however,  ap- 
prove of  limiting  the  practice  to  those  who  vomit  readily,  and  of  avoiding  the  winter 
season.  Celsus  again  appears  to  be  opposed  to  our  author,  for  he  holds  that 
"  vomitus  inutilis  gracilibus."  (i,  3.)  I  have  not  met  with  any  satisfactory  solution 
of  this  apparent  contradiction.     Compare  II  Morb.  xiii,  12. 

7.  Persons  who  are  difficult  to  vomit,  and  are   moderately    |[ 

fat,  should  be  purged  downwards,  avoiding  the  summer  season,      jj 

The  rule  here  laid  down  is  a  natural  inference  from  the  preceding  one.  Here 
moderately  fat  is  opposed  to  lean ;  difficult  to  vomit,  to  easy  to  vomit ;  and  the 
summer  season,  to  winter.  I  have  had  occasion  to  state  already  that  the  ancients 
particularly  avoided  purgatives  during  the  heat  of  summer.  Compare  II  Morb. 
xii,  35.  * 


724  APHORISMS. 

8.  Wc   must   be    guarded    in    purgiug    phtliisical    persons 

upwards. 

It  will  be  seen  upon  reference  to  the  Commentaries  of  Tlieopliilus  and  Damascius, 
as  published  by  Dietz,  that  they  joined  this  Ai>horism  to  the  last.  I  have  followed 
Galen,  as  M.  Littru  has  also  done.  Considering  how  frequently  phthisis  is  compli- 
cated with  hajmoptysis,  it  is  a  prudential  rule,  at  all  events,  to  avoid  giving  emetics 
in  such  cases,  lest  one  should  get  the  blame  of  causing  the  rupture  of  a  blood-vessel. 
We  have  mentioried  in  an  analysis  of  the  work,  On  Diseases,  that  the  author  of  it 
enumerates  this  among  the  awkward  mistakes  which  a  physician  is  liable  to  make. 
Compare  Loc.  in  Hom.  xxxv,  4  ;    Int.  Affect,  iv,  26,  xiii,  30. 

9.  And   from   tlie  same   mode   of  reasoning,    applying  the 

opposite  rule  to  melancholic  persons^  we  must  purge  them  freely 

downwards. 

It  was  ail  invariable  rule  of  ancient  practice  to  administer  purgatives,  and  more 
especially  black  hellebore  (/icl/eboriis  niyer)  in  melancholy,  with  the  intention  of 
carrying  off  the  black  bile  downwards.  "  The  ojiposite  rule,"  to  wdiicli  he  refers, 
would  appear  to  be  that  laid  down  in  Aph.  6,  resiiecting  the  treatment  of  persons  to 
whom  it  is  proper  to  give  emaiics.     Compare  Aer.,  Acp,  Loc.  xi,  2. 

10.  In  very  acute  diseases,  if  matters  be  in  a  state  of  orgasm, 
we  may  purge  on  the  first  day,  for  it  is  a  bad  thing  to  pro- 
crastinate in  such  cases. 

The  meaning  of  this  Aphorism  is  obvious,  namely,  that  when  there  is  great  tur- 
gescence  of  the  fluids,  they  should  be  purged  off  without  delay.  See  Aph.  1  of  this 
section.  According  to  Galen,  by  "very  acute  diseases"  he  means  such  as  terminate 
within  seven  days.     Compare  V  Epidem.  xxv,  IG,  17. 

11.  Those  cases  in  which  there  are  tormina,  pains  about  the 
umbilicus,  and  pains  about  the  loins,  not  removed  either  by 
purgative  medicines  or  otherwise,  usually  terminate  in  dry 
dropsy. 

We  have  the  positive  assurance  of  Galen  that  by  "  dry  dropsy"  Hippocrates  meant 
that  species  of  dropsy  called  tympanites,  wdiich  is  so  named  because  in  it  the  belly, 
when  struck,  sounds  like  a  drum  (tympanum).  Although  Prosper  Martian,  Berends, 
and  other  modern  authorities,  are  sceptical  on  this  point,  I  must  say  that  I  see  no 
reason  for  doubting  that  it  was  the  same  as  the  tympanites  of  modern  uosologists. 
Sec  further,  Paulus  iEciNETA,  B.  Ill,  48,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  Compare  Coac.  ii,  2/9, 
iii,  280. 

12.  It  is  a  bad  thing  to  purge  upwards  in  winter  persons 

whose  bowels  are  in  a  state  of  lientery. 

As  Galen  states,  the  disease  being  seated  in  the  lower  intestines,  emetics  can  ob- 
viously do  no  good  in  lientery.  But,  moreover,  it  is  contrary  to  rule  to  administer 
them  in  winter.  Sec  above,  §  0.  Berends,  under  this  head,  gives  a  very  interesting, 
but  very  lengthy,  dissertation  on  lientery. 

13.  Persons  who  are  not  easily  purged  upwards    by  the 


APHORISMS.  72:> 

hellebores,  sliould  have  their  bodies  moistened  b}^  plenty  of  food 
and  rest  before  taking  the  draught. 

For  a  full  account  of  all  the  ancient  rules  respecting  the  administration  of  helle- 
bore, see  Paulus  ilCciNKTA,  B.  YII,  10.  One  can  readily  understand  that  it  would 
be  a  wise  rule  to  give  diluents  before  administering  so  violent  an  emetic  as  the 
veralrum  album.  Compare  Aph.  i,  22,  ii,  9,  vii.  70;  II  Diffit.  xxxvi,  18;  Loc.  in 
Horn,  xl,  3  ;  Verat.  Us.  i,  1 ;  II  iMori).  xiii,  10  ;  Int.  Atfcct.  xxiii,  1."} ;  Morb.  Mulier. 
XXV,  13,  14  ;    Superfoet.  xx,  1. 

M.  When  one  takes  a  draught  of  hellebore^  one  should  be 
made  to  move  more  about,  and  indulge  less  in  sleep  and 
repose.  Sailing  on  the  sea  shows  that  motion  disorders  the 
body. 

The  object  being  to  procure  ready  vomiting,  it  was  no  doubt  a  good  rule  to  move 
the  patient  about.  That  motion  produces  vomiting  is  illustrated,  as  he  says,  by  the 
movements  of  a  sbip  occasioning  sea-sickness.  Tliat  sucb  is  bis  meaning,  there  can 
be  no  doubt.  See  the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus.  Compare  Verat. 
Us.  i,  2;    VI  Epid.  v,  15  ;    Aph.  ii,  51. 

15.  When  you  wish  the  hellebore  to  act  more,  move  the  body, 
and  when  to  stop,  let  the  patient  get  sleep  and  rest. 

The  argument  contained  in  this  Aphorism  is  manifestly  a  continuation  of  tlie  pre- 
ceding one.  Compare  Veratr.  Us.  i,  4 ;  Superfcet.  xx,  1 ;  VI  Epid.  v,  45 ;  Aph. 
v,  21 ;    VI  Epid.  v,  45. 

16.  Hellebore  is  dangerous  to  persons  whose  flesh  is  sound, 

for  it  induees  convulsion. 

This  is  little  else  but  a  repetition  of  Apbor.  ii,  36.  Celsus,  in  like  manner,  de- 
clares that  emetics  "  non  semper  a;gris  prodesse,  semper  sauis  iiocere."  (ii,  13.)  See 
Verat.  Us.  i,  5 ;   Aph.  ii,  30,  37,  vi. 

17.  Anorexia,  heartburn,  vertigo,  and  a  bitter  taste  of  the 
mouth,  in  a  person  free  from  fever,  indicate  the  want  of  purg- 
ing upwards. 

The  symptoms  here  enumerated  are,  no  doubt,  indicative  of  the  presence  of  bile 
in  the  stomach,  and  consequently  emetics  must  be  proper  in  sucb  a  case.  See  Galen 
and  Berends.  Compare  Verat.  Us.  i,  10;  Aftect.  xiv,  12;  II  Morb.  Mulier.  xxiv, 
2,  3. 

18.  Pains  seated  above  the  diaphragm  indicate  purging  up- 
wards, and  those  below  it,  downwards. 

I  here  follow  the  reading  which  Berends,  Lefebure,  and  Littre  have  adopted  from 
Bosquillon.  The  rule  here  laid  down  seems  to  be,  that,  in  affections  of  the  chest, 
emetics  are  to  be  administered ;  and  in  those  of  the  abdomen,  purgatives.  That  this 
rule  would  be  a  very  proper  one  in  many  cases  I  can  well  believe,  but  as  a  general 
rule,  I  suppose  we  would  now  demur  submitting  to  it.    Compare  Veratr.  Us.  i,  10,  11. 

19.  Persons  who  have  no  thirst  Avhile  under  the  action  of  a 


726  APHORISMS. 

purgative  medicine^  do  not  cease  from  being  purged  until  they 
become  thirsty. 

The  same  remark  is  made  in  tlie  little  tract  on  the  Administration  of  Hellebore. 
It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  operation  of  a  drastic  pnrgative  induces  tliirst.  The 
rationale  of  the  rule  of  practice  founded  upon  it  is  explained  by  Theophilus  to  he, 
that  until  thirst  takes  place  we  must  consider  that  the  system  has  not  been  properly 
dried.     See  Veratr.  Us.  i,  11. 

20.  If  persons  free  from  fever  be  seized  with  tormina,  heavi- 
ness of  tlie  knees,  and  pain  of  the  loins,  this  indicates  that 
purging  downwards  is  required. 

Tills  Aphorism  is  little  else  than  a  continuation  of  Aph.  18.  The  reader  will  re- 
mark that  our  author  qualifies  both  by  restricting  purging  to  those  cases  in  which  no 
fever  is  present.     Compare  Veratr.  Us.  i,  11. 

21.  Alvine  dejections  which  are  Ijlack,  like  blood,  taking 
place  spontaneously,  either  with  or  without  fever,  are  very  bad ; 
and  the  more  numerous  and  unfavorable  the  colours,  so  much 
the  Avorse ;  when  Avith  medicine  it  is  better,  and  a  variety  of 
colours  in  this  case  is  not  bad. 

The  characters  of  the  dejections  given  in  this  Aphorism,  and  some  of  the  following, 
is  taken  partly  from  I'rognost.  ^11,  and  Coac.  Pr.  §  5'JG,  of  Littre's  edition.  The 
Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus  are  interesting,  as  showing  us  the  manner  in 
which  the  ancient  authorities  accounted  for  this  apiiearance  pliysiologically.  They 
held  that  the  office  of  the  spleen  being  to  attract  the  melancholic  humour  for  its 
own  purposes,  when  this  viscus  fails  to  perform  its  office,  llic  superfluity  deranges 
the  liver;  and  hence  this  discharge  is  indicative  of  the  greatest  possible  derangement 
of  the  internal  viscera.  Calen  mentions  that  he  found  black  dejections  from  the 
bowels  a  common  syir.ptora  in  the  i)lague  which  prevailed  in  his  time. 

22.  When  black  bile  is  evacuated  in  the  beginning  of  any 

disease  whatever,  either  upwards  or  dov.nwards,  it  is  a  mortal 

symptom. 

This  is  a  natural  inference  from  the  preceding  Aphorism.  Of  course,  as  the 
commentators  remark,  a  black  discharge  eitlicr  upwards  or  downwards,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  a  disease,  indicates  a  very  serious  derangement  of  the  system.  Galen 
remarks  that,  in  a  more  advanced  stage  of  the  disease,  such  an  evacuation  may  be 
critical,  and  in  that  case  favorable.     See  also  Coac.  i,  100. 

23.  In  persons  attenuated  from  any  diseases,  whether  acute 

or  chronic,  or  from  wounds,  or  au}^  other  cause,  if  there  be  a 

discharge  either  of  black  bile,  or  resembling  black  blood,  they 

die  on  the  following  day. 

Of  the  fatal  nature  of  such  dejections  there  can  be  no  question.  Hippocrates 
would,  no  doubt,  be  familiar  \\ith  them  in  the  fevers  of  his  own  country.  In  inter- 
tropical fevers,  I  need  scarcely  remark,  they  are  looked  upon  as  most  mortal 
symptoms. 


APHORISMS.  727 

21.   Dysentery,  if  it  commence  with  black  bile,  is  mortal. 

Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  i)ionoiuices  such  a  case  to  he  as  incurable  as  cancer, — 
as,  in  fact,  hciiig  produced  hy  the  same  humour,  that  is  to  say,  black  bile.  Theo- 
philus  makes  the  curious  remark,  that  if  black  bile,  when  poured  on  the  earth,  occa- 
sions an  effervescence,  like  vinegar,  it  may  ■well  be  supposed  that  it  will  corrode  the 
human  body  when  confined  in  it.     Compare  Coac.  i,  100,  iii,  292 ;   V  Epid.  x,  2. 

25.  Blood  discharged  upwards^  whatever  be  its  character,  is 

a  bad  symptom,  but  downwards  it  is  (more  ?)  favorable,  and  so 

also  black  dejections. 

Upon  reference  to  Dietz  (Analec.  tom.  ii,  p.  400)  and  Littre  (OJuv.  Hip.  torn,  iv, 
p.  510),  it  will  be  seen  that  there  arc  different  readings  of  this  paragraph.  As  a 
general  fact,  there  is  little  to  say  to  the  announcement  made  in  this  Aphorism ;  for 
certainly  discliarges  of  blood  npwards  are  generally  unfavorable,  whereas  those 
downwards  are  less  so.  Galen  understands  the  meaning  to  be,  that  discharges  of 
blood,  or  black  discharges,  when  they  proceed  from  the  hemorrhoidal  vessels,  are 
favorable.     Compare  Aph.  vii,  37  ;    Coac.  ii,  254,  vi,  14. 

26.  If  in   a  person  ill  of  dysentery,  substances  resembling 

flesh  be  discharged  from  the  bowels,  it  is  a  mortal  symptom. 

The  dejection  resembling  the  scrapings  of  the  guts,  is  noticed  at  Prognost.  §  11,  and 
occurs  among  the  symptoms  of  dysentery  as  given  by  Areta^us  (Morb.  Chron.  i,  9), 
and  tlie  other  authorities.  All  regard  it  as  a  fatal  symptom,  proceeding  from  ex- 
coriation of  the  bowels.     See  Aph.  iv,  70. 

27.  In  whatever  cases  of  fever  there  is  a  copious  hemorrhage 
from  whatever  channel,  the  bowels  are  in  a  loose  state  during 
convalescence. 

The  rationale  of  this,  as  stated  by  Theophilus,  is,  that  the  discharge  of  blood 
having  occasioned  debility  of  the  digestive  powers,  the  food  is  not  properly  digested* 
and  in  consequence  the  chyle  is  evacuated  from  the  bowels.  See  also  Prorrh.  i,  133; 
Coac.  149,  326,  ed.  Littre. 

28.  In  all  cases  whatever,  bilious  discharges  cease  if  deaf- 
ness supervenes,  and  in  all  cases  deafness  ceases  when  bilious 
discharges  supervene. 

As  remarked  by  Galen,  our  author,  in  this  place,  evidently  refers  to  symptomatic 
deafness  in  fevers,  and  other  such  complaints.  Theophilus  explains,  that  such  an 
atfection,  lieing  occasioned  by  a  metastasis  of  the  bile  upwards,  is  naturally  reheved 
by  an  evacuation  of  the  same  downwards.    See  Coac.  ii,  06,  103,  vi,  77  ;  Aph.  iv,  60. 

29.  Rigors  which  occur  on  the  sixth  day  have  a  difficult 
crisis. 

The  sixth  was  regarded  by  all  the  authorities  as  an  unfavorable  critical  day. 
Theophilus  compares  the  sixth  to  a  tyrant,  and  the  seventh  to  a  king.  See  Galea 
De  Crisibus ;  and  Paulus  tEgineta,  B.  II,  7,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  Compare  Coac.  i,  23  ; 
VII  Epid.  xl,  20. 

30.  Diseases  attended  with  paroxysms,  if  at  the  same  hour 


728  APHORISMS. 

that  the  fever  leaves  it  return  again  next  day,  are  of  difficult 

crisis. 

It  will  he  seen  upon  reference  to  the  Commentary  of  Galen,  that  there  had  heen 
two  different  interpretations  of  this  passage.  As  rendered  here,  the  meaning  seems 
sufficiently  clear,  and  the  diagnosis  would  appear  to  he  very  well  founded.  See 
Humor,  iii,  91. 

31.  In   febrile  diseases  attended  with  a  sense  of  lassitude, 

deposits  form  about  the  joints,  and  especially  those  of  the  jaws. 

See  Humor,  iii,  98;  IV  Epideni.  xviii,  10,  17.  This  Aphorism  evidently  hears 
reference  to  semciology.  As  stated  hy  Galen,  the  deposits  here  noticed  are  huho  and 
parotis.  These,  1  need  scarcely  remind  the  reader,  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the 
Epidemics. 

32.  Ill  convalescents  from  diseases,  if  any  part  be  pained, 

there  deposits  are  formed. 

See  Humor,  iii,  100.  I  need  not  say  that  deposits  or  ahscesses  (for  they  are  nearly 
the  same)  are  largely  treated  of  in  the  different  hooks  of  Epidemics.  That  in  such 
a  case  a  deposit  should  form  in  a  part  affected  with  pain,  is  what  might  he  naturally 
expected. 

33.  But   if  any  part  be   in  a  painful  state  previous  to  the 

illness,  there  the  disease  fixes. 

As  stated  hy  Galen,  this  Aphorism  is  closely  connected  with  the  two  preceding 
ones.  That  any  disease  is  apt  to  fix  on  a  weak  limh,  is  a  well-known  fact  in  semci- 
ology.    See  Humor,  iii,  101  ;    IV  Epidem.  xviii,  2,3;    Loc.  in  Ilomin.  xxxvi,  G. 

31.  If  a  person  labouring  under  a  fever,  Avithout  any  swell- 
ing in  the  fauces,  be  seized  with  a  sense  of  suffocation  sud- 
denly, it  is  a  mortal  symptom. 

This  is  evidently  ci/nanche  lari/iujUis,  which  is  frequently  noticed  in  the  Hippo- 
cratic  treatises.  See  Aph.  iv,  25  ;  Pr;enot.  xxiii,  3,  4  ;  Coac.  i,  90,  ii,  201,  202,  203, 
iii,  06;  also  Paulus  /Egineta,  B.  Ill,  27,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  Galen  gives  a  very 
interesting  Commentary  on  this  passage,  in  which  he  discusses  the  nature  of  the 
affection  noticed  in  it.  He  distincUy  refers  it  to  inflammation  spreading  from  the 
fauces  to  the  lar_\nx,  and  ohstructing  the  passages  to  the  lungs,  that  is  to  say,  the 
hronchi.     Theophilus  gives  hrittly  the  same  account  of  it. 

35.  If  in  a  person  affected  with  fever,  tlie  neck  become  sud- 
denly distorted,  and  he  cannot  swallow  unless  Avith  difficulty, 
although  no  swelling  be  present,  it  is  a  mortal  symptom. 

Allusion  is  evidently  made  here  to  dislocation  of  the  upper  vertehra;,  an  affection 
which  we  have  had  occasion  to  notice  previously  more  than  once.  See  Articidations, 
f  41;  Epideni.  ii,  24;  Aphor.  iii,  20;  Pronhet.  i,  87;  and  Coac.  201.  See  also 
our  analysis  of  Epid.  ii,  and  Commentary  on  Aph.  iii,  20.  Galen's  Commentary  on 
this  A])horism  is  very  interesting.  lie  descril)es  the  affection  as  a  form  of  disloca- 
tion forwards  of  the  upper  vertclna;  from  an  inflammatory  complaint  ahout  the 
fauces.     TheophiUis  and  Damascius  give  a  similar  account  of  the  disease,  which  tlie 


APHORISMS.  729 

former  of  these  calls  a  species  of  cynanche,  in  wliicli  the  vertebrre  of  the  spine  are 
affected  sympathetically.  It  is  noticed  by  Celsus  in  the  following  terms :  "  Cuive  in 
eodem  febris  corporisque  habitu  cervix  convertitur,  sic  ut  devorare  a;que  nihil  possit." 
(ii,  6.) 

30.  Sweats,  in  febrile  diseases,  are  favorable,  if  they  set  in 
on  the  third,  fifth,  seventh,  ninth,  eleventh,  fourteenth,  seven- 
teenth, twenty-first,  twenty-seventh,  and  thirty-fourth  day,  for 
these  sweats  prove  a  erisis  to  the  diseases;  but  sweats  not 
occurring  tints,  indicate  pain,  a  protracted  disease,  and  relapses. 

The  prognostics  from  sweats,  and  the  critical  days,  are  treated  of  in  various  parts 
of  our  author's  works.  See  Prrenot.  v,  1 ,  2,  3  ;  Coac.  iv,  36,  &c.  See  also  the  Com- 
mentary on  Pal'lus  /Egixeta,  B.  II,  7,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

37.  Cold  sweats  occurring  along  with  an  acute  fever,  indi- 
cate death ;  and  along  with  a  milder  one,  a  protracted  disease. 

The  truth  of  this,  Galen  says,  has  been  often  proved  by  experieuce ;  and  the  rationale 
of  it  he  explains  at  considerable  length,  in  this  way,  that  cold  sweats  are  occasioned 
by  the  innate  heat  being  nearly  overpowered  by  the  humours  which  engender  the 
fever.  Theophilus  gives  a  similar  explanation.  Compare  Judicat.  vi,  9,  10,  viii,  1, 
8 ;  Praenot.  v,  4,  5 ;  Coac.  iv,  40. 

38.  And  in  whatever  part  of  the  body  there  is  a  sweat,  it 
shows  that  the  disease  is  seated  there. 

That  is  to  say,  as  Heurnius  justly  remarks,  affections  of  the  brain  are  indicated  by 
sweats  about  the  head,  and  those  of  the  lungs  by  sweats  about  the  chest.  He  treats 
here  of  symptomatic  and  partial  sweats.     See  Aph.  ii,  5,  and  Celsus,  ii,  2. 

39.  And  in  whatever  part  of  the  body  heat  or  cold  is  seated, 
there  is  disease. 

All  the  ancient  commentators  explain  this  upon  the  principle  that  the  disease 
is  connected  with  an  unequal  distribution  of  the  innate  heat  in  the  body,  or,  as 
they  express,  to  a  departure  from  the  proper  temperature  (tvKfjacria).  Compare 
Judicat.  viii,  3. 

40.  And  wherever  there  are  changes  in  the  whole  body,  and 
if  the  body  be  alternately  cold  and  hot,  or  if  one  colour  succeed 
another,  this  indicates  a  protracted  disease. 

From  the  varied  characters  of  the  affections,  as  the  commentators  remark.  Nature 
— meaning  the  vis  rnedicatrix  nature — cannot  accomplish  the  removal  of  them  in  a 
short  time.  Celsus  renders  this  Aphorism  as  follows  :  "  Ant  ubi  corpus  niodo  frigidum, 
modo  calidum  est,  et  color  alius  ex  alio  fit."  (ii,  5.)  Compare  Aph.  vii,  GO  ;  Ilmnor. 
iii,  22,  53 ;    Judic.  viii,  4  ;   Prsedict.  vi,  4  ;   Coac.  i,  77, 177. 

41.  A  copious  sweat  after  sleep  occurring  without  any  mani- 
fest cause,  indicates  that  the  body  is  using  too  much  food.  Bnt 
if  it  occur  Avhen  one  is  not  taking  food,  it  indicates  that  evacua- 
tion is  required. 

As  Galen  and  Theophilus  explain  his  meaning,  Hippocrates  infers  that  a  copious 


730  APHORISMS. 

sweat  must  ])e  occasioned  by  an  effort  of  Nature  to  expel  a  superfluity  from  the 
systein,  which,  as  he  states,  is  likely  to  be,  either  the  consequence  of  too  much  food, 
or  of  humours  in  the  systein  requiring  to  be  purged.  Aph.  vii,  61  ;  Coac.  iv,  30; 
V  Epid.  XXV,  15  ;   Aph.  iii,  8. 

43.  A  copious  sweat,  wliether  hot  or  cold,  floAving  con- 
tinuously, indicates,  the  cold  a  greater,  and  the  hot  a  lesser 
disease. 

Copious,  and  more  especially  colliquative  and  cold  sweats,  are  well  known  to  be 
a  very  unfavorable  symptom  in  fevers.  See  further  Judicat.  viii,  9;  Coac.  i,  21  ; 
Aiilior.  vii,  61 ;   also  Paulus  .Egixeta,  B.  II,  47,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

43.  Fevers,  not  of  the  intermittent  type,  which  are  exacer- 
bated on  the  third  day,  are  dangerous ;  hut  if  they  intermit  in 
any  form,  this  indicates  that  they  are  not  dangerous. 

Our  author  here  evidently  draws  the  distinction  between  remittent  and  inter- 
mittent fevers,  pronouncing  of  the  former  that  they  are  dangerous,  and  of  the  latter 
tbat  they  are  not  so.  Celsus  seems  to  have  had  this  Aphorism  in  view,  when  he 
gives  in  his  list  of  dangerous  diseases,  "  quaeve  sic  continueut,  ut  per  acccssiones 
incrcscant,  per  dccessiones  tantum  molliantur,  nee  unquam  integrum  corpus  de- 
niittant."  (ii,  1-)  I  need  scarcely  remaik,  that  remittent  fevers,  which  are  the  same 
as  the  contiiuial  fevers  of  the  ancients,  are  v.ell  known  to  l)e  of  a  very  intractable 
nature.  See  further  Aph.  vii,  02;  Coac.  i,  106;  I  Epid  iii,  16;  III  Epid.  iii,  109; 
VII  Ei>id.  xl,  19 ;   Vict.  Acut.  iii,  3. 

44.  In    cases    attended    with   protracted    fevers,    tubercles 

{pitl/mata)  or  pains  occur  about  the  joints. 

That  protracted  fevers  are  apt  to  terminate  in  collections  of  matter,  or  pains  in 
joints,  must  be  well  known  to  every  one  who  is  faiijiliar  with  medical  practice.  They 
are  noticed  in  several  of  the  Hippocratic  treatises,  as,  Aph.  vii,  63  ;  Humor,  iii,  98  ; 
Prasnot.  xxiv,  9,  10,  11  ;  II  Prorrhet.  \,  7;  Coac.  i,  108.  169.  By  p/n/nui fa  in  this 
])lace,  our  author  evidently  means  dcjiosi/s,  of  vihich  I  need  scarcely  say  that  he  treats 
in  various  parts  of  his  works,  more  especially  in  the  Epidemics. 

45.  When  tubercles  [pJnjmata)  or  pains  attack  the  joints 
after  fevers,  such  persons  are  using  too  much  food. 

This  seems  a  very  natural  inference  if  confirmed  by  experience ;  namely,  that 
Nature  being  overloaded,  endeavours  to  relieve  herself,  either  by  these  tubercles,  or 
eftusion  in  the  joints.     See  Aph.  vii,  61. 

46.  If  in  a  fever  not  of  the  intermittent  type  a  rigor  seize  a 

person  already  much  debilitated,  it  is  mortal. 

That  a  rigor  attacking  a  patient  reduced  by  fever  is  a  very  fatal  symptom  cannot 
be  unknown  to  any  person  who  is  familiar  with  the  treatment  of  these  diseases.  See 
Coac.  ii,  05. 

47.  In  fevers  not  of  the  intermittent  type,  expectorations 
which  are  livid,  bloody,  fetid,  and  bilious,  are  all  bad;  but  if 
evacuated  properly,  they  are  favorable.     So  it  is  M'ith  the  alvine 


APHORISMS.  731 

evacuations  and  the  urine.      But  if  none  of  the  proper  excre- 
tions take  phice  by  these  channels,  it  is  bad. 

We  have  here  prognostics  derived  from  the  sputa,  the  alvine  and  tlic  urinary 
discharges.  Upon  reference  to  the  Couiinentary  of  Galen  and  the  Notes  of  Littre, 
it  will  he  seen  that  very  anricutly  there  was  a  different  reading  of  the  last  clause 
of  tills  Aphorism.  The  sul)jccts  to  which  it  relates  are  treated  of  in  several 
of  the  Ilippocratic  treatises,  as  Apli.  vii,  CD  ;  Coac.  ii,  IGl,  iii,  241  ;  2  Prorrhet. 
XV,  10. 

48.  In  fevers  not  of*  the  intermittent  type,  if  the  external 
parts  be  cold,  l)ut  the  internal  be  burnt  up,  and  if  there  be 
thirst,  it  is  a  mortal  symptom. 

This  Aphorism  is  thus  rendei-ed  hy  Celsus :  "  Aut  cui,  fehre  non  quiescente, 
exterior  pars  friget,  interior  sic  calet,  ut  etiam  sitim  faciat."  (ii,  6.)  Galen  accounts 
for  the  case  here  noticed  in  the  following  manner  :  when  an  inflammation  or  erysijielas 
is  seated  in  the  internal  parts,  blood  from  all  parts  of  the  body  is  attracted  to  the 
part,  and  hence  the  surface  of  the  body  is  congealed.  He  gives  the  name  of  li])yria 
to  a  fever  of  this  character.  See  Paulus  ^gineta,  B.  II,  27,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 
Compare  Aph.  vii,  69  ;    Coac.  ii,  IGl,  iii,  241 ;    Praenot.  xv,  10 ;   Aph.  i,  25. 

49.  In  a  fever  not  of  the  intermittent  type,  if  a  lip,  an  eye- 
brow, an  eye,  or  the  nose,  be  distorted ;  or  if  there  be  loss  of 
sight  or  of  he:i.ring,  and  the  patient  be  in  a  weak  state — what- 
ever of  tliese  symptoms  occur,  death  is  at  hand. 

This  is  partly  derived  from  Coac.  72,  cd.  Littre.  The  most  of  the  features  here 
drawn  are  copied  by  Celsus,  in  his  admirable  chapter  "  On  the  evident  symptoms  of 
death :" — "  cademque  labra,  et  uares,  oculique,  et  palpebral,  et  supercilia,  aliquave 
ex  his  pervertuntur."  (ii,  G.)  As  Theophilus  remarks,  the  symptoms  here  noted  iudi- 
cate  a  loss  both  of  the  powers  of  motion  and  of  sensibility. 

50.  Apostemes  in  fevers  which  are  not  resolved  at  the  first 
crisis,  indicate  a  protracted  disease. 

Galen  does  not  hesitate  to  declare,  that  this  is  a  self-evident  truth,  which  it  pro- 
bably did  not'require  an  Hippocrates  to  announce.     See  Celsus,  ii,  5. 

51.  "When  in  a  fever  not  of  the  intermittent  type  dyspnoea 

and  delirium  come  on,  the  case  is  mortal. 

In  this  case,  as  Galen  remarks,  both  the  brain  and  the  lungs  being  affected,  the 
danger  must  be  of  an  urgent  nature ;  in  fact,  either  of  them  is  a  very  unfavorable 
symptom,  and  a  combination  must  necessarily  be  very  mortal.  Compare  Judicat.  viii, 
17 ;  Prcenot.  iv,  10,  xiv,  9,  xv,  3. 

52.  When  persons  in  fevers,  or  in  other  illnesses,  shed  tears 

voluntarily,  it   is   nothing  out  of  place ;   but  when  they  shed 

tears  involuutarilv,  it  is  more  so. 

Celsus  ranks  it  among  the  unfavorable  symptoms  "  sinevoluntatelachrimare."  (ii.) 
This  Aphorism  is  repeated  Epidem.  iv,  27,  and  Prognost.  ii,  15,  ed.  Linden. 


732  APHORISMS. 

53.  In  wliatever  cases  of  fever  very  viscid  concretions  form 
about  the  teeth,  the  fevers  turn  out  to  be  particularly  strong. 

The  appearance  here  noted  is  a  well-known  symptom  of  malignant  fevers.  See 
Coac.  ii,  153  ;  IV  Epidem.  xxvii,  13.  Celsus  renders  it  thus  :  "Ciavis  morbi  periculnni 
est, — habere  Immorem  glutinosuni  dentibus  inlircrentem."  (ii,  4.) 

5 1.  In  whatever  cases  of  ardent  fever  dry  coughs  of  a  tickling 
nature  with  slight  expectoration  are  long  protracted,  there  is 
usually  not  much  thirst. 

Celsus  gives  the  following  version  of  this  Aphorism  :  "  Si  quis  auteni  in  linjnsmodi 
febre  leviter  tussit,  is  necpie  vehementi  siti  conflietatur,  neque  bibere  aquam 
frigidam  debet."  (iii,  7.)  According  to  Ileurnius,  the  object  of  our  author  in  this 
Aphoiism  is  to  warn  the  physician  not  to  be  deceived  in  a  case  of  latent  fever  by  the 
absence  of  thirst.     See  also  VI  Epid.  ii,  43. 

55.  All  fevers  complicated  with  buboes  arc  bad,  except 
ephemeral  s. 

I  have  touched  upon  this  important  subject  in  my  Annotations  on  the  Epidemics, 
and  elsewhere.  See  Epidem.  ii,  3  ;  also,  in  particular,  Galen,  ad  Glauc.  ii,  and  De 
Diff.  Feb.  G. 

56.  Sweat  supervening  in  a  case  of  fever  without  the  fever 
ceasing,  is  l>ad,  for  the  disease  is  protracted,  and  it  indicates 
more  copious  humours. 

This  prognosis  is  repeated,  Judicat.  viii,  G  ;  Coac.  iv,  3G ;  II  Morb.  xxxvi,  12; 
I  Prorrhet.  rii,  8  ;  Aphor.  vii,  Gl.  Galen  considers  it  obvious  that  the  repetitiou 
of  the  sweats  in  this  case  is  an  effort  of  Nature  to  get  rid  of  a  greater  than  usual 
amount  of  humours. 

57.  Fever  supervening  in  a  case  of  confirmed  spasm,  or  of 
tetanus,  removes  the  disease. 

The  truth  of  this  prognosis  is  confirmed  by  many  of  the  ancient  authorities,  but  is 
denied  by  Cxlius  Aurelianus.  See  Paulus  /Egineta,  B.  iii,  20,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 
See  further,  Aph.  ii,  '2G,  v,  70  ;  Loc.  in  Ilom.  xlviii,  G  ;  Judic.  xii,  10  ;  Coac.  i,  231, 
iii,  80,  84;    I  Morb.  vi,  13,  14. 

58.  A  rigor  supervening  in  a  case  of  ardent  fever,  produces 

resolution  of  it. 

The  fact  here  announced  can  be  tested  only  by  those  who  are  familiar  with  the 
fevers  of  hot  cotuitries.  See  further,  Judicat.  xi,  9,  IG;  Coac.  i,  188;  also 
Celsus,  ii,  8. 

59.  A  true  tertian  comes  to   a   crisis   in   seven   periods    at 
furthest. 

Galen  is  at  great  pains  to  ex])lain  the  rationale  of  this  statement,  but  his  doctrine  of 
crises  and  critical  days  api)lies  only  to  Greece  and  Italy.  See  further.  Judical,  iv,  10  ; 
Coac.  i,  212  ;    I  Epid.  iii,  2G  ;    II  Epid.  iii,  82. 

(50.   When  in  fevers  there  is  deafness,  if  blood  nui  from  the 


APHORISMS.  733 

nostrils^   or  the   bowels   become   disordered,  it   carries  off  the 
disease. 

Galen  reverting  to  his  Commentary  on  a  preceding  Aphorism,  in  wliicli  ho  states 
that  deafness  in  this  case  is  connected  with  the  determination  of  bilious  superfluities 
to  tlie  brain,  finds  in  that  hypothesis  a  natural  explanation  of  the  prognostic  contained 
in  this  Apliorism.  Sec  further,  Aph.  iv,  28  ;  Judicat.  xi,  11, 12,  13;  Coac.  ii,  06, 99, 
100,  103,  vi,  77,  78  ;  and  Celsus,  ii,  8. 

Gl.  In  a  febrile  complaiut,  if  the  fever  do  not  leave  on  the 
odd  days,  it  relapses. 

Galen  doubts  if  lIi])pocratcs  actually  wrote  this  Aphorism,  since  examples  are  re- 
]at(Ml  in  the  Epidemics,  of  fevers  being  resolved  on  even  days,  without  a  relapse.  This 
opinion  of  our  author's,  however,  is  alluded  to  in  general  terms  in  different  parts  of 
his  works,  as  Humor,  ill,  91 ;  Judicat.  ix,  11  ;  Pra:not.  xxiv,  8;  Coac.  i,  115,  210; 
I  Epid.  iii,  40;  II  Epid.  v,  30,  vi,  18  ;  IV  Morb.  xix,  10,  11,  xx,  8,  12,  15,  16; 
Celsus,  iii,  4. 

62.  When  jaundice  supervenes  in  fevers  before  the  seventh 
day,  it  is  a  bad  symptom,  unless  there  be  watery  discharges 
from  the  bowels. 

All  the  Greek  authorities  confirm  the  truth  of  this  prognostic,  but  the  Arabians 
call  it  in  question.  See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  .Egineta,  B.  II,  4.  See 
further,  Judicat.  iii,  5, 18,  20  ;  Coac.  i,  172  ;  I  Morb.  vi,  2  ;  Vict.  Acut.  Hv,  3,  4  ;  also 
Pliny,  H.\.  xxvi,  16. 

63.  In  whatever  cases  of  fever  rigors  occur  during  the  day, 

the  fevers  come  to  a  resolution  during  the  day. 

The  meaning  appears  to  me  somewhat  ambiguous,  after  consulting  all  the  com- 
mentators ;  I  am  inclined,  however,  to  think  with  Theophilus,  that  the  prognostic 
applies  to  quotidians,  in  which,  as  there  is  a  cold  fit  every  day,  so  is  there  also  a 
complete  apyrexia.    See  further  Judicat.  xi,  16. 

64.  When  in  cases  of  fever  jaundice  occurs  on  the  seventh,  the 
ninth,  the  eleventh,  or  the  fourteenth  day,  it  is  a  good  symptom, 
provided  the  hypochondriac  region  be  not  hard.  Otherwise 
it  is  not  a  good  symptom. 

Galen  thinks  this  Aphorism  should  have  been  joined  to  the  62d.  Celsus  alludes  to  it 
in  the  following  terms  :  "  Quern  (morbum  arquatum)  Hippocrates  ait  si  post  septimum 
diem  febricitante  a^gro  supervenit,  tutum  esse,  moUibus  tantummodo  prjccordiis  sub- 
stantibus  :  Diodes,  ex  toto,  si  post  febrem  oritur,  etiam  prodesse,  si  post  hunc  febris, 
occidcre."  (iii,  24.).  See  Judicat.  iii,  5,  18,  iv,  11  ;  Coac.  i,  173;  I  Epid.  ii,  120; 
I  Morb.  vi,  2 ;    Aph.  vi,  42. 

65.  A  strong  heat  about  the  stomach  and  cardialgia  are  bad 
symptoms  in  fevers. 

This  Aphorism  requires  no  illustration  or  comment.  1  may  just  mention  that 
Damascius  refers  the  heat  in  the  stomach  and  heartburn  to  yellow  bile  in  a  heated 
state,  which  is  lodged  in  the  coats  of  the  stomach. 


734  APHORISMS. 

C6.   In    acute  fevers,    spasms   and  strong  pains    about    tlie 

Ijowels  are  bad  sj^miDtoms. 

Galen  remarks  that  the  spasms  and  violent  pains  of  the  bowels  may  he  conneeted 
with  inflammation,  erysipelas,  a  strong  obstruction,  or  an  abscess,  and  from  what- 
ever of  these  causes  they  proceed,  must  necessarily  be  a  bad  complication  in  fevers. 
See  further,  Coac.  ii,  207  ;    Aph.  ii,  26  ;    and  Celsus,  ii,  4. 

67.  In  fevers,  frights  after  sleep,  or  convulsions,  are  a  bad 
symptom. 

Galen  informs  us  that,  instead  of  frights  {(j>6f3oi),  some  read  pains  (ttoi'oi).  This 
Apliorisni  is  in  accordance  with  Aph.  ii,  1. 

G8.  In  fevers,  a  stoppage  of  the  respiration  is  a  bad  sym- 
ptom, for  it  indicates  convulsions. 

By  stoppage  of  the  respiration  {to  m'tofia  TrpoffKOTTTOp)  is  meant  a  temporary 
suspension,  or  intermission,  of  the  act  of  inspiration  or  expiration,  or  of  both.  See 
Galen,  Comment,  h.  1.  He  justly  ascribes  it  to  an  affection  of  the  resj)iratory  organs. 
We  have  seen  it  noticed  in  certain  of  the  cases  related  in  the  First  and  Third  Books 
of  the  Epidemics.  Compare  also  Vict.  Acut.  xxi,  21 ;  I  Morb.  IMul.  v,  7.  The  ex- 
pression means  literally  "the  breath  tripping,"  and  is  borrowed  from  the  race-course. 
See  Vossius,  Etymolog.  in  voce  ccsj/es. 

69.  When  the  urine  is  thick,  grumous,  and  scanty  in  cases 
not  free  from  fever,  a  copious  discharge  of  thinner  urine  proves 
beneticial.  Such  a  discharge  more  commonly  takes  place  when 
the  urine  has  had  a  sediment  from  the  first,  or  soon  after  the 
commencement. 

Galen  informs  ns  that  instead  of  grumous  (Sfio/i/^wofn),  Numesianus  and 
Dionysius  read  muddy,  {jSooftopMCici).  My  necessary  limits  will  not  permit  me  here 
to  treat  upon  the  important  suljject  of  the  indications  drawn  from  the  urine,  as  given 
by  the  ancient  authorities.  See  a  succinct  account  of  them  in  the  Commentary  on 
Paulus  .Egineta,  B.  II,  14.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks  that  thick  gru- 
mous urine  may  either  be  accompanied  with  fever  or  without  it,  and  in  either  case 
it  must  be  a  favorable  symptom  when  this  secretion  comes  to  its  natural  state. 
Compare  Coac.  v,  80,  81. 

70.  AVhen  in  fevers  the  urine  is  turbid,  like  that  of  a  beast 

of  burden,  in  such  a  case  there  either  is  or  vill  be  headache. 

Urine  resembling  that  of  cattle  is  noticed  several  times  in  the  Epidemics.  See 
the  case  of  the  wife  of  Dromcadcs,  Epid.  1  ;  also  Epid.  vi,  5,  13,  anil  vii ;  Epid.  liv, 
5,  6,  10,  11.     In  all  these  cases  it  appears  to  have  been  connected  with  an  atfection 

of  the  brain. 

71.  In  cases  which  come  to  a  crisis  on  the  seventh  daj^,  the 
urine  has  a  red  nubecula  on  the  fourth  day,  and  the  other 
symptoms  accordingly. 

That  in  estimating  the  critical  days,  the  fourth  is  to  1)e  looked  upon  as  an  index 
of  the  seventh,  is  a  doctrine  held  by  all  the  authorities.     See  Paulus  /Egineta, 


APHORISMS.  735 

B.  II,  9,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.;  and  Galen's  Comment,  h.  1.  The  ancients  jiaid  great  atten- 
tion to  the  nubeeuLx,  or  cloudy  appearances  in  the  nrinc;.  On  tliis  Aphoiisni,  sec 
further  Judic.  vi,  2,  ix,  8  ;  Coae.  i,  213,  v,  5,  82  ;  Aph.  1 ,  12. 

72.  When   the  urine  is  tniuspHreiit  and  wliitc^  it  is  bad ; 
it  appears  principally  in  cases  of  phrenitis. 

Urine  that  is  transparent  and  of  a  light  colour  was  held  to  be  indicative  of  a 
complete  stoppage  of  the  digestive  jjowers,  and  it  was  thought  to  Ijc  more  particularly 
fatal  in  phrenitic  cases,  which  were  considered  to  be  of  a  bilious  character.  See  the 
Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theopliilus. 

73.  When  the  hypochondriac  region  is  affected  with  meteorism 

and  borborygmi,  should  pain  of  the  loins  supervene^  the  bowels 

get  into  a  loose  and  watery  state,  unless  there  be  an  eruption 

of  flatus  or  a  copious  evacuation  of  urine.      These  things  occur 

in  fevers. 

Meteorism  ami  borborygmi  are  well-known  symptoms  in  fever.  The  Commentators 
state  that  they  arise  from  flatulence  and  fluids  collected  in  the  hypochondriac 
region,  which  may  either  pass  downwards  by  the  bowels,  or  be  determined  to  the 
urinary  organs.  The  Aphorism  is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus  :  "  Si  inflatio  in  superiori- 
bus  partilnis  dolorem  tunioremque  fecit,  bonum  signum  est  sonus  ventris  inde  ad 
inferiores  partes  evolutus."  (ii,  3.)  These  symptoms  are  alluded  to  in  several  parts  of 
the  Hippocratie  treatises,  as  Coae.  ii,  240,  241,  257;  Prognost.  x,  14  ;  Aph.  v,  64. 

74.  When  there   is   reason  to   expect   that  an  abscess  will 

form  in  joints,  the  abscess  is  carried  off  by  a  copious  discharge 

of  urine,  which   is  thick,  and  becomes  white,  like  what  begins 

to  form  in  certain  cases  of  quartan  fever,  attended  with  a  sense 

of  lassitude.      It  is  also  speedily  ctirried  off  by  a  hemorrhage 

from  the  nose. 

This  Aphorism  is  founded  on  two  prognostics  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  Epidemics, 
§  4.  See  also  Humor,  xi,  13,  IG,  and  Judicat.  x,  4-7.  That  a  deposit,  or  abscess, 
commencing  in  a  joint  should  be  carried  oft"  by  the  urine  or  a  hemorrhage  from  the 
nose  appears  very  natural.  Galen  and  Theophilus  call  attention  to  the  remark  that 
the  crisis  by  epistaxis  carries  oif  the  affection  much  more  speedily  than  that  by  the 
urine.  From  this  Aphorism  being  given  individually  in  the  Epidemics  and  generally 
in  the  Aphorisms,  the  learned  Fuchsius,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Epidemics,  infers 
that  it  is  the  earlier  production. 

75.  Blood  or  pus  in  the  urine  indicates  ulceration  either  of 

the  kidneys  or  of  the  bladder. 

That  bloody  and  purulent  urine,  generally,  is  connected  with  ulceration  in  the 
kidneys  or  bladder  will  be  admitted  at  the  present  day.  Galen  further  remarks 
correctly,  that  the  ulceration  is  generally  jiroduced  by  a  sharp  calculus.  This  Apho- 
rism is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus :  "  Si  sanguis  ant  pus  in  uriua  est,  vel  vesica  vel 
renes  exulceratae  sunt."  (ii,  7.)  See  further  Aph.  iv,  78,  81 ;  Int.  Atfect.  xvi,  4,  5  ; 
Nat.  Human,  xxvi,  4  ;  Praenot.  xix,  11. 


736  APHORISMS. 

76.  When  small  fleshy  substances  like  hairs  are  discharged 
along  with  thick  urine^  these  substances  come  from  the  kidnej^s. 

The  siil)stances  resembling  hairs  floating  in  the  urine  are  clescril)etl  by  Galen, 
Cxiius  Aurelianiis,  Avicenna,  and  other  ancient  autliorities.  See  Paui.us  .Egineta, 
B.  Ill,  45,  Syd.  Sec.  edit.  Galen  pays  a  higli  compliment  to  our  author  for  having 
acutely  remarked  a  morbid  appearance,  of  which  many  practitioners  in  his  time  were 
ignorant.  See  further,  Nat.  Human,  xxvi,  5  ;  Apli.  iv,  2(5.  Cclsiis  renders  this  Apho- 
rism as  follows :  "  Si  luec  crassa,  carunculas  (piasdem  exiguas  quasi  capillos  liabet," 
&c.  (ii,  7.) 

77.  In  tliose  cases   where   there   are   furfuraceous   particles 

discharged  along  with  thick  urine^  there  is  scabies  of  the  bladder. 

By  scabies  vesica^,  as  Galen  explains  in  liis  Commentary,  was  meant  an  affection 
of  the  inner  membrane  of  the  bladder.  Furfuraceous  sediments  were  looked  upon  by 
all  the  authorities  as  an  unfavorable  symptom.  See  Paulus  vEgineta,  B.II,14,  Syd. 
Soc.  edit. ;  arid  Nat.  Human,  xxvi,  G. 

78.  In  those  cases  where  there  is  a  spontaneous  discharge 
of  bloody  urine,  it  indicates  rupture  of  a  small  vein  in  the  kid- 
neys. 

This  Aphorism  is  nearly  allied  to  Aphor.  7.J.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks 
that  the  rupture  of  the  vessel  may  either  proceed  from  an  external  or  an  internal 
cause.     By  spontaneous  is  meant  sudden. 

79.  In  those  cases  where  there  is  a  sandy  sediment  in  the 
urine,  there  is  calculus  in  the  bladder  (or  kidneys). 

Galen  informs  us  that  there  was  no  mention  of  the  kidneys  in  the  copies  of 
Hippocrates  then  in  use,  whence  he  justly  held  that  the  Aphorism  was  not  strictly 
correct.  It  is,  of  course,  undeniable  that  salmlous  urine  may  either  l)e  connected 
with  disease  of  the  bladder  or  of  the  kidneys.  See  further,  IV  Morb.  xxix,  13  ;  Int. 
Atfect.  XV,  10,  11. 

80.  If  a  patient  pass  blood  and  clots  in  his  urine,  and  have 
strangury,  and  if  a  pain  seize  the  hypogastric  region  and  peri- 
neum, the  parts  about  the  bladder  are  aflected. 

This  Aphorism  is  repeated  word  for  word,  A])hor.  vii,  39.  One,  of  course,  can 
have  no  hesitation  in  admitting  the  truth  of  it,  when  we  take  into  account  that,  as 
explained  by  Galen,  under  the  expression  "  the  parts  about  the  bladder,"  are  com])re- 
hcnded  all  the  luinary  organs,  namely,  the  bladder,  kidneys,  and  urethra. 

81.  If  a  patient  pass  blood,  pus,  and  scales,  in  the  urine,  and 
if  it  have  a  heavv  smell,  ulceration  of  the  bladder  is  indicated. 

This,  it  will  be  i-emarked,  is  very  little  different  from  Aphor.  iv,  75. 

82.  "When  tubercles  form  in  the  urethra,  if  these  suppurate 

and  burst,  there  is  relief. 

By  phymata  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hippocrates  understood  small  and  indolent 
abscesses ;  the  term,  I  need  scarcely  say,  is  frequently  used  by  him  in  this  sense.  By 


APHORISMS. 


i^i 


urethra,  in  this  place,  according  to  Tlieophilus,  was  meant  the  neck  of  the  hladdcr. 
I  cannot,  from  my  own  personal  information,  give  any  account  of  these  tubercles,  but 
for  a  description  of  them  I  would  refer  the  reader  to  the  Commentary  of  Ileurnius  ; 
and  also  to  the  works  of  Ambrose  Pare,  and,  in  particular,  to  Amatus  Lusitanus, 
4,  cent.  19.     See  further,  Coac.  iii,  311,  312  ;  and  Cclsns,  ii,  8. 

83.   "When  much  uriiic  is  passed  during  the  night,  it  indicates 
that  the  alvine  evacuations  are  scanty. 

From  this  Aphorism  it  will  be  seen  that  our  author  regarded  the  urinary  and 
alvine  evacuations  as  vicarious,  so  that  if  the  one  was  abnormally  abundant,  the  other 
was  of  necessity  deficient  in  as  great  a  degree.  Tlieophilus  mentions  that  he  says 
"  during  the  night,"  because  digestion  takes  place  at  that  time.  Compare  II  Diait. 
xl,  10-17;  IV  Morb.  vii,  4. 


SECTION   V. 

1.  A  spasm  from  taking  hellebore  is  of  a  fatal  nature. 

We  have  had  occasion  repeatedly  to  remark  that  Hippocrates,  in  extreme  cases, 
had  recourse  to  the  hellebore,  that  is  to  say,  the  white  hellebore,  as  Galen,  in  his 
Commentary,  remarks.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  vpratrtim  album.  See  Paulus 
yEcixETA,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  107.  He  here  states  the  danger  of  administering  it  unseason- 
ably. As  Theophilus  remarks,  it  sometimes  brings  on  convulsion  from  sympathy 
with  the  stomach.  Heurnius,  in  his  Commentaiy,  relates  a  case  in  point,  which 
occurred  to  his  own  knowledge.  See  further,  Aph.  vii,  25 ;  Coac.  iv,  24 ;  and 
Celsus,  ii,  6. 

2.  Spasm  supervening  on  a  wound  is  fatal. 

That  spasm,  that  is  to  say,  a  tetanic  affection  supervening  on  a  wound,  is  highly 
dangerous  all  experienced  surgeons  are  well  aware,  Galen,  in  his  Commentary, 
remarks  that  the  spasm  is  an  affection  of  the  nervous  parts  in  connexion  with  the 
wound.  He  further  remarks  that  by  "  fatal,"  {Qavaaijiov,)  in  this  place  is  merely 
meant  "  very  dangerous."  See  further  Coac.  iii,  81,382;  Capit.  Vulner.  xxv,  5; 
Celsus,  ii,  26.  Tagaultius  pointedly  adverts  to  this  interpretation  of  the  Aphorism. 
Inst.  Chirurg.  ii. 

3.  A  convulsion,  or  hiccup,  supervening  on  a  copious  dis- 
charge of  blood  is  bad. 

Every  person  who  is  tamiliar  with  obstetrical  practice  will  bear  testimony  to  the 
truth  of  this  Aphorism,  as  far  as  regards  uterine  hemorrhage  ;  hence  the  danger  of 
using  violent  remedies  in  such  a  case.  Hiccup,  as  Galen  remarks,  is  a  spasm  of  the 
stomach.     See  further,  Aph.  vii,  9  ;    Coac.  iii,  57  ;    Celsus,  ii,  8. 

4.  A  convulsion^  or  hiccup,  supervening  upon  hypercatharsis 
is  bad. 

This  is  a  natural  inference  from  Aph.  1  and  3.  See  further,  Aph.  vii,  41 ;  Coac. 
iv,  22  ;  Verat.  Us.,  i,  8  ;  and  Celsus,  ii,  8, 

5.  If  a  drunken  person  suddenly  lose  his  speech,  he  will  die 

47 


7.38  APHORISMS. 

convulsed,  unless  fever  come  on,  or  lie  recover  his  speecli  at  the 
time  when  the  consequences  of  u  debauch  pass  off. 

We  have  here  a  very  important  fact  announced  to  ns  respecting  the  effects  of 
intoxication,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  tliat  of  sucli  cases  modern  jdiysicians  have 
much  greater  experience  than  IIii)pocrates  can  have  liad,  intoxication,  it  is  too  well 
known,  heing  niucli  moi'e  common  now  than  in  the  days  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans. 
Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks  that  there  is  no  limit  for  the  effects  of  intoxica- 
tion to  pass  off,  that  in  some  this  takes  place  next  day,  and  in  others  they  last  till 
the  third  day.     See  II  ]\lorb.  iv,  IG,  xxii,  2,  3,  4 ;    Celsus,  ii,  G. 

6.  Such  persons  as  are  seized  with  tetantis  die  within  four 

days,  or  if  they  pass  these  they  recover. 

No  doul)t  this  prognosis  is  generally  applicable  in  hot  countries.  See  further, 
Judicat.  viii,  19;    III  Mori),  xiii,  11  ;    Celsus,  ii,  1. 

7.  Those  cases  of  epilepsy  which  come  on  before  puljerty 
may  undergo  a  change ;  but  those  which  come  on  after  twenty- 
five  years  of  age,  for  the  most  part  terminate  in  death. 

The  prognosis  in  this  case  is  in  accordance  with  Aphor.  ii,  45.  See  further, 
II  Prorrhet.  xvi,  and  Morh.  Sac;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8,  and  iii,  23.  It  is  to  he  lamented 
that,  at  the  present  day,  no  more  favoraltle  i)rognosis  can  he  made  in  tliis  case. 

8.  In  pleuritic  affections,  Mhen  the  disease  is  not  purged  off 

in  fourteen  days,  it  usually  terminates  in  empyema. 

The  subject  of  empyema  after  acute  inflanunations  of  the  chest  is  treated  of  in  the 
annotations  on  the  Progiiostics.  On  this  interesting  subject,  see  further,  Aph.  v,  If) ; 
Loc.  in  Horn,  xxvii,  4;  Coac.  iii,  131,  132,  171;  VII  Epid.  xlvii,  IG;  I  Morb.  iii, 
29,  X,  12,  xi,  G-11,  xxiii,  15,  IG,  xxiv,  10;  III  Morb.  xvi,  30;  Affect,  viii,  19,  20, 
ix,  13;  Int.  Affect,  i.  20;  Vict.  Acnt.  vii,  1,  2.  The  Commentary  of  Ileurnius  on 
this  Aphorism  is  interesting. 

9.  Phthisis  most  commonly  occurs  between  the  ages  of 
eighteen  and  thirty-five  j'cars. 

This  agrees  with  Aphor.  iii,  29.  See  further,  viii,  7,  and  Coac.  iii,  2G0  ;  also 
Celsus,  iii,  22.  It  is  to  be  Ijorne  in  mind  tliat  tlie  terms  here  specified  comprehend 
tlie  age  of  puberty  (latpaKiw}')  and  tliat  of  adults  {rtavi(TKO)v).  See  the  Com- 
mentary of  Galen.  I  beg  to  quote,  under  this  head,  the  opiiyon  of  our  great  English 
authority  on  Phtliisis,  I  mean  Sir  James  Clark :  "  The  opinion  of  Hippocrates  on 
this  subject  corresponds  still  more  clearly  with  the  results  obtained  from  our  tables; 
that  accurate  observer  fixed  the  age  at  which  phthisis  most  frequently  occurs  between 
the  18th  and  35th  year/'  (On  Tnbercular  Plithisis.)  Louis,  as  is  too  frequently  tlie 
case  with  him,  is  undecided  on  this  point. 

10.  Persons  who  escape  an  attack  of  quinsy,  and  when  the 
disease  is  turned  upon  the  lungs,  die  in  seven  days  ;  or  if 
they  pass  these  they  become  affected  with  empyema. 

We  have  here  clearly  tl>e  case  of  idcerous  sore-throat  referred  to,  in  wliicli  the 


APHORISMS.  739 

disease  passes  down  to  the  lungs.  That  such  cases  generally  prove  fatal  in  tlic 
course  of  a  few  days  is  well  known ;  but  that  they  terminate  in  empyema,  according 
to  the  modern  acceptation  of  that  term,  will  not  be  so  readily  admitted.  It  is  pro- 
bable, however,  that  our  author  meant  by  the  term  any  purulent  expectoration  from 
the  lungs.  In  fact,  the  literal  translation  of  the  last  clause  would  be,  "  they  become 
purulent."  Ileurnius,  by  the  way,  relates  a  case  in  point.  See  his  Commentary  ; 
also  Prognost.  xxiii,  15;  Coac.  iii,  100,  101,  105, 106;  II  Morb.  xxvii,  15-19;  and 
Celsus,  ii,  6. 

11.  In   persons   affected   with   phthisis,  if  tlie  sputa  which 

they  cough  up  have  a  heavy  smell  when  poured  upon  coals,  and 

if  the  hairs  of  the  head  fall  off,  the  case  will  prove  fatal. 

The  test  of  phthisis  here  proposed  is  taken  from  Coac.  iii,  252.  It  is  approved  of 
by  Galen,  and  most  of  the  commentators,  even  down  to  Heurnius  in  the  17th 
century,  who  relates  an  instance  in  which  he  founded  a  correct  diagnosis  upon  it. 
Areticus,  however,  objects  to  it,  Morb.  Acut.  i,  8.  See  further,  II  Morb.  xlvi,  16-20, 
Iv,  20-23  ;   Affect,  viii,  19 ;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8,  and  iii,  22. 

12.  Phthisical  persons,  the  hairs  of  whose  head  fall  off,  die 

if  diarrhoea  set  in. 

The  two  symptoms  here  mentioned,  are  very  characteristic  of  the  last  stage  of 
phthisis.  See  further,  Aph.  v,  14,  vii,  78  ;  Coac.  iii,  144,  255  ;  I  Morb.  \,  36  ;  II 
Morb.  xlvi,  12 ;    also  Celsus,  ii,  8. 

13.  In  persons  who  cough  up  frothy  blood,  tlie  discharge  of 

it  comes  from  the  lungs. 

No  doubt,  as  a  general  rule,  this  statement  is  true,  and  is  confirmed  by  many  of 
the  ancient  authorities.  See  those  referred  to  in  the  Commentary  on  Paulus 
iEoiNETA,  B.  Ill,  31 ;  andfurther,  Coac.  iii,  216,  250,  254, 273  ;  II  Morb.  Ii,  4.  The 
Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Ileurnius  on  this  head  are  interesting,  but  too  lengtliy 
for  my  limits.  The  former  of  these  informs  us,  that  in  some  of  the  editions  he  found 
"  vomit"  (f/iEovfft),  instead  of  "  spit"  (tttvovcti). 

14.  Diarrhoea  attacking  a  person  affected  with  phthisis  is  a 

mortal  symptom. 

This  symptom  is  already  alluded  to,  Aph.  v,  12.  See  further,  vi,  17,  vii,  78; 
Coac.  iii,  244,  256  ;   I  Morb.  vi,  5,  x,  36,  39,  xi,  41,  xiv,  10  ;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8,  iii,  22. 

15.  Persons  who  become  affected  with  empyema  after  pleurisy, 

if  they  get  clear  of  it  in  forty  days  from  the  breaking  of  it, 

escape  the  disease ;   but  if  not,  it  passes  into  phthisis. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  what  is  stated  in  this  Aphorism  strongly  confirms  the 
opinion  expressed  by  me  in  ray  Annotations  on  the  Prognostics,  that  our  author 
applied  the  term  empyema  both  to  the  purulent  expectoration  that  follows  inflam- 
mation of  the  lungs  and  pleurisy,  and  to  that  which  proceeds  from  a  cavity  of  the 
lungs  in  tubercular  phthisis.  See  further,  Aph.  v,  12,  vi,  16  ;  Loc.  inllom.  xxv,  10; 
Coac.  iii,  141,  171,209,  215;  VII  Epidem.  xlvii,  16,  17;  I  iMorb.  x,  15,  17,20;  II 
Morb.  Iv,  23;   III  Morb.  xvi,  35  ;    also  Celsus,  ii,  7.  ' 


7-10  APHORISMS. 

16.  Heat  produces  tlie  following  bad   effects  on  those  who 

use  it  frequently  ;  enervation  of  the  fleshy  parts,  impotence  of 

the  nerves,  torpor  of  the  understanding,  hemorrhages,  deliquia, 

and,  along  with  these,  death. 

Upon  reference  to  my  analysis  of  the  work  "  De  Usu  Hnmidorum,"  in  the  second 
section  of  the  Preliminary  Discourse,  it  will  he  seen  that  the  contents  of  it  are  in  a 
great  measure  identical  with  the  series  of  Aphorisms  (1(5-25)  upon  which  we  are  now 
entering.  It  will  also  he  seen  from  the  Commentary  of  Galen,  that  there  was  a 
variety  of  readings  with  regard  to  the  last  words  of  the  sentence  here  translated, 
"and,  along  with  these,  death."  By  "heat"  is  meant  "  hot  water,"  or  "  a  hot 
fomentation."  The  effects  here  descrihed  apply,  of  course,  only  to  the  immoderate 
use  of  it.  See  further,  Humid.  Us.  iii,  2,  3  ;  Offic.  Medic,  viii,  14  ;  Artie.  Ivii,  3  ; 
Aphor.  1-23.  Celsus  tersely  renders  it  thus:  "  (Calor)  si  nimius  est,  corpus 
eflreminet,  nervos  emollit,  stomachum  solvit."  (i,  9.) 

17.  Cold   induces    convulsions,   tetanus,    mortification,    and 
febrile  rigors. 

See  Aph.  v,  20 ;   Humid.  Us.  iii,  4,  iv,  5  ;   Tract,  xxxvii,  G  ;   Artie.  Ixxiv,  10. 

18.  Cold  is  inimical  to  the  bones,  the  teeth,  the  nerves,  the 

brain,  and  the  spinal  marrow,  but  heat  is  beneficial. 

See  Humid.  Us.  iv,  1,4,  and  Celsus,  i,  9.  The  commentators,  and  especially 
Theophilus,  explain  that  the  parts  of  the  hody  here  mentioned  are  of  a  cohl  nature, 
as  hcing  possessed  of  little  vascularity,  and  hence  they  are  readily  hurt  by  cold,  and 
arc  benefited  by  heat. 

19.  Such  parts  as  have  been  congealed  sliould  be  heated, 
except  where  there  either  is  a  hemorrhage,  or  one  is  expected. 

See  further,  Aph.  ii,  22,  v,  23  ;  Humid.  Us.  i,  21,  xi,28.  The  practice  here  recom- 
mended is  obviously  founded  on  the  rule  "contraria  contrariis." 

20.  Cold   pinches   ulcers,  hardens  the   skin,  occasions  pain 

Avhich  docs  not  end  in  suppuration,  blackens,  produces  febrile 

rigors,  convulsions,  and  tetanus. 

The  only  expression  here  of  ambiguous  meaning  is  o^vvijv  av(K7rvi]Tov  ttoim,  the 
import  of  which  would  seem  either  to  be,  "  that  it  aggravates  pains  not  connected 
with  suppuration,"  as  explained  by  Theophilus,  or  "  that  it  prevents  painful  parts  from 
coming  to  suppuration,"  as  explained  by  Heurnius.  SeeAph.  v,  17;  Humid.  Us. 
iii,  4,  ix,  5,  xi,  15  ;   Tract,  xxxvii,  6  ;   Artie.  Ixxiv,  10;   also  Celsus,  i,  9. 

21.  In  the  case  of  a  muscitlar  voutli  having  tetanus  without 

a  Avound,   during  the  midst  of  summer,  it  sometimes  happens 

that  the  aflTusion  of  a  large  quantity  of  cold  water  recalls  the 

heat.      Heat  relieves  these  diseases. 

We  have  here  as  safe  directions  as  can  he  well  imagined  for  the  application  of  the 
cold  affusion  in  tetanus,  and  very  different  from  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was 
proposed  by  Dr.  Curric,  of  Liverpool.     It  is  only  in  the  case  of  a  muscular  person,  and 


API101118MS.  741 

x>lieii  uiicoiincctcd  svilli  a  wound,  that  he  reconiniends  the  pnictice  ;  and  even  under 
these  eircunistances  it  was  discontinued  hy  succeeding  authorities.  See  tlie  Com- 
mentary on  I'aulus  /Egineta,  Book  III,  20.  See  furtlicr,  Ilnniid.  Us.  xi,  IG  ; 
Aphor.  V,  2.j  ;  III  Morb.  xiv,  17  —  xv.  GahMi,  in  his  Commentary,  explains  that  the 
cold  acts  in  this  place,  not  by  extinguishing,  but  by  rousing  the  vital  heat. 

22.  Heat  is  suppurative,  but  not  in  all  kinds  of  sores,  but 
■\vlien  it  is,  it  furnishes  the  greatest  test  of  their  being  free 
from  danger.  It  softens  the  skin,  makes  it  thin,  removes  pain, 
soothes  rigors,  convulsions,  and  tetanus.  It  removes  affections 
of  the  head,  and  heaviness  of  it.  It  is  particularly  efficacious 
in  fractures  of  the  bones^  especially  of  those  which  have  been 
exposed,  and  most  especially  in  wounds  of  the  head,  and  in 
mortifications  and  ulcers  from  cold ;  in  herpes  exedens,  of  the 
anus,  the  privy  parts,  the  w  oml),  the  bladder,  in  all  these  cases 
heat  is  agreeable,  and  brings  matters  to  a  crisis  ;  but  cold  is 
prejudicial,  and  does  mischief. 

The  important  matters  contained  in  this  Aphorism  are  also  treated  of  in  the  fol- 
lowing parts  of  the  Hippocratic  Collection:  Humid.  Us.  xi,  18-28,  xi,  10,  i,  10,  19, 
V,  13,  vi,  2,  3  ;  Ulcer,  v,  1 ;  I  Morb.  vi,  14.  Galen  and  Theophilus,  among  the 
ancients,  and  lleurnius,  among  the  modern  commentators,  have  given  some  very  in- 
teresting observations  on  this  Aphorism,  but  they  are  far  too  lengthy  for  ray  limits. 
Heat,  it  will  be  remarked,  is  said  to  be  a  test,  as  it  were,  of  ulcers,  whether  they  are 
of  a  inild  nature  or  not ;  for  if  it  produce  suppuration,  they  may  be  regarded  as  mild, 
but  if  otherwise,  as  malignant. 

23.  Cold  water  is  to  be  applied  in  the  following  cases:  when 

there  is  a  hemorrhage,  or  when  it  is  expected,  but  not  applied 

to  the  spot,  but  around  the  spot  whence  the  blood  flows  ;    and 

in  inflammations  and  inflammatory  aflections,  inclining  to  a  red 

and  sub-sanguineous  colour,  and  consisting  of  fresh  blood,  in 

these  cases  it  is  to  be  applied,  but  it  occasions  mortification  in 

old  cases;  and  in  erysipelas  not  attended  with  ulceration,  as  it 

proves  injurious  to  erysipelas  when  ulcerated. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  the  good  and  bad  effects  of  cold,  when  applied  medi- 
cinally, are  here  given  with  admirable  judgment.  What  a  valuable  fact  is  here 
stated  with  regard  to  the  etfects  of  cold  in  checking  hemorrhage  !  And  how  excellent 
the  advice  not  to  apply  it  to  the  wound,  for  this  might  occasion  pain  and  increase 
vascular  action,  but  to  the  parts  around .'  It  will  be  remarked,  that  he  further  recom- 
mends cold  applications  to  intlammation,  and  to  erysipelas,  when  not  ulcerated. 
Popular  opinion  is  against  the  use  of  it  in  the  latter  case,  but  very  probably  without 
much  cause.  The  substance  of  this  Aphorism  is  given  by  Celsus,  i,  9.  No  part  of 
this  Aphorism  is  to  be  found  in  the  treatise  De  Humid.  Us.,  and  the  only  passage 
which  is  at  all  parallel  to  it  is  Aph.  v,  19. 

2-i.   Cold  things,  such  as  snow  and  ice,  are  inimical   to   the 


742  APHORISMS. 

chest,  being  provocative  of  couglis_,  of  discharges  of  blood,  and 

of  catarrhs. 

The  matter  contained  in  tliis  important  Apliorism  is  also  to  he  found  at  Humid. 
Us.  iv,  8,  V,  16;  VI  Epid.  iii,  22.  Although  intensely  cold  applications  to  the  chest 
are  condemned  hy  all  the  ancient  authorities,  moderately  cold  applications  are  recom- 
mended l)y  many  of  them.  But  even  these,  Galen  affirms,  have  sometimes  the  con- 
trary etfect  to  what  they  are  intended  to  produce.  (]Meth.  Med.,  v,  G.)  See  the 
Commentary  on  Paulus  jEgineta,  Book  III,  26,  Syd.  Soc.  edition.  I  would  remark 
in  this  place,  as  confirmatory  of  the  views  laid  down  by  our  author  in  this  and  the 
preceding  Aphorism,  that,  in  my  opinion,  snow-  and  ice,  when  applied  in  uterine 
hemorrhage,  often  do  harm  ratlier  than  good.  I  am  confident  that  the  hemorrhage 
is  to  he  checked,  not  hy  intensely  cold,  hut  by  cooling  things  ;  for  I  verily  believe, 
with  Ilippoci'ates,  that  ice  and  snow,  by  creating  pain  and  bringing  on  a  violent 
reaction,  may  often  increase  the  hemorrhage  rather  than  allay  it.  "  Ubi  dolor  ibi 
fluxus." 

25.  SAvelliiigs  and  pains  in  the  joints,  withont  ulceration, 
those  of  a  gouty  nature,  and  sprains,  are  generally  improved 
by  a  copious  afi'usion  of  cold  water,  which  reduces  the  swelling, 
and  removes  the  pain  ;  for  a  moderate  degree  of  numbness 
removes  pain. 

See  further,  lliuuid.  Us.  x,  14,  lo.  "With  the  exception  of  gouty  swellings,  it  will 
scarcely  be  questioned,  at  the  present  day,  that  the  practice  advocated  in  this 
Apliorism  is  sound  and  judicious  ;  and  even  in  the  gout  there  have  not  been  wanting 
modern  authorities  who  have  advocated  the  practice  of  Ilipjiocrates,  including  King- 
lake,  the  celebrated  Ilarvey,  and  Mason  Good.  See  Dr.  Copland's  Dictionary  of 
Practical  Medicine,  under  Govt,  §  6.").  It  should  l)e  kcj)!  in  mind,  moreover,  that  it  is 
not  cold  applications, but  the  affusion  of  cold  water  which  oiu-  author  recommends  in 
these  cases ;  and  that  all  the  commentators  hold  that  it  acts,  not  by  producing  cold, 
but  by  rousing  the  vital  beat  of  the  part.  .See,  in  particular,  the  very  interesting 
commentaries  puldished  by  Dietz,  Anccdota  Grreca,  tom.  ii,  458. 

26.  The  lightest  water  is  that  whicli  is  quickly  heated  and 
quickly  cooled. 

Sec  Aer.,  Aq.,  Loc,  xvii,  1  ;   II  Epid.  ii,  20;  C'elsus,  ii,  18. 

27.  AYhen  persons  have  intense  thirst,  it  is  a  good  thing  if 

ihey  can  sleep  oft'  the  desire  of  drinking. 

This  I  believe  to  be  a  very  judicious  rule  of  practice,  whether  the  thirst  be  occasioned 
by  drinking  wine  or  by  the  presence  of  fever.  As  Galen  remarks,  if  the  thirst  be  in- 
tense, a  moderate  (juantity  of  liquids  is  to  be  taken;  and  if  less  so,  drink  is  to  be 
absiained^from  altogether,  and  the  person  should  l)e  left  to  sleep  off  his  thirst.  See 
the  Comment,  of  Galen;  also  VI  Epid.  iv,  42. 

28.  Fumigation  with  aromatics  prouiotes  menstruation,  and 
would  be  useful  in  many  other  cases,  if  it  did  not  occasion 
heaviness  of  the  head. 

This  agrees  Willi  what  is  said,  Natur.  Mulieb.  xix,  161-187.  All  the  ancient  authorities 


APHORISMS.  743 

trusted  much  to  fomentations  and  pessaries,  consisting  principally  of  aromatics,  for 
the  cure  of  amenorrhoca.  See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  /Egineta,  Book  III,  71. 
The  aromatics,  l)cing  of  a  diffusible  nature,  affect  the  heads  of  delicate  women  when 
so  applied.  Those  mentioned  by  Galen  are  costus,  cassia,  cinnamon,  and  amomum, 
on  wliichsee  Dicrhach,  as  to  tlie  medicinal  articles  used  by  Hippocrates,  and  Paulus 
/Egixeta,  Vol.  Ill,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

29.  Woineu  in  a  state  of  pregnancy  may  be  purged,  if  there 

he  any  urgent  necessity  (or,   if  tlie  humours  be  in    a  state  of 

orgasm?),   from  the  fourth  to  the  seventh   montli,  but  less  so 

in  the  hitter  case.      In  the  first  and   hist   periods    it  must  be 

avoided. 

Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  rem<irks,  that  this  Aphorism  occurs  previously,  among 
those  relating  to  purging,  and  is  here  repeated  among  those  devoted  to  female  com- 
plaints.    He  adds,  however,  that  some  had  suppressed  it.     See  Celsus,  ii,  6. 

30.  It  proves  fiital  to   a   woman  in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  if 

she  be  seized  with  anv  of  the  acute  diseases. 

How  often  have  I  seen  the  truth  of  this  prognosis  veritied  !  Galen  instances 
epilepsy,  apoplexy,  spasm,  and  tetanus ;  and  Theophilus,  phrenitis  and  pleurisy,  as 
diseases  particularly  fatal  when  they  attack  a  pregnant  woman.  See  further, 
I  Morb.  iii,  9  ;  I  Epidem.  ii,  111  ;  also  Celsus,  ii.  G. 

31.  If  a  woman  with  child  be  bled,  she  will  have  an  abor- 
tion, and  this  will  be  the  more  likely  to  happen,  the  larger  the 
foetus. 

That  a  large  evacuation  of  blood,  by  depriving  the  foetus  of  its  pal)ulum,  should 
prove  fatal  to  it,  seems  very  natural,  and  accordingly  most  of  the  ancient  authorities, 
as  a  general  rule,  forbid  pregnant  women  to  be  bled.  Celsus  mentions  it  as  a  recent 
discovery,  that  a  vein  might  be  opened  even  in  a  woman  with  child,  (ii,  10.) 
Heurnius  accounts  for  the  difference  between  modern  views  and  those  of  Hippocrates 
on  this  head,  ft-om  the  difference  in  the  mode  of  li\ing,  which  he  supposes  must 
have  been  very  simple  in  the  age  of  Hippocrates,  and  consequently  persons  could 
not  bear  the  loss  of  blood  so  well  as  they  do  in  modern  times,  when  the  diet  is  more 
full  and  luxurious.  Perhaps  this  is  the  proper  way  of  reconciling  the  rules  of 
Hippocrates  and  Celsus. 

32.  Haemoptysis  in  a  woman  is  removed  by  an  eruption  of 

the  menses. 

The  very  same  prognosis  occurs  at  I  Morb.  vi,  11.  Galen  explains  the  relief  ob- 
tained in  this  case  upon  the  principle  of  revulsion,  and  states  that,  in  imitation  of 
this  natural  cure,  he  had  often  opened  a  vein  with  the  same  intention,  and  with 
good  etfects. 

33.  In  a  woman  when  there  is  a  stoppage  of  the  menses,  a 
discharge  of  blood  from  the  nose  is  good. 

See,  in  like  manner.  Virgin.  ^lorb.  iii,  2.  This  also  looks  like  a  natural  cure  of  the 
plethora  induced  by  the  suppression  of  the  menstrual  discharge.  Galen  remarks, 
that  it  points  out  the  propriety  of  letting  blood  from  other  parts  of  the  body  in  such 
a  case. 


744  APHORISMS. 

34.  When  a  pregn.int  woman  has  a  violent  diarrhoea^  lliere 

is  danger  of  her  miscarrying. 

See,  in  like  manner,  II  Picediet.  x\x,  11  ;  Coac.  iii,  416;  I  Moib.  Miilier.  xxxvii, 
5 ;  xli,  3,  C.  The  dangei'  of  abortion  when  a  woman  is  seized  with  a  violent  dis- 
charge from  the  bowels  is  well  known. 

35.  Sneezing  occurring  to  a  woman  affected  with  hysterics, 
and  in  difficult  labour,  is  a  good  symptom. 

The  meaning  of  hysterics  in  this  Aphorism  is  somewhat  ambiguous.  Damascius 
understands  by  it  {vanpiKuJv)  "  the  secundines,"  and  refers  the  case  to  re- 
tention of  the  placenta.  Galen  rejects  this  interpretation,  and  also  that  of  those 
commentators  who  applied  it  to  all  diseases  of  the  uterus,  whereas  he  contends  it  is 
only  applicable  to  uterine  suffocation,  that  is  to  say,  the  hysterical  fit.  That  in  it, 
and  in  certain  cases  of  tedious  labour,  sneezing,  by  rousing  the  natural  powers,  may 
prove  useful,  can  be  well  conceived.  On  this  subject,  see  further,  Aph.  v,  49  ; 
Praenot.  xiii,  11;  Coac.  iii,  175;  Morb.  Mulier.  xciii,  1,6,  7. 

36.  "When  the  menstrual  discharge  is  of  a  bad  colour  and 
irregular,  it  indicates  that  the  woman  stands  in  need  of 
purging. 

It  ajipeais  from  Galen,  that  in  his  time  both  the  reading  and  meaning  were  con- 
sidered doubtful.  From  the  nature  of  the  remedy,  one  may  conjecture  that  it  means 
to  apply  to  deficient  menstruation,  the  discharge  being  deficient  both  in  quantity  and 
quality.  The  term  purging  may  also  ai)ply  either  to  purgatives  of  the  bowels,  or  to 
those  which  act  upon  the  uterus,  that  is  to  say,  emnienagogues.  In  these  cases 
hellebore  was  used  by  the  Ilippocratists.  (De  Verat.  Us.  i,  11.)  Enimenagogues,  in 
the  form  of  a  pessary,  were  usually  administered  in  like  manner.  See  the  Com- 
mentary on  Paulus  .Egixeta,  Book  III,  61,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

37.  In  a  pregnant  woman,  if  the  breasts  suddenlj^  lose  their 

fulness,  she  has  a  miscarriage. 

The  prognostic  contained  in  this  Aphorism  no  doubt  generally  holds  true,  and  is 
still  much  relied  upon  by  females  themselves.  See  further,  in  connexion  with  this 
Aphorism,  Ai)h.  v,  53;   II  Epid.  i,  42;   I  Morb.  IMulier.  xliv,  i,  2,  3. 

38.  If,  in  a  woman  pregnant  with  twins,  either  of  her  breasts 
lose  its  fulness,  she  will  part  with  one  of  her  children  ;  and  if 
it  be  the  right  breast  which  becomes  slender,  it  will  be  the 
male  child,  or  if  the  left,  the  female. 

This  Aphorism  is  founded  on  the  physiological  notion  which  generally  prevailed 
in  auticpiity,  that  the  uterus  consists  of  two  cavities,  a  right  and  a  left,  and  that  the 
male  fixtus  was  contained  in  the  former,  and  the  female  in  the  latter.  See,  in  par- 
ticular, Theophilus,  ed.  Dietz.,  ii,  p.  469.  However,  Moschion,  Soranus,  and 
Galen  would  a])))ear  to  have  been  better  informed.  See  Comment,  on  Paulus 
.lilGiNETA,  Book  III,  65,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

39.  If  a  woman  who  is  not  with  child,  nor  has  brought  forth, 
have  milk,  her  menses  ai'c  ubsti'uctcd. 


APHORISMS.  715 

Galen  and  Thcophilus  enter  into  a  physiological  explanation  of  the  reason  of  the 
fact  here  stated,  the  summary  of  which  amounts  to  this,  that  there  is  a  strong  sym- 
pathy between  the  uterus  and  mammae,  according  to  Thcopliilus,  owing  to  a  vascular 
connexion  hctwcen  them.  Galen's  Commentary  is  very  interesting,  but  too  lengtliy 
for  my  limits.      Sec  further,  II  Prorrhet.  xxxv,  5. 

40.  In  womeiij  blood  collected  in  the  breasts  indicates 
madness. 

This  prognosis  is  repeated,  Epidem.  ii,  at  the  end.  Galen,  however,  states,  that  he 
had  never  seen  such  a  case,  and  declares  that  if  ever  such  do  occur,  it  must  he  very 
rarely.  But  supposing  it  true,  he  attempts  to  explain  the  rationale  of  it.  A  com- 
mentary published  by  Dictz  (torn,  ii,  p.  4G5)  states,  that  Galen  rejected  this 
Aphorism,  as  being  false  and  supposititious.  I  can  well  believe,  however,  that  it 
refers  to  some  rare  cases  of  puerperal  mania,  which  is  often  connected  with  disorders 
of  the  mamma;. 

41.  If  you  wish  to  ascertain  if  a  woman  be  with  child,  give 
her  hydromel  to  drink  when  she  is  going  to  sleep,  and  has  not 
taken  supper,  and  if  she  be  seized  with  tormina  in  the  belly, 
she  is  with  child,  but  otherwise  she  is  not  pregnant. 

This  test  is  founded  on  the  nervous  irritability  which  is  so  common  in  the  state  of 
pregnancy.  See  also  Steril.  vi,  6,  7,  8,  11.  There  is  some  incongruity,  as  M.  Littre 
remarks,  between  the  text  and  the  Commentary  of  Galen,  which  would  lead  to  the 
supposition  that  the  text  may  be  corrui)ted. 

42.  A  woman  with  child,  if  it  be  a  male,  has  a  good  colour, 

but  if  a  female,  she  has  a  bad  colour. 

Women,  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  still  repose  confidence  in  this  diagnostic 
rule,  and  it  was  admitted  by  all  the  commentators  which  have  come  down  to  us.  It 
is  repeated,  Steril.  vii,  1.     Ambrose  Pare  quotes  it  with  approbation,  (xxiii,  12.) 

43.  If  erysipelas  of  the  womb  seize  a  woman  with  child,  it 
will  probably  prove  fatal. 

Galen  remarks  that  not  only  erysipelas,  but  also  inflammation,  when  it  attacks  the 
impregnated  uterus,  generally  proves  fatal.  In  fact,  as  stated  formerly,  all  acute 
diseases  which  attack  pregnant  women  are  usually  fatal.  See  Aph.  v,  30 ;  I  Morb. 
iii,  9 ;  Natur.  Mul.  xii,  17,  27  ;  II  Morb.  Mul.  Iviii,  12,  29. 

44.  Women  who  are  \  ery  lean,  have  miscarriages  when  they 
prove  with  child,  until  they  get  into  better  condition. 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  Commentary  of  Galen,  that  this  Aphorism  had  been  dif- 
ferently interpreted.  That  in  women  who  are  much  emaciated,  the  fcetus  should 
perish  for  want  of  food  is  a  very  natural  supposition,  and  yet  I  know  from  experience 
that  it  does  not  always  happen.  None  of  the  ancient  authorities,  however,  venture 
to  question  the  truth  of  this  prognostic. 

45.  When  women,  in  a  moderate  condition  of  body,  miscarry 
in  the  second  or  third  month,  without  any  obvious  cause,  their 


746  APHORISMS. 

cotyledones  are  filled  with   mucosity,  and  cannot   support  tlie 
weight  of  the  fcEtus^  but  are  broken  asunder. 

The  term  cotyledones  was  originally  applied  to  the  uterine  glandulre  of  the  sheep, 
with  which  their  placentulaj  are  connected.  It  was  afterwards  applied  also  first  to  the 
ruminants  and  then  to  the  tufts  of  the  human  placenta.  All  the  ancient  physiologists 
believed  that  the  band  of  connexion  between  the  mother  and  the  foetus,  in  ruminants 
and  in  women,  is  analogous.  It  was  supposed,  then,  that  abortion  was  occasioned 
by  the  weakness  and  softness  of  the  parts  which  connect  the  uterus  and  ftetus.  See 
further,  Nat.  Mulier.  xwii,  1-5  ;  I  Morb.  Jlulier.  Ixxxiv,  1,  2,  3. 

46.  Such  women  as  are  immoderately  fat,  aud  do  not  prove 
with  child,  in  them  it  is  because  the  epiploon  {fut?)  blocks 
up  the  mouth  of  the  Avomb,  aud  until  it  be  reduced,  they  do 
not  conceive. 

Our  author  would  seem  to  use  epiploon  here  as  being  synonymous  with  fat,  as  is 
stated  in  the  Commentary  of  Theophilus.  See  further,  Aer.,  Aq.,  Loc,  ix,  12; 
II  Pracdict.  xxxiii,  12  ;  Nat.  Mulieb.  xix,  4,  5,  7  ;  Steril.  x,  7. 

47.  If  the  portion  of  the  uterus  seated  near  the  hip-joint 
suppurate,  it  gets  into  a  state  requiring  to  be  treated  with 
tents. 

Our  author  evidently  treats  of  chronic  abscess  of  the  womb,  which,  as  I  have  seen, 
is  apt  to  end  in  a  sinous  ulcer.  This  is  what  he  means  by  an  ulcer  requiring  to  be 
treated  by  tents.     See  Nat.  ]\lulier.  vi,  5  ;  I  Jlorb.  Mnlicr.  xci,  32. 

48.  The  male  foetus  is  usually  seated  in  the  right,  aud  the 
female  in  the  left  side. 

I  have  referred  to  the  anatomical  opinions  of  the  ancients  with  respect  to  the 
uterus  at  Aph.  v,  38. 

49.  To  procure  the  expulsion  of  the  sccundines,  apply  a 
sternutator}',  and  shut  the  nostrils  aud  mouth. 

This  is  the  popular  practice  in  the  north  of  Scotland  at  the  present  day.  The 
object  evidently  is  to  rouse  the  action  of  the  uterus  and  abdominal  muscles  to 
expel  the  placenta.  Theophilus,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks,  that  if  the  placenta  be 
not  expelled,  it  becomes  putrid,  and  occasions  much  mischief.  See  further,  Aph.  v,  35  ; 
Coac.  iii,  175;  Prainot.  xiii,  11 ;  II  Ei)id.  v,  42;  I  Morb.  Mulier.  Ixxvi,  G,  7,  xciii, 
1,  G,  7 ;    II  Morb.  ]\Iulier.  xliii,  G,  7. 

50.  If  you  wish  to  stop  the   menses   in   a  woman,   apply  as 

large  a  cupping  instrument  as  possible  to  the  breasts. 

I  need  scarcely  remark  that  we  have  here  given  a  most  imjiortant  rule  of  practice, 
founded  on  the  connexion  and  sympathy  between  the  uterus  and  mamma;.  Upon 
this  principle,  as  Ileurnius  in  his  Commentary  remarks,  we  may  see  the  advantage  of 
determining  to  the  maniniie  in  uterine  hemorrhage  after  delivery.  It  is  well  known 
that,  in  modern  i)ractice,  the  child  is  generally  applied,  which  often  proves  very 
efficacious,  by  producing  a  rush  of  fluids  to  tlie  breasts.  On  this  head,  sec  further, 
II  Epid.  vi,  33;    II  Morb.  Mulier.  i,  4,  11,  17. 


APHORISMS.  747 

51.  "Wlicn  women  are  with  child^  tlic  raoutli  of  tlicir  womb  is 

closed. 

Tlie  great  anatomical  authority,  Ilerophilns,  stated,  that  in  pregnancy  the  mouth 
of  the  womh  is  so  closely  shut  up,  that  it  cannot  admit  tlie  end  of  a  probe.  See 
Dietz,  &c.,  torn,  ii,  p.  4  70. 

52.  If  ill   a  woman  with  cliild,   mucli  milk  flow  from   the 

breasts,  it  indicates  that  the  foetus  is  weak  ;  but  if  the  breasts 

be  firm,  it  indicates  that  the  foetus  is  in  a  more  healthy  state. 

This  Aphorism  is  also  evidently  founded  on  the  same  principle.  See  further, 
II  Epid.  vi,  3o,  3G. 

53.  In  women  that  ai'e  about  to  miscarry,  the  breasts  become 

slender;   bat  if  again  they  become   hard,   there  will   be   pain 

either  in  the  breasts,  or  in  the  hip-joints,  or  in  the  eyes,  or  in 

the  knees,  and  they  will  not  miscarry. 

The  drift  of  this  Aphorism  is  somewhat  obscure  to  me,  after  reading  the  elaborate 
Commentaries  of  Galen,  Heurnius,  and  others,  both  ancient  and  modern.  I  am  much 
inclined  to  adopt  one  of  the  interpretations  given  by  Galen,  namely,  that  of  supposing 
that  "  again"  (~uXiv),  in  this  place,  signifies  "  on  the  contraiy,"  and  that  the  swell- 
ing up  of  the  mammae  announces  that  the  danger  of  abortion  is  over,  while  the  pains 
mentioned  in  other  organs  indicate  that  the  mischief  had  passed  to  tiiem.  On  the 
connexion  between  pain  in  the  hip-joint  and  pregnancy,  see  fiu-ther,  II  Epid.  ii,  42. 

54.  AVlien   the    mouth   of    the    uterus    is   hard,   it   is   also 

necessarily  shut. 

Allusion  seems  to  be  here  made  to  amenorrhoea  connected  with  organic  disease  of 
the  uterus.  See  the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus.  Heurnius  holds  this 
to  be  a  very  important  Aphorism,  as  it  indicates  the  source  of  the  many  bad  con- 
sequences which  -women  experience  from  retention  of  the  menses  connected  with  a 
cause  which  the  obstetric  practitioner  has  it  in  his  power  to  remove.  See  further, 
II  Morb.  iMulier.  xlv,  II,  12,  xlvi,  1,  2,  1,  1,  2. 

55.  Women  with  child  who  are  seized  Avith  fevers,  and  who 
are  greatly  emaciated,  without  any  (other?)  obvious  cause,  have 
difiKcult  and  dangerous  labours,  and  if  thev  miscarry,  they  are 
in  danger. 

Upon  reference  to  Galen,  Theophilus,  Heurnius,  and  Littre,  it  will  be  seen  that 
there  is  considerable  uncertainty  respecting  the  meaning  of  this  Aphorism.  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  what  is  meant  is  this,  that  pregnant  women  who  are  greatly 
emaciated  by  fevers  are  apt  to  have  either  dangerous  deliveries  or  abortions.  Com- 
pare Aph.  V,  30,  43  ;   Coac.  iii,  408. 

56.  In  the  female  flux  [iminoderate  menstruation'/),  if  con- 
Avulsion  and  deliquium  come  on,  it  is  bad. 

The  terra  "female  tlux"  was  api)licd  by  the  ancient  authorities  to  any  vitiated 
state  of  the  menstrual  discharge.      See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  ^-EGiNErA, 


748  APHORISMS. 

Book  III,  63,  Syd.  See.  edit.  The  danger  from  convulsions  and  deliciiiiiim,  in  sucli 
cases,  is  well  understood.  See,  in  connexion  with  tliis  Aphorism,  Aph.  v,  3  ;  Coac. 
iii,  424 ;    II  Morb.  Mulier.  xiii,  7,  9. 

57.  When  the   menses   are  excessive,   diseases  take   place, 

and  when  the   menses  are  stopped,    diseases  from  the   uterus 

take  phice. 

This  Aphorism  is  rather  ambiguously  expressed,  as  may  be  seen  on  reference  to 
the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus.  Perhaps  all  that  is  meant  is,  that  dis- 
eases are  engendered  both  by  immoderate  menstruation  and  by  a  stoppage  of  the 
same.  There  are  many  parallel  passages  in  the  Hippocratic  Collection,  such  as  Nat. 
Mul.  xiii,  5,  xxxix,  1,  2,  5,  6,  xl,  2,  5,  G;  I  Morb.  Mulier.  xiv,  1,  12;  II  Morb. 
Mulier.  iii,  v,  vi,  &c;  Nat.  Puer.  vi,  14,  xiii,  1;  Virg.  Morb.  ii,  5-14;  Nat.  Mul. 
iii,  1,  X,  1-5. 

58.  Strangury  supervenes  upon  inflammation  of  the  rectum, 
and  of  the  womb,  and  strangury  supervenes  upon  suppuration  of 
the  kidney,  and  hiccup  upon  inflammation  of  the  liver. 

This  important  Aphorism  is  so  plain  as  not  to  stand  in  need  of  any  comment.  See 
further,  in  connexion  with  it,  Hemorrhoid,  iii,  1,  iv,  1;  Aph.  vii,  13;  Int.  Affect, 
xli,  6. 

59.  If  a  woman  do  not  conceive,  and  wish  to  ascertain 
Avhethcr  she  can  conceive,  having  wrapped  her  up  in  blankets, 
fumigate  ])elow,  aud  if  it  appear  that  the  scent  passes  through 
the  body  to  the  nostrils  and  mouth,  know  that  of  herself  she 
is  not  unfruitful. 

This  jiractice  of  fumigating  the  uterus,  either  on  account  of  the  state  of  the  men- 
strual discharge,  or  for  the  purpose  here  indicated,  is  adverted  to  in  various  parts  of 
the  Hippocratic  treatises;  as  Nat.  Mul.  vii,  9;  I  Morb.  Mul.  cvii,  1  ;  II  Morb.  Mul. 
xl,  20,  21 ;  Steril.  vi,  3:  Supcrfcet.  ix,  3,  x,  9,  11.  Tlicoiibilus  describes  the  i)rocess 
very  minutely,  but  it  will  readily  be  understood  that  it  consisted  in  introducing  the 
fumes  of  strong-smelling  things,  such  as  frankincense,  spikenard,  cassia,  and  storax, 
into  the  vagina  by  means  of  a  funnel.  As  a  remedial  means  in  certain  diseases  of  the 
uterus,  I  can  tliink  of  nothing  more  likely  to  prove  efficacious.  Whether  or  not  it  would 
]>rove  a  suitable  test  of  a  woman's  capa])ility  for  conceiving,  I  am  not  able  either  to 
affirm  or  deny.     As  Galen  remarks,  Plato  refers  to  this  practice  in  his  ThccEtetus. 

60.  If  woman  with  a  child  have  her  courses^  it  is  impossible 

that  the  child  can  be  healthy. 

See,  in  connexion  with  this  Aphorism,  Nat.  Puer.  v,  3  ;  I  Morb.  Mul.  xl,  2,  5, 9,  11, 
xliv,  4,  5,  6,  xcix,  2.  Theophilus  has  a  very  interesting  Commentary  on  this  head, 
in  which  he  states  that  it  is  a  fact  ascertained  by  experience,  that,  during  pregnancy, 
there  is  sometimes  a  discbarge  up  to  the  fifth  or  sixth  month  ;  Ijut,  he  properly  re- 
marks, in  such  a  case  the  blood  does  not  come  from  the  inside  of  the  uterus,  but 
from  the  veins  situated  in  the  neck  of  it.  Galon  expresses  himself  to  the  same  effect, 
but  not  so  fullv. 


APIIORISMf^.  710 

61.  If  a  woman^s  courses  be  suppressed,  and   neither   rigor 

nor  fever  has  followed,  but  she  has  been  affected  with  nausea, 

you  may  reckon  her  to  be  with  chihl. 

I  need  scarcely  remark  that,  as  a  general  rule,  what  is  here  stated  by  our  author 
holds  good.     See  further,  Aiili.  v,  41 ;    I  Morb.  Mulier.  xcix,  2 ;    Steril.  vi,  9,  10. 

62.  Women  who  liave  the  uterus  cold  and  dense  [cotiipact?) 

do  not  conceive;  and  those  also  who  have  the  uterus  humid,  do 

not  conceive,  for  the  semen  is  extinguished,  and  in  women  whose 

uterus  is  very  dry,  and  very  hot,    the  semen  is  lost  from  the 

want  of  food  ;   but  women  whose  uterus  is  in  an  intermediate 

state  between  these  temperaments  prove  fertile. 

The  principal  cause  of  sterility,  it  will  be  remarked,  is  here  held  to  be  the  inteni- 
peraments  of  the  uterus.  Galen  has  given  a  very  lengthy  dissertation  on  this  subject 
in  his  Commentary,  and  the  subsequent  authorities  all  adopt  the  views  of  our  author. 
See  Paulus  ^Egineta,  Book  III,  74,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  Compare  I  Morb.  Mulier. 
xxvi,  27,  xxxiii,  5,  xxxiv,  1 ;    II  Predict,  xxxiii,  2-6. 

63.  And  in  like  manner  with  respect  to  males ;   for  eitlier, 

owing    to   the  laxity  of    the   body,  the  pneuma  is  dissipated 

outwardly,  so  as   not  to  propel    the  semen,   or,   owing  to   its 

density,  the  fluid  {semen  ?)  does  not  pass  outwardly;  or,  owing 

to  coldness,  it  is  not  heated  so  as  to  collect  in  its  proper  place 

{seminal  vessels?),  or,  owing  to  its  heat,  the  very  same  thing 

happens. 

Galen  finds  many  things  in  this  Aphorism  altogether  foreign  to  the  doctrines  of 
Hijjpocrates,  and,  in  a  word,  does  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  to  be  supposititious. 
Theophilus  and  Damascius  adopt  the  same  views  as  Galen  regarding  it. 

64.  It  is  a  bad  thing  to  give  milk  to  persons  having  head- 
ache, and  it  is  also  bad  to  give  it  in  fevers,  and  to  persons 
whose  hypochondria  are  swelled  up,  and  troubled  with  bor- 
borygmi,  and  to  thirsty  persons  ;  it  is  bad  also,  when  given  to 
those  Avho  have  bilious  discharges  in  acute  fevers,  and  to  those 
who  have  copious  discharges  of  blood;  but  it  is  suitable  in 
phthisical  cases,  when  not  attended  with  very  much  fever;  it  is 
also  to  be  given  in  fevers  of  a  chronic  and  weak  nature,  when 
none  of  the  aforementioned  symptoms  are  present,  and  the 
patients  are  excessively  emaciated. 

I  need  scarcely  call  attention  to  this  Aphorism  as  containing  most  excellent  rules 
for  the  use  of  a  very  important  article,  both  in  regimen  and  medicine.  Milk,  it  will 
be  seen,  is  said  to  be  prejudicial  in  febrile  and  bilious  complaints ;  but  is  beneficial  in 
phthisical  cases,  and  when  there  is  much  emaciation  without  any  acute  fever.  See,  in 
connexion  with  this  subject,  III  Epid.  iii ;    /F.gr.  xiii,  7  ;   I  Morb.  Mulier.  Ixxxviii,  22 ; 


750  APHORISMS. 

Aph.  iv,  73  ;  Int.  Aft'ect.  iv,  35,  xi,  2  ;  II  Morb.  Mul.  viii,  21 ;  also  the  Commentaries 
of  Galen  and  Theophilus,  which  are  interesting,  although  they  contain  no  new  views 
on  the  subject. 

65.  When  swellings  appear  on  wounds^  sucli  cases  are  not 
likely  to  be  attacked  either  with  convulsions  or  delirium^  but 
when  these  disappear  suddenly,  if  situated  behind,  spasms  and 
tetanus  supervene,  and  if  before,  mania,  acute  pains  of  the 
sides,  or  suppurations,  or  dysentery,  if  the  swellings  be  rather 
red. 

This  Aphorism  evidently  relates  to  the  consequences  of  metastasis  in  wounds,  or 
ulcers.  It  is  founded  on  II  Epidem.  iii,  129,  and  is  thus  translated  by  Celsus  :  "  Si 
tumores  super  ulcera  subito  esse  desierunt,  idque  a  tergo  incidit,  vel  distensio 
nervorum,  vel  rigor  timeri  potest;  et  si  a  priore  parte  id  evenit,  vel  lateris  acutus 
dolor,  vel  insania  expectanda  est ;  interdum  etiara  ejusniodi  casum,  qass  tutissima 
inter  hajc  est,  profusio  alvi  sequitur."  (ii,  7.)  The  greatest  difficulty  about  it  is  the 
distinction  which  is  recognised  among  the  affections  according  as  the  wound  is  situ- 
ated in  the  fore  or  back  part  of  the  body.  Galen  says,  in  explanation,  that  the  back 
parts  are  nervous,  and  hence  the  affections  are  spasm  and  tetanus ;  while  the  fore 
parts  are  vascular,  that  is  to  say,  contain  many  arteries  and  veins ;  and  hence,  when 
the  metastasis  is  upwards,  it  produces  mania;  when  to  the  chest,  pleurisy  and  em- 
pyema ;  and  when  to  the  bowels,  bloody  dysentery,  that  is  to  say,  an  evacuation  of 
pure  blood  by  the  bowels.  See  Paulus  /Egineta,  B.  111,42.  See  the  Annotations 
of  M.  Nasse  on  this  passage  in  M.  Littre's  edition,  torn,  iv,  p.  550,  which,  however, 
do  not  appear  to  me  to  throw  much  light  on  the  subject  of  this  Aphorism. 

66.  When  no  swelling  appears  on  severe  and  bad  wounds,  it 
is  a  great  evil. 

See  II  Epidem.  iii,  128,  xxiii,  1.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  explains  that  l)y 
"bad"  is  meant,  in  this  jdace,  woimds  situated  in  nervous  and  muscular  parts, 
wounds  of  which,  it  is  well  known,  are  apt  to  prove  dangerous.  This  Aphorism  is 
evidently  connected  with  the  preceding  one. 

67.  In  such  cases,  the  soft  are  favorable ;  and  crude,  •un- 
favorable. 

This  Aj)horism  is  also  clearly  connected  with  the  tv^o  preceding.  By  "crude"  is 
meant  tumours  which  are  bard,  and  have  not  come  to  a  suppuration. 

68.  When  a  person  is  pained  in  the  back  part  of  the  head, 

he   is  benefited  by  having  the  straight  vein   in   the  forehead 

opened. 

This  practice  is  also  alluded  to  at  Loc.  in  Homine,  xlix,  10;  VI  Epid.  ii,  48 ; 
Affect,  ii,  10,  11.  The  practice  here  recommended  is  founded  on  the  principle  of 
evacuation  by  revulsion.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  mentions,  that,  from  analogy,  he 
bad  often  bled  by  cupping  the  back  part  of  the  head  in  the  affections  of  the  eye.  By 
"  the  straight  vein  in  the  forehead"  our  author  evidently  means  either  the  temporal 
vein  or  artery ;  but  which  of  these,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  as  he  apphes  the  term 


APHORISMS.  7'>l 

vein  (^X«4')  '"  the  modern  sense  of  "  blood-vessel."    See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus 
^Egineta,  B.  VI,  5,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

C9.  Rigors  commence  in  women,  especially  at  the  loins,  and 
spread  by  the  back  to  tlie  head  ;  and  in  men  also,  rather  in 
the  posterior  than  the  anterior  side  of  the  l)ody,  as  from  the 
arms  and  thighs;  the  skin  there  is  rare,  as  is  obvious  from  the 
growth  of  hair  on  them. 

See  II  Epid.  iii,  111;  VI  Epid.  iii,  30-35;  Nat.  Tuer.  xvii,  2,  3,  14,  xviii,  1. 
There  is  considerable  ambiguity  in  this  sentence,  on  which  compare  the  Commentaries 
of  Galen  and  Theophilus  with  the  Annotations  of  M.  Littre  (tom.  iv,  |).  5G1).  In 
my  opinion  the  meaning  is  this : — rigors  conuueuce  in  those  parts  of  the  body  which 
are  coldest,  as  the  back  in  women,  and  back  parts  of  the  arms  and  legs  in  men  ; 
that  tlie  back  parts  are  coldest  is  evident  from  their  rarity,  as  not  being  covered 
witli  hair  so  much  as  the  anterior  parts. 

70.  Persons  attacked  with  quartans  are  not  readily  attacked 

Avith   convulsions,   or  if  previously  attacked  with   convulsions, 

they  cease  if  a  quartan  supervene. 

This  Aphorism  is  founded  ujion  a  highly  important  principle  which  our  author 
announces  elsewhere,  namely,  that  a  quartan  fever  is  not  only  free  of  danger  itself, 
but  often  carries  otf  other  serious  diseases  of  the  system,  I  Epidem.  iii,  18.  In  con- 
nexion with  this  important  fact  in  therapeutics,  consult  further,  Aph.  ii,  26  ;  VI  Epid. 
vi,  16,  viii,  96,  97;  San.  Tuend.  12  ;  Aph.  iv,  57.  The  commentator  Damascius 
by  convulsions  here  understands  epilepsy,  and  all  the  commentators  explain  the  cure 
in  this  case  upon  the  principle,  that  the  viscid  and  pituitous  humour  which  occasions 
the  convulsion  is  excreted  and  concocted  by  the  fever.  In  a  word,  our  author  means 
that  the  fever  proves  an  alterative  of  the  system.  I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  this 
subject,  that  is  to  say,  the  removing  of  fatal  diseases  by  the  substitution  of  others  less 
dangerous,  has  been  lately  attracting  the  attention  of  the  profession. 

71.  In  those  persons  in  whom   the  skin  is  stretched,  and 

parched  and  hard,  tlie  disease  terminates  Avithout  sweats  ;    but 

in  those  in  whom  the  skin  is  loose  and  rare,  it  terminates  with 

sweats. 

Theophilus  applies  this  observation  both  to  favorable  and  fatal  crises,  but  Galen 
restricts  it  to  the  latter.  Heurnius  and  Littre  follow  Galen.  See  further,  VI  Epidem. 
vi,  29. 

72.  Persons   disposed   to  jaundice  are   not   very  subject   to 

flatulence. 

The  reason  of  this,  assigned  by  Galen,  is,  that  flatulence  is  engendered  by  a  pituitous 
humour,  whereas  icterus  is  of  a  bilious  nature.  Heurnius  understands  the  Aphorism 
to  refer  to  persons  of  a  bilious  temperament. 


I'^'l 


APHORISMS. 


SECTION     VI. 


1.  In  cases  of  chronic  lientery,  acid  eructations  supervening 

when  there  were  none  previously,  is  a  good  symptom. 

See  further  II  Ejjid.  49,  50,  51  ;  I  Morb.  vi,  10.  By  lientery  was  meant  a  rapid 
passage  of  undigested  food  through  the  bowels,  as  is  fully  explained  by  Galen  in  his 
elaborate  Commentary,  whicli  contains  a  great  variety  of  interesting  matters  regarding 
the  opinions  of  Erasistratus,  Ilerophilus,  Diodes,  and  other  of  the  ancient  commenta- 
tors, but  little  that  bears  on  the  subject  in  question.  The  rationale  of  the  fact  stated 
in  this  Aphorism  would  appear  to  l)e,  as  stated  by  Jacobus  Forliviensis  in  his  Com- 
mentary, that  lientery  being  a  preternatural  determination  of  the  matters  downwards, 
acid  eructations  indicate  that  the  stomach  is  resuming  its  tone.  On  lienterj-,  see  further, 
Paulus  iEciNETA,  Book  III,  50,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

2.  Persons  whose  noses  are  naturally  watery,  and  their  seed 

watery,  have  rather  a  deranged  state  of  health  ;   but  those  in 

the  opposite  state,  a  more  favorable. 

That  is  to  say,  as  Galen  in  his  Commentary  explains,  persons  of  a  humid  tempera- 
ment are  subject  from  slight  causes  to  catarrhal  affections  in  the  head,  throat,  and 
lungs,  and  perhaps  to  dysenteries.  He  adds,  that  this  subject  is  treated  of  in 
the  work,  On  Airs,  Waters,  and  Places,  and  in  those  On  Diseases,  and  On  Aifections. 
See  further,  VI  Epid.  vi,  37. 

3.  In  protracted  cases  of  dysentery,  loathing  of  food  is  a 

bad  symptom,  and  still  worse,  if  along  with  fever. 

As  Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  remarks,  the  anorexia  indicates  that  the  intestinal 
derangement  extends  upwards  as  far  as  tlie  stomach.  A  fever  of  course  adds  an 
additional  feature  to  the  unfavorable  aspect  of  the  case.  See  further,  VI  Epid.  viii, 
1  ;    Coac.  vi,  100. 

4.  Ulcers,  attended  with  a  falling  off  of  the  hair,  are  maVi 
moris. 

The  falling  oft"  of  the  hair,  as  Galen  remarks,  indicates  that  the  humours  causing 
the  ulcer  are  of  a  very  vitiated  nature.     See  further,  VI  Epid.  viii,  2. 

5.  It  deserves  to  be  considered  whether  the  pains  in  the  sides, 
and  in  the  breasts,  and  in  the  other  parts,  differ  much  from  one 
another. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  the  question  here  put  is  one  of  vital  importance  intlie 
treatment  of  diseases.  It  is  previously  alluded  to,  as  Galen  remarks,  in  the  work 
On  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases.  See  Hi,  1,  2,  3,  ed.  Linden  ;  also  VI  Epid.  vi,  83  ; 
and  II  Picedic.  xvii,  4,  xix,  6,  7,  xx  4.  Galen  under  this  head  has  many  interesting 
observations  on  the  nature  of  pain,  and  the  different  kinds  of  it,  but  they  are  too 
lengthy  for  my  limits.  Theophilus  remarks,  that  Hippocrates  evidently  recognised 
diagnosis  as  the  foundation  of  therajjcutics.    See  further  Littre. 


APHORISMS.  7.03 

6.  Diseases  about  the  kidneys  and  bladder  arc  cured  witli 
dilliculty  in  old  men. 

Galen  remarks,  that  the  office  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder  being  incessant,  these 
parts,  if  diseased,  having  no  rest,  can  scarcely  get  well  when  in  state  of  ulceration, 
or  when  inflamed,  especially  in  old  persons.  The  fact  here  stated  is  but  too  well 
known.     See  further,  VI  Epid.  viii,  1. 

7.  Pains  occurring  about  the  stomach,  the  more  superficial 

they  are,  the  more  slight  are  they ;   and  the  less  superficial,  the 

more  severe. 

The  meaning  seemingly  is,  that  in  diseases  about  the  epigastric  region,  the  more 
superficial  they  are,  that  is  to  say,  the  nearer  to  the  surface,  they  are  in  so  far  less 
serious.  Galen  remarks,  that  all  diseases  situated  external  to  the  peritoneum  are  held 
to  be  superficial.  No  practical  i)hysician  will  doubt  the  importance  of  the  fact  indi- 
cated in  this  Aphorism ;  for  who  has  not  seen  an  incipient  abscess  in  the  abdominal 
muscles  confounded  with  serious  disease  of  the  deeper-seated  parts  ? 

8.  In  dropsical  persons,  ulcers  forming  on  the  body  are  not 
easilv  healed. 

This  is  a  well-known  fact,  and  the  Aphorism  needs  no  comment.  Ileurnius,  how- 
ever, properly  remarks,  that  this  should  render  the  physician  cautious  in  forming 
artificial  ulcers  in  dropsical  patients,  as  he  had  known  such  terminate  in  gangrene. 

9.  Broad  exanthemata  are  not  verj^  itchy. 

It  is  difficult  to  determine  what  disease js  here  meant  by  exanthema;  most  pro- 
bably, however,  it  was  a  pustular  disease,  as  understood  by  Jacobus  Forliviensis  and 
Heurnius.  The  former  of  these  insinuates  that  it  was  scabies ;  and  this  conjecture  is 
in  so  far  applicable,  that  the  kind  of  itch  in  which  the  pustules  are  small,  is  known 
to  be  attended  with  more  tingling  than  when  the  pustules  are  broader.  The  Com- 
mentaries of  Galen,  Theophilus,  and  Damascius  supply  no  information  of  any  interest. 
See  further,  VI  Epid.  ii,  52. 

10.  In  a  person  having  a  painful  spot  in  the  head,  with  in- 
tense cephalalgia,  pus  or  water  running  from  the  nose,  or  by 
the  mouth,  or  at  the  ears,  removes  the  disease. 

This  Aphorism  occurs  again  at  Judicat.  xii,  3,  See  further,  Coac.  ii,  25,  26,  27,  59. 
Three  natural  modes  of  cure  in  severe  cephalalgia  are  here  indicated,  namely,  a  dis- 
charge by  the  nose,  the  ears,  and  the  mouth.  Heurnius  remarks,  that  this  fact  has 
furnished  a  hint  towards  the  artificial  modes  of  cure  now  a<lopted. 

11.  Hemorrhoids   appearing   in   melancholic   and   nephritic 

affections  are  favorable. 

The  truth  of  the  fact  announced  in  this  Aphorism  is  not  questioned  by  any  of  the 
ancient  authorities,  and  is  further  attested  by  many  modern,  such  as  Plater,  Obs.i,  1 ; 
A.  Vega,  de  Art.  Med.  ii,  4  ;  Zacut.  Lusit.  Prax.  Hist,  ii,  6  ;  Primros.  de  Vulg. 
Error,  iv,  51;  Hoistius,  ii,  7;  Salmuth.  i,  72;  River.  Prax.  xi,  6;  Albertus  de 
Hsemorrh.  See  further,  in  confirmation  of  our  author's  opinion,  Copland's  Dictionary, 
art.  Haemorrhoids,  p.  128. 

48 


754  APHORISMS. 

12.  When  a  person  has  been  cured  of  chronic  hemorrhoids, 
unless  one  be  left^  there  is  danger  of  dropsy  or  phthisis  super- 
vening. 

See  the  authorities  quoted  under  the  preceding  Aphorism  ;  also  Humor,  xi,  3  ;  IV 
Epid.  xxxi,  1,2;  V  Epid.  x,  18-21 ;  VI  Epid.  iii,  Go.  The  ancient  commentators 
explain  the  fact,  upon  the  hypothesis  that  the  hemorrhoidal  discharge  is  an  effort  of 
Nature  to  relieve  the  system  of  impurities,  and  that  when  the  outlet  is  entirely  stopped, 
they  are  determined  either  to  the  liver,  and  produce  dropsy,  or  to  the  Inngs,  and  pro- 
duce phthisis.     See  Galen  and  Theopliilus. 

13.  Sneezing  coming  on,  in  the  case  of  a  person  afflicted  with 

hiccup,  removes  the  hiccup. 

See  further  Prrenot.  xiii,  11;  Coac.  iii,  175;  Celsus,  ii,  8.  The  ancient  com- 
mentators state,  that  hiccup  is  a  spasmodic  affection  of  the  stomach,  conuected  either 
with  repletion  or  inanition.  The  present  Aphorism  refers  to  it  .when  connected  with 
plethora.     The  fact  here  stated  is  notorious. 

If.    In  a  case  of  dropsy,  when  the  water  run^  by  the  veins 

into  the  belly,  it  removes  the  disease. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  the  fact  here  stated  is  a  most  important  one,  namely, 
that  dropsy  is  cured  naturally  hy  a  spontaneous  discharge  of  water  from  the  howels. 
As  stated  hy  Galen,  the  cure  of  dropsy  In"  hydragogucs  is  founded  on  it.  Of  tliese, 
the  most  efficacious  are  said  by  lleurnius  to  he  elaterium  and  euphorliium.  See  his 
Commentary  on  this  Aphorism.  Compare  Aph.  vii,  29  ;  Flat,  xvii,  8,  9 ;  Judical,  xi,  10  ; 
Coac.  iii,  285,  289 ;  I  3\Iorh.  vi,  7 ;  II  Morb.  Ixix,  11,12. 

15.  In   confirmed   diarrhoea,   vomiting,   when   it  comes  on 

spontaneously,  removes  the  diarrhoea. 

As  Galen  states  in  his  Commentary,  this  is  an  example  of  a  natural  cure,  upon  the 
principle  of  revulsion.  See  further,  II  JYixt.  xxvi,  15,  IG;  Loc.  iu  Hom.  xlv,  8; 
Coac.  iii,  7  ;  I  ^lorb.  vi,  10 ;  vii,  7  ;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8. 

16.  A  diarrhoja  supervening  in  a  confirmed  case  of  pleurisy 

or  pneumonia  is  bad. 

Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  makes  the  acide  remark,  that  although  in  an  incipient 
attack  of  pleurisy  or  pneumonia  a  diarrhoea  may  jirove  critical,  in  a  case  where  the 
patient  is  mastered  hy  the  disease,  a  diarrhoea  may  Ije  set  down  as  being  occasioned 
hy  the  liver's  sympathising  with  the  organs  of  respiration,  and  the  process  of  sanguifi- 
cation being  tlius  deranged,  Nature  makes  an  effort  to  expel  the  depraved  huuiours 
])y  the  intestines.  The  explanation  given  by  the  other  commentators,  ancient  and 
modern,  is  to  tlie  same  effect.  See  further,  Aph.  v,  12,  14;  Loc.  in  Hom.  xxix, 
15,  IG,  17  ;  I  Morh.  vi,  5,  x,  41  ;  III  Morb.  xvii,  59. 

17.  It  is  a  good  thing  iu  ophthalmy  for  the  patient  to  be 

seized  with  diarrhoea. 

Every  experienced  physician  must  be  able  to  confirm  the  truth  of  this  remark. 
Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  states  that,  in  imitation  of  this  natural  metliod  of  cure, 
physicians  were  iu  the  practice  of  determining  to  the  bowels  by  clysters  and  purga- 
tives.    See  further,  Jiulicat.  xii,  9 ;  Coac.  ii,  130,  133. 


APHORISMS.  755 

18.  A  severe  wound  of  the  bladder,  of  the  braiu,  of  the 
heart,  of  the  diaphragm,  of  the  small  intestines,  of  the  stomach, 
and  of  the  liver,  is  deadly. 

Galen,  in  his  Commentary  on  this  Aphorism,  gives  a  variety  of  interesting  remarks, 
which  I  regret  that  my  limits  do  not  admit  of  my  copying  entire.  He  states,  in  the  first 
place,  that  the  term  used  by  our  author  in  this  place  signifies  a  great  or  severe  wound, 
and  that  the  epithet  "  deadly"  is  often  applied  in  the  sense  of  "  very  dangerous."  He 
further  remarks,  that  although  wounds  of  the  heart  and  diaphragm  he  necessarily  fatal, 
those  of  the  brain,  the  liver,  the  bowels,  and  the  bladder  are  not  necessarily  so.  In  proof 
of  this,  he  mentions  cases  of  wounds  of  the  brain  which  lie  had  known  not  to  prove 
fatal,  and  refers  to  the  operation  of  lithotomy,  as  a  proof  that  the  muscular  part  of 
the  bladder,  that  is  to  say,  its  neck,  may  be  cut  without  occasioning  death.  The 
other  commentators  add  nothing  of  much  interest.  See  further,  Aph.  vi,  24 ; 
II  Prcxdict.  xix,  2-6,  11,  12,  xxii,  1;  Coac.  iii,  387,  388,  389;  I  Morb.  iii,  4, 
vii,  21 ;  and  Cclsus,  v,  20.  This  commentary  is  well  illustrated  l)y  Tagaultius, 
De  Vuhier.  ii,  and  also  by  Dinus  de  Garbo,  in  his  Commentary  on  Aviceuna,  ed. 
Venet.  p.  59. 

19.  When  a  bone,  cartilage,  nerve,  the  slender  part  of  the 
jaw,  or  prepuce,  are  cut  out,  the  part  is  neither  restored,  nor 
does  it  unite. 

Galen,  Theophilus,  and  Damascius  understand  the  meaning  of  this  Aphorism  to 
be,  that  when  any  portion  of  a  bone,  or  other  part  here  enumerated,  is  fairly  taken 
away,  the  substance  by  which  the  loss  is  supplied  is  not  exactly  the  same  as  the  part 
which  is  lost.  For  example,  callus  is  not  exactly  bone.  Still  Galen  .admits  that 
there  is  some  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  terms  used  by  our  author  with  the  facts 
of  the  case.  See  further,  Aph.  vii,  28  ;  Coac.  iii,  379-382 ;  II  Predict,  xxiv,  1  ; 
I  Morb.  iii,  32,  33 ;  vii,  21 ;  Celsus,  ii,  10  ;  Aristot.  H.  N.  i,  13.  Tagaultius  makes 
some  good  remarks  on  this  Aphorism.  He  holds  that  it  is  meant  that  a  part  is  fairly 
cut  out.   (Inst.  Cbirurg.  ii.) 

20.  If  blood  be  poured  out  preternaturally  into  a  cavity,  it 
must  necessarily  become  corrupted. 

By  cavity  in  this  place  is  to  be  understood,  as  elsewhere,  not  only  the  stomach,  but 
the  chest,  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,  &c.  Our  author,  like  all  the  ancient  authorities, 
holds  that  pus  is  corrupted  blood.  See  further,  Aph.  vii,  38  ;  Flat,  xvii,  3 ;  I  Morb. 
iii,  37,  X,  42-48,  xii,  4,  xv,  4  ;  Celsus,  ii,  7. 

21.  In  maniacal  affections,  if  varices  or  hemorrhoids  come 
on,  thev  remove  the  mania. 

All  the  commentators  are  agreed  that  by  maniacal  affections  in  this  place  our 
author  understands  melaucholy.  The  cure  is  to  be  referred  to  the  principle  of 
metastasis.     See  further,  Aph.  vii,  5  ;  Humor,  xi,  1. 

22.  Those  ruptures  in  the  back  which  spread  down  to  the 
elbows  are  removed  by  venesection. 

By  ruptures  in  this  place  Galen  understands  pains ;   and  Theophilus  has  tliis 


756  APHORISMS. 

reading.      That  these  severe  pains  will  he  removed  hy  bleeding,  on  the  principle  of 
revulsion,  seems  very  likely.     See  further,  II  Morh.  lix,  22  ;  Cclsus,  ii,  10. 

f       23,   If  a  fright  or  despondency  last  for  a  long  timCj  it  is  a 
melancholic  affection. 

That  mental  emotions,  when  long  protracted,  are  morhid,  may  generally  be  con- 
cluded; and  in  such  cases,  the  ancients  ascribed  the  disease  to  the  melancholic 
humour.     See  Galen  and  the  other  commentators. 

24.   If  any  of  the  small  intestines  be  transfixed,   it  docs  not 

unite. 

This  is  a  mere  repetition  of  the  general  statement  made  in  Aph.  vi,  18  ;  and  Galen 
thinks  the  present  Ai)horism  deserves  to  be  erased. 

2.5.  It  is  not  a  good  sign  for  an  erysipelas  spreading  out- 
wardly^ to  he  determined  inwards ;  but  for  it  to  be  determined 
outwards  from  within  is  good. 

This  is  an  inii)ortant  and  now  generally  admitted  fact.  Consult,  in  particular, 
Copland's  Dictionary  of  Medicine,  under  Erysipelas,  §  33.  Sec  further,  Prffinot. 
vii,  3,  xxiii,  0  ;  Coac.  iii,  103  ;  I  Morb.  vi,  8,  f) ;  and  Aph.  vi,  37. 

26.  In  whatever  cases   of  ardent   fever  tremors  occur,  they 

are  carried  off  by  a  delirium. 

(ialcn  is  not  at  all  satisfied  with  this  Aphorism,  and  bints  at  its  beirig  an  interpo- 
lation. At  all  events,  he  states  that  it  is  well  known  that  a  delirium  coming  on  after 
shivering  in  fevers,  does  not  carry  off  the  fever,  so  that  he  holds  the  meaning  must  be 
understood  to  be  that  the  tremors  are  replaced  l)y  the  delirium,  that  is  to  say, 
delirium  succeeds  to  the  tremors.  He  and  Theophilus  attempt  to  explain  the 
rationale  of  this  rule  physiologically,  llcurnius  entertains  the  notion  (but  it  appears 
to  me  fanciful)  that  Hippocrates  in  this  case  uses  the  words  "  carries  off"  (A Afi) 
ironically,  and  that  he  means  that  the  delirium  carries  off  the  patient,  not  the  disease. 

27.  Those  cases  of  empyema  or  dropsy  which  are  treated  by 
incision  or  the  cautery,  if  tlie  water  or  pus  flow  rapidly  all  at 
once,  certainly  prove  fatal. 

This,  I  need  scarcely  remark,  is  a  most  important  rule  in  practical  surgery.  By 
empyema,  as  Galen  remarks,  our  author  jmncipally  means  a  collection  of  matter 
between  the  thorax  and  the  lungs.  (See  the  Annotations  on  the  Prognostics.)  lie 
and  Theoj)hilus  account  for  the  fatal  termination,  upon  the  principle  that  a  great 
evacuation  of  the  fluids  is  attended  with  a  fatal  loss  of  the  animal  and  vital  spirits. 
On  the  subject  of  empyema  and  ascites,  see  further,  Aph.  ii,  51,  vii,  44;  Coac.  iii, 
91,  92  ;  II  Morb.  xlv,  24-28  ;  III  Morb.  xxvii,  1,  8,  14  ;  Int.  Affect.  iv,30,  x,  20-23, 
XXV,  30-3G,  xxvii,  5  ;  VI  Epid.  vii,  G2  ;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8. 

28.  Eunuchs  do  not  take  the  gont,  nor  become  bald. 

According  to  Galen,  the  reason  is,  that  eunuchs,  by  being  emasculated,  become  of 
cold  temperament  like  women.  He  states,  however,  that  although  it  was  true  that 
in  the  age  of  Hippocrates  eunuchs  did  not  take  the  gout,  they  were  exposed  to  the 
disease  in  his  time,  owing  to  their  indolence  and  eflfcminacy.  lie  gives  a  most  ingenious 


APHORISMS.  757 

and  philosophical  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  disease,  which  he  ascribes  to 
debauchery,  iiiteniperance,  and  an  hereditary  taint.  Tiic  freedom  of  eunuchs  from 
baldness,  the  commentators  ascribe  in  like  manner  to  the  coldness  of  their  tempera- 
ment.    See  further,  Nat.  Puer.  xviii,  1,  T),  C,  xix,  1 ;  Cclsus,  iv,  21. 

29.  A  woman  docs  not  take  tlie  gout,  uuless  her  menses  be 
stopped. 

Galen,  in  his  Commentary,  states  that,  in  his  age,  women,  from  excess  of  luxury, 
had  become  subject  to  tlie  gout;  and  Seneca  aflirnis  the  same  of  his  age.  (Epid.  xcv.) 
See  V  Epid.  xxxiii,  4 ;  VI  Epid.  viii,  U8-101 ;  YII  Epid.  xlix,  12  ;  I  Morb.  Mulier. 
xiii,  G,  11. 

30.  A  young  man  docs  not  take  the  gout  until  he  indulges 
in  coition. 

This  will  still  be  generally  admitted  to  be  true.  All  the  ancient  authorities  hold 
that  venery  is  a  great  predisposing  cause  of  gout. 

31.  Pains  of  the  eyes   are  removed  by  drinking  pure  Avine, 

or  the  bath,  or  a  fomentation,  or  venesection,  or  purging. 

This  Aphorism  contains,  as  Galen  remarks,  an  empirical  enumeration  of  the  various 
means  used  for  the  cure  of  ophthalmy.  lie  gives  some  most  interesting  observations 
on  the  subject  in  his  Commentary,  which,  however,  is  so  lengthy,  that  I  cannot  in- 
troduce its  contents  in  this  place.  He  relates  a  most  instructive  case,  in  which 
he  immediately  succeeded  iu  appeasing  the  pains  of  the  eyes  by  the  warm  bath, 
after  an  oculist  had  failed  to  relieve  them  by  cooling  applications.  When  the  pain 
is  connected  with  plethora,  he  says  it  is  to  be  cui-ed  by  venesection,  when  with 
cacochymy,  by  purging,  and  when  with  debility,  by  drinking  wine,  which  atteiuiates 
and  discusses  thick  humours  in  the  eye.  The  commentaries  pubUshed  by  Dietz  are 
also  well  deserving  of  being  consulted  on  this  head.  See  further  Aph,  vii,  4G ; 
II  Epid.  vi,  26  ;  Celsus,  vi,  26. 

32.  Persons  whose  speech  has  become  impaired  are  likely 
to  be  seized  Avitli  chronic  diarrhoea. 

The  commentators  explain  this  Aphorism  as  follows : — An  impediment  in  the 
speech  is  occasioned  by  a  fulness  of  the  brain  (as  is  illustrated  iu  the  case  of  a 
drunken  man),  and  Nature  often  endeavours  to  relieve  this  state  by  a  determination 
downwards.  Compare  Prsecept.  xii,  1-5  ;  Coac.  ii,  117  ;  Veratr.  Us.  i,  12  ;  and  see 
Eoiis,  Aunot.  h.  1. 

33.  Persons  having  acid  eructations  are  not  very  apt  to  be 
seized  with  pleurisy. 

Galen  and  the  other  commentators  account  for  this  fact  from  acidities  of  the 
stomach  being  connected  with  phlegm,  whereas  pleurisy  is  connected  with  yellow- 
bile  ;  and,  moreover,  acidity  of  the  stomach  is  of  a  cold  nature,  whereas  pleurisy  is  an 
inUammation.  As  Galen  remarks,  Hippocrates  has  stated  in  his  work,  On  Airs, 
Waters,  and  Places,  that  persons  who  have  a  humid  stomach  are  not  subject  to 
pleuritic  diseases. 

34.  Persons  Avho  have  become  bald  are  not  subject  to  large 


758  APHORISMS. 

varices ;  but  should  varices  supervene  upon  persons  who  are 

bald,  their  hair  again  grows  thick. 

Taken  literally,  as  Galen  states,  this  Aphorism  is  ridiculous  and  inadmissible ;  for 
■who  does  not  know  that  baldness  is  not  cured  by  the  supervention  of  varices  in  the 
limbs  ?  He  supposes,  however,  that  allusion  may  be  made  to  the  diseases  alopecia 
and  ophiasis  [porrir/o  (lecahmns?),?a\A  that  these  maybe  cured  by  the  determination 
of  the  humours  which  occasion  them  to  the  veins  of  the  limljs. 

35.  Hiccup  supervening  in  dropsical  cases  is  bad. 

The  hiccup  supervening  in  an  advanced  stage  of  dropsy  is  attributed,  by  the  com- 
mentators, to  the  increase  of  the  watery  humours,  so  as  to  intercept  the  trachea, 
and  hence  hiccup,  and  danger  lest  the  patient  be  sulfocated.  From  whatever  cause 
it  originate,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact  that  hiccup  in  dropsy,  and  other 
diseases  of  a  like  nature,  is  a  fatal  symptom.  Sec  further,  Aph.  vii,  47  ;  II  Predict, 
xi,  1-16  ;    11  Epid.  v,  28  ;    Celsus,  ii,  8. 

36.  Venesection  cures  dysuria ;  open  the  internal  veins  of 
the  arm. 

Galen  is  not  at  <ill  satisfied  with  this  Aphorism,  and  hints  that  it  is  interpolated. 
In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that  venesection  wOl  remove  dysuria,  unless  connected 
with  inflammation  and  a  redundance  of  humours.  Then  he  holds  that  bleeding  in 
the  arm  is  not  applicable  in  diseases  below  the  diaphragm,  but  in  the  ankle. 
Tlieoi)liiIus  in  the  present  instance  supposes  that  it  is  the  inner  vein  of  the  arm,  but 
Damascius  of  the  ankle. 

37.  It  is  a  good  symptom  when  swelling  on  the  outside  of 

the  neck  seizes  a  person  very  ill  of  quinsy,   for  the  disease  is 

turned  outM  ardly. 

As  Galen  remarks,  the  reason  of  this  fact  is  obvious,  namely,  a  determination 
outwardly  of  the  humours  which  necessarily  relieves  the  internal  complaint.  See 
Aph.  vii,  49,  and  Celsus,  iv,  4.  This  rule  holds  good  frequently,  but  not  universally, 
in  epidemical  sore  throat. 

38.  It  is  better  not  to  apply  any  treatment  in  cases  of  occult 
cancer ;  for,  if  treated,  the  patients  die  quickly ;  but  if  not 
treated,  they  hold  out  for  a  long  time. 

All  the  ancient  commentators  explain,  that  by  "  occult"  m.iy  be  meant  either 
"  not  ulcerated"  or  "  deep  seated."  Tlie  latter  seems  the  better  interpretation,  and 
then  the  meaning  will  be,  that  when  the  cancer  is  superficial,  it  admits  of  being  re- 
moved by  an  operation,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  knife  or  the  cautery  ;  but  when  the 
disease  is  deep  seated,  it  is  better  to  let  it  alone.  Galen's  Commentary  contains 
many  interesting  remarks  on  cancer.  See  further,  II  Praidict.  xviii,  5,  9,  xxi,  5 ; 
II  Morb.  xxiii,  25. 

39.  Convulsions  take  place  either  from  repletion  or  depletion  ; 
and  so  it  is  with  hiccup. 

I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  this  is  a  most  important  fact  both  in  therapeutics 
and  prognostics.     How  important  is  it,  for  example,  in  puerperal  convulsions  !     Tlic 


ArilORISMS.  750 

whole  treatment  turns  upon  tlie  question  ■whether  the  convulsion  be  connected  with 
plethora  or  inanition.     It  is  evidently  the  same  with  hiccup. 

40.  When    pains,   without    inflammation,    occur   about  the 

liypochoutlna,    in    sucli  cases,  fever  supervening   removes    the 

])ain. 

The  commentators  hold  that  it  is  by  attenuating  and  dissipating  the  flatus  or 
humour  causing  the  obstruction,  that  a  fever  operates  the  cure  in  this  case. 
Apli.  vii,  52 ;  Coac.  iii,  272;  Cclsus,  ii,  8. 

41.  Wlien  pus  formed  anj^where  in  the  body  does  not  point, 
tliis  is  owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  part. 

According  to  Galen,  some  of  the  commentators  read  thickness  of  the  pus  (rrvov) 
and  some  of  the  place  (ruvrov).  See  further,  Coac.  iii,  238,  239  ;  II  Morb.  xlv,  14  ; 
III  Morb.  xxvii,  I. 

42.  In  cases  of  jaundice,  it  is  a  bad  symptom  when  the  liver 
becomes  indurated. 

It  is  a  well-known  pathological  fact,  that  jaundice  attended  with  scirrhus  of  the 
liver  is  necessarily  all  but  hopeless.  See  further,  Aph.  iv,  G-11  ;  Coac.  ii,  223,  225- 
229  ;  also  Celsus,  ii,  8. 

43.  When  persons  having  large  spleens  are  seized  Avith 
dysentery,  and  if  the  dyseuter}^  pass  into  a  chronic  state,  either 
dropsy  or  lientery  supervenes,  and  they  die. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  fatal  nature  of  dropsy  or  lientery  supervening 
upon  dysentery  complicated  with  enlarged  spleen.  The  ancient  authorities  generally 
hold  that  enlargement  of  the  spleen  is  a  common  cause  of  dropsy.  See  further, 
Aph.  vi,  48;    Coac.  iii,  295,  29G  ;    I  Morb.  iii,  27  ;   Atfect.xxi,  23. 

44.  When  ileus  comes  on  in  a  case  of  strangury,  they 
prove  fatal  in  seven  days,  unless,  fever  supervening,  there  be 
a  copious  discharge  of  urine. 

This  Aphorism  is  of  ambiguous  meaning,  and  Galen  finds  so  many  things  in  it  which 
he  cannot  admit  to  be  true,  that  he  hesitates  whether  he  should  sustain  it  as  genuine. 
Celsus  seems  to  understand  the  meaning  to  V)e,  that  a  fever  alleviates  ileus  connected 
with  difficulty  of  water,  if  by  its  heat  it  promotes  the  flow  of  urine.  M.  Lallemand,  as 
quoted  by  Littre  (h.  1.),  understands  our  author  to  mean,  that  when  fever  sets  in,  the 
case  proves  fatal,  unless  an  abundant  flow  of  blood  take  place.  This  seems  the  most 
likely  explanation.     It  is  reported  totidem  verbis  at  Coac.  iii,  314. 

45.  When  ulcers  continue  open  for  a  year  or  upwards,  there 

must  necessarily  be  exfoliation  of  bone,  and  the  cicatrices  are 

hollow. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as  here  stated,  the  majority  of  ulcers  which  are  slow  of 
healing  are  complicated  with  disease  of  a  bone,  which  must  be  cast  off  before  the  sore 
can  heal,  and  in  that  case  there  must  necessarily  be  a  hollow  in  the  place  from  which 
the  bone  has  separated.     See  further  Fract.  xxx,  2  ;   Ulcer,  v,  4. 


760  APHORISMS. 

46.  Such  persons  as  become  hump-backed  from  astlima  or 
cough  before  puberty,  die. 

The  subject  of  spinal  disease  is  treated  of  at  Articnl.  xxxvii,  xxxviii,  and  iloch.  xxi,  6. 
Galen  and  Tlieopliilus  give  interesting  commentaries  on  this  Aphorism, but  they  contain 
little  or  nothing  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  part  of  the  Articulations  referred  to. 
'Whether  derangement  of  the  spine  be  occasioned  by  external  violence,  or  by  disease, 
it  must  prove  fatal  when  it  occasions  pressure  on  the  chest  and  difficulty  of  breathing. 

47.  Persons  who  are  benefited  b}^  venesection   or  pvirging, 

should  be  bled  or  purged  in  spring. 

See  further  Aph.  vii,  53.  Galen,  in  his  interesting  Commentary  on  this  head,  gives 
an  account  of  various  cases  of  confirmed  disease,  such  as  gout,  epilepsy,  ele- 
phantiasis, and  so  forth,  which  were  greatly  benefited  by  being  put  under  a  course  of 
treatment  by  bleeding  and  purging  in  the  spring.  That  tliis,  in  fact,  is  the  season  of 
plethora  both  in  vegetables,  and  in  animals,  is  well  known ;  and  hence  Virgil,  de- 
scribing spring,  truly  says,  "  Superat  tener  omnibus  humor."  I  may  here  remark  that 
the  month  of  April  is  the  time  when  bh'ch  trees  are  bled  (so  to  speak)  in  order 
to  procure  their  juice  for  making  birch  wine.  Spring  also  is  the  season  at  which  the 
temperature  is  intermediate  between  the  extremes  of  cold  and  heat,  when  all  great 
evacuations  are  to  be  avoided.  Tlie  soundness  of  the  rule  of  practice  here  laid 
down  cannot  be  doul)ted.  See  Sanctorius,  ii,  48,  49;  Fernel,  ii,  1,  de  Yen.  Sect.; 
Fallopius  de  Med.  Purg.  24. 

48.  In  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  it  is  a  good  symptom 
Avhen  dvsenterv  comes  on. 

See  under  Aph.  vi,  43  ;  also  Coac.  iii,  295  ;    I  Morb.  \-i,  7  ;    and  Cclsus,  ii,  8. 

49.  In  gouty  affections,  the  inflammation  subsides  in  tlie 
course  of  forty  davs. 

This  Aphorism  evidently  refers  to  prognostics  and  the  critical  days.  See  Prsedict. 
vi,  3  ;  and  Celsus,  iv,  24.  Forty  days  are  meant  as  the  utmost  limit,  provided  no 
error  in  treatment  be  committed. 

50.  When  the  brain  is  severely  wounded,  fever  and  vomiting 
of  bile  necessarily  supervene. 

As  Galen  remarks,  the  vomiting  of  bile  is  evidently  produced  by  the  stomach's 
sympathising  with  the  brain,  in  consequence  of  its  connexion  with  that  organ  by 
means  of  a  pair  of  considerable  nerves.  Fever  is  no  doubt  a  likely  consequence  of 
a  severe  wound  of  the  brain,  and  the  term  used  by  our  author  implies  a  severe  injury. 
See  II  Pra:;dict.  xxii,  12,  IG,  xxiii,  5-11 ;  Coac.  iii,  271,  383,  384  ;  I  Morb.  iii,  35  ; 
Celsus,  V,  26. 

51.  When  persons  in  good  health  are  suddenly  seized  with 
pains  in  the  head,  and  straightway  are  laid  down  speechless, 
and  breathe  with  stertor,  they  die  in  seven  days,  unless  fever 
come  on. 

The  state  here  described  is  evidently  apoplectic.  Stertor,  as  Galen  remarks,  is  indi- 
cative of  siiong  apoplexy,  and  is  occusioued  Ity  debility  of  the  nervous  energy.     Galeu 


ji 


APHORISMS.  761 

says,  when  it  proceeds  from  a  pituitous  (or  serous)  humour,  it  is  dissipated  by  the 
heat  of  the  fever.  Theophihis  gives  the  same  explanation  of  this  Aphorism.  See 
fiirHicr,  Jiulicat.  xii,4;  Coac.  ii,  6,  iii,  .320-323;  II  Morb.  vi,  1,2,  3,4,7,  xxi,2.I2; 
III  iMorb.  viii,  2  ;    I  Priedict.  x,  13,  xii,  8. 

52.  Wc  must  attend  to  the  appearances  of  the  eyes  in  sleep, 
as  presented  from  below ;  for  if  a  portion  of  the  white  be  seen 
between  the  closed  eyelids,  and  if  this  be  not  connected  with 
diarrhoja  or  severe  purging,  it  is  a  very  bad  and  mortal  symptom. 

Tiiis  Aphorism  is  entirely  taken  from  the  Prognostics.  See  §  2  of  this  edition ; 
also  I'rorrhet.  xi,  2  ;  Coac.  ii,  121 ;  Celsus,  ii,  6.  In  the  edition  of  the  Aphorisms 
pubhshed  by  Dictz,  with  the  Scholia  of  Theophilus  and  Damascius,  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding Apliorism  are  joined  together. 

53.  Delirium  attended  with  laughter  is  less  dangerous  than    j] 
delirium  attended  with  a  serious  mood. 

According  to  Galen,  delirium  attended  with  laughter  is  connected  with  yellow  bile, 
and  the  same  attended  with  despondency  is  produced  by  black  bile.  See  further, 
Coac.  i,  141  ;   Celsus,  iii,  18. 

54.  In  acute  diseases,  complicated  with  fever,  a  moaning 
respiration  is  bad. 

Galen  gives  several  conjectural  explanations  of  the  cause  of  this  moaning 
respiration ;  such  as  that  it  proceeds  from  coldness  of  the  nerves,  hardness  of  the 
muscles  about  the  chest,  or  a  spasmodic  movement  of  the  chest ; — at  the  present  time 
we  would  suspect  valvular  disease  of  the  heart. 

55.  For  the  most  part,  gouty  affections  rankle  in  spring  and 
in  autumn. 

In  Aphorism  iii,  20,  arthritic  diseases  are  enumerated  among  those  of  spring.  In 
autunm,  exacerbations  take  place,  owing  to  the  inequality  of  temperature  and  un- 
hcalthiness  of  that  season.  Theophilus  explains  the  autumnal  exacerbation  as  being 
occasioned  by  an  effort  of  Nature  to  expel  to  the  extremities  the  cacochymy,  or  pec- 
cant humour,  engendered  during  the  summer.    See  Celsus,  ii,  1,  16,  iii,  24. 

56.  In  melancholic  affections,  determinations  of  the  humour 
which  occasions  them  produce  the  following  diseases  :  either 
apoplexy  of  the  whole  body,  or  convulsion,  or  madness,  or 
blindness. 

This  Aphorism  contains  a  statement  of  the  diseases  which  were  supposed  by  the 
ancients  to  be  connected  with  the  prevalence  of  black  bile,  namely,  apoplexy,  spasm, 
mania,  and  blindness.  The  sul)ject  is  treated  of  in  an  interesting  manner  by  Galen,  in 
his  work,  On  Black  Bile.  See  further,  Aph.  vii,  40  ;  Vict.  Acut.  xlv,  3  ;  II  Pra^dict. 
xiii,  3  ;   Coac.  iii,  316, 317. 

57.  Persons  are  most  subject  to  apoplexy  between  the  ages 
of  forty  and  sixty. 

Tliat  apoplexy  is  a  disease  most  common  in  declining  years,  is  a  fact  (piite  well 


7G2  APHORISMS. 

known  and  admitted  by  the  best  of  our  modern  authoiities.  Hippocrates  ranks  it 
among  the  diseases  of  old  age,  at  Aph.  iii,  31.  All  the  ancient  commentators  ascribe 
the  frequency  of  tlie  disease  in  old  age  to  the  pi-evalence  of  black  bile. 

58.  If  the  omentum  protrude,  it  necessarily  mortifies  and 
drops  off. 

Galen  and  all  the  other  commentators  understand  this  Aphorism  as  referring  to 
protrusion  of  the  epiploon  through  a  woimil.  When  a  piece  of  it,  then,  has  protruded, 
and  has  been  allowed  to  remain  so  for  some  time,  and  has  become  much  cooled, 
it  will  necessarily  mortify,  and  should  be  cut  otf  before  having  recourse  to  the 
gastrorhaphe  ;  but,  as  stated  by  Galen  and  the  others,  if  reduced  immediately,  the 
Aphorism  does  not  hold  true.  Galen  remarks,  that  in  this,  as  in  many  other  of  the 
Aphorisms,  our  author  states  the  common  results  as  the  general  rule,  but  does  not  think 
it  necessary  to  mind  the  exceptions.     Compare  Coac.  iii,  378  ;    1  Morh.  iii,  36. 

59.  In  chronic  diseases  of  tlie  hip-joint,  if  the  bone  pro- 
trude and  return  again  into  its  socket^  there  is  mncosity  in 
tlie  place. 

The  snl)ject  of  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint  from  disease  is  fully  treated  of  in  the 
work.  On  the  Articulations.  See  the  Argument.  Compare  I  Morb.  iii,  10;  Int. 
Atfect.  Iviii.  2 ;    Aer,  Aq.,  Loc.,  xlviii,  5  ;   Atfect.  xxx,  12 ;    and  Celsus,  iv,  23. 

CO.  In  persons  affected  uitli  chronic  disease  of  the  hip-joint, 
if  the  bone  protrude  fi'om  its  socket^  the  limb  becomes  wasted 
and  maimed,  unless  the  part  be  cauterized. 

This  also  is  treated  of  in  the  same  work ;  in  fact,  as  Galen  states,  this  Aphorism 
and  the  preceding  should  have  been  joined  together. 

SECTION    VII. 

1.  In  acute  diseases,  coldness  of  the  extremities  is  bad. 

I  need  scarcely  remark  that  coldness  of  the  extremities  is  a  symptom  often  noticed 
in  the  febrile  cases  related  in  the  Epidemics.  All  the  ancient  commentators  account 
for  the  coldness  of  the  extremities,  from  the  congestion  of  the  febrile  heat  in  the 
internal  viscera.  See  further,  Aph.  iv,  48,  vii,  20 ;  Pr;enot.  xv,  9;  Coac.  i,  105; 
VI  Epid.  viii,  93 ;    Celsus,  ii,  -1,  0. 

2.  Livid  flesh  on  a  diseased  bone  is  bad. 

This  Aphorism  would  seem  to  refer  to  gangrene  along  with  disease  of  the  bone. 
The  case,  however,  is  not  quite  clear,  and  the  commentators  do  not  supply  much  in- 
formation under  this  head. 

I         3.    Hiccup  and  redness  of  the  eyes,  when  they  supervene  on 

\    vomiting,  are  bad. 

i  The  commentators  ascribe  the  hiccup  either  to  inflammation  of  the  stomach  or  an 
affection  of  the  brain,  with  which  the  stomach  sympathises.  The  redness  of  the 
eyes  they  hold  to  be  symptomatic  of  a  cerebral  affection.  See  also,  Coac.  iv,  20; 
Celsus,  ii,  4. 


APHORISMS.  703 

4.  A  chill  supervening  on  a  sweat  is  not  good. 

This  is  a  well-known  fact.  Galen  explains  it  as  indicating  that  Nature  is  over- 
powered hy  the  disease.     See  Praedict.  vii,  11,  15  ;    Celsus,  ii,  4. 

5.  Dysentery,  or  dropsy,   or  ccstacy  coming  on  madness   is 

good.  i 

The  commentators  explain,  that  hy  dysentery  or  dropsy  supervening  in  a  case  of 
mania,  a  metastasis  of  the  disease  takes  place.  By  ecstacy,  they  understand  a  violent 
exacerhation  of  the  maniacal  symptoms,  which  brings  the  disease  to  a  crisis. 

6.  In   a   very  protracted  disease,   loss  of  appetite  and  un- 
mixed discharges  from  the  bowels  are  bad  symptoms. 

That  loss  of  appetite  is  a  bad  symptom  in  protracted  diseases  can  admit  of  no 
doubt.  By  "unmixed  discharges"  our  author  probal)ly  means  "colliquative  diar- 
rhcea,"  which,  of  course,  is  also  a  very  had  symptom  in  all  such  cases.  In  the  edition 
of  Dietz  often  referred  to  above,  the  reading  would  signify  "  unmixed  vomitings  and 
bilious  dejections,"  but  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  recognised  by  Galen. 

7.  A  rigor  and  delirium  from  excessive  drinking  are  bad. 
This  seems  cleai^ly  a  case  of  delirium  tremens.   The  chill  is  explained  by  Damascius 

as  being  occasioned  by  the  extinction  of  the  innate  heat,  induced  by  the  immoderate 
drinking  of  wine. 

8.  From  the  rupture  of  an  internal  abscess,   prostration   of 
strength,  vomiting,  and  deliquium  animi  result. 

The  term  phyma  is  explained  by  the  Greek  commentators  to  signify,  in  this  place, 
an  internal  abscess  either  in  the  chest  or  in  the  belly.  The  syuij)toms  of  collapse 
here  enumerated  are  said  by  Galen  to  be  superinduced  by  an  escape  of  the  vital 
pneuma  (or  breath).     No  one  can  question  the  fact,  however  it  may  be  explained. 

9.  Delirium  or  convulsion  from  a  flow  of  blood  is  bad. 

This  is  nearly  allied  to  Aphor.  v,  3.  See  also  Coac.  iii,  57.  Galen  remarks,  that 
this  is  an  important  Aphoi'ism,  as  intimating  to  us  that  delirium  may  be  connected 
with  inanition,  like  tremors  in  the  limbs,  which  are  produced  by  weakness  of  the 
motor  powers. 

10.  Vomiting,  or  hiccup,  or  convulsion,  or  delirium,  in  ileus, 

is  bad. 

The  symptoms  here  mentioned  are  known  to  be  very  fatal  in  ileus.  See  Coac. 
iii,  303  ;   Celsus,  ii,  8. 

11.  Pneumonia  coming  on  pleurisy  is  bad. 

That  it  is  a  bad  symptom  when  the  disease  extends  from  the  pleura  to  the  lungs, 
cannot  be  doubted.     See  Coac.  iii,  172  ;   Afiect.  ix,  12;    Celsus,  ii,  7. 

12.  Phrenitis  along  with  pneumonia  is  bad. 

No  one  will  question  the  truth  of  this  prognosis.  Damascius  remarks  tliat  the 
fumes  of  the  disease  in  this  case  ascend  from  the  lungs  to  the  brain. 

13.  Convulsion  or  tetanus,  coming  upon  severe  burning, is  bad. 
There  are  different  readings  and  interpretations  of  this  Aphorism,  as  may  be  seen 


Ii 


764  APHORISxMS. 

on  consulting  Galen.     By  hnrning  may  either  be  meant  exposure  to  great  heat,  or 
burning  by  the  cautery. 

li.    Stupor  or  delirium  from  a  blow  on  tlie  head  is  bad. 

This  also  will  be  admitted  as  an  unquestionable  fact.  See  Coac.  ii,  8  ;  Cap.  Vulu. 
XV,  1 ;    and  Celsus,  ii,  7. 

15.  From  a  spitting  of  blood  tliere  is  a  spitting  of  pus. 
That  haemoptysis  is  frequently  either  the  cause  or  the  index  of  consumption  is 

now  well  ascertained.     Still,  as  Galen  remarks,  spitting  of  blood  is  not  always  fol- 
lowed by  consumption.     Compare  Nat.  Hum.  xxiii,  1  ;    II  Predict,  xiv,  13. 

16.  From  spitting  of  pus  arise  phthisis  and  a  flux  ;   and  when 
the  sputa  arc  stopped,  they  die. 

The  phenomena  of  phthisis  here  stated  are  now  well  known  and  admitted.  Com- 
pare Coac.  iii,  2.57 ;    I  .Morb.  x,  17,  20,  xi,  40. 

17.  Hiccup  in  inflammation  of  the  liver  is  bad. 

Perhaps,  in  this  case,  as  suggested  by  Galen,  the  eidarged  liver  presses  on  the 
stomach,  and  occasions  the  hiccup.     See  Aph.  v,  58. 

18.  Convulsion  or  delirium  supervening  upon  insomnolency 
is  bad, 

Insomnolency,  according  to  Galen,  is  connected  with  a  dry  iritemperament  of  the 
brain,  and  hence  convulsion  or  delirium  supervening  on  such  a  condition  of  it  is 
necessarily  bad.  He  states,  however,  that  in  some  of  the  copies,  "  delirium"  was 
omitted.     Compare  Celsus,  ii,  7. 

18.*  Trembling  upon  lethargus  is  bad. 
This  Aphorism  is  omitted  in  the  editions  of  Galen,  but  occurs  in  the  edition  of  the 
Aphorisms  published  by  Dietz,  with  the  Commentaries  of  Theojihilus  and  Damascius. 
Thcophilus  states  that  the  lethargus  is  attended  with  a  low  fever,  and  a  disposition 
not  to  be  roused.  A  treuil)ling  in  such  a  febrile  disease  would  now  be  suspected  to 
be  connected  with  a  typhoid  form  of  the  affection. 

19.  Erysipelas  upon  exposure  of  a  bone  (is  bad?). 

This  Aphorism  is  to  be  understood  as  referring  principally  to  the  bones  of  the 
cranium,  and  in  that  case  I  need  not  say  that  erysipelas  is  a  very  serious  affair.  See 
Cap.  Vuln.  xxvii,  4. 

20.  Mortification  or  suppuration  upon  erysipelas  is  bad. 

This  Aphorism  needs  no  comment,  as  everybody  will  admit  that  either  gangrene 
or  suppuration  is  a  most  untoward  termination  of  erysipelas. 

21.  Hemorrhage  upon  a  strong  pulsation  in  wounds  is  bad. 

By  pulsation  in  this  place  is  evidently  meant  a  violent  throbbing  of  the  arteries ; 
or,  as  the  commentators  explain  it,  a  painful  feeling  connected  with  the  action 
of  the  arteries.  It  ajiplies  then  to  hemorrhage  connected  with  increased  action 
of  tlie  vessels,  and  it  is  now  well  known  that  in  such  cases  the  flow  of  blood  is 
violent. 


APHORISMS.  765 

22.  Suppuration  upon  a  protracted  pain  of  the  parts  about 

the  bowels  is  bad. 

The  ancient  commentators  naturally  understand  this  Aphorism  as  referring  to 
inflammation  terminating  in  suppuration. 

23.  Dysentery  upon  unmixed  alvine  discharges  is  bad. 

See  Aph.  vii,  G.  Galen  remarks,  that  in  such  a  case,  there  is  danger  lest  a  portion 
of  the  intestine  may  he  corroded.  I  need  scarcely  remark,  that  it  is  now  well  known, 
that  in  dysentery,  there  is  danger  of  the  gut  heiug  completely  ulcerated,  so  as  to  allow 
of  the  escape  of  its  contents. 

2  1.   Delirium  upon  division  of  the  cranium,  if  it  penetrate 
into  the  cavity  of  the  head,  is  bad. 

There  is  a  good  deal  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  reading  and  meaning  of  this  Aphorism. 
See  Galen,  Littre,  and  Foes.  !Most  probably  it  refers  to  a  severe  fracture  of  the  skull 
extending  its  violence  to  the  membranes. 

25.  Convulsion  upon  severe  purging  is  mortal. 
This  is  little  else  than  a  repetition  of  Aph.  v,  1. 

26.  Upon  severe  pain  of  the  parts  about  the  bowels,  coldness 
of  the  extremities  coming  on  is  bad. 

^Vithout  doubt  this  Aphorism  refers  to  inflammation  of  the  bowels  ending  in  mor- 
tification. In  this  case,  as  it  is  well  known,  the  fatal  termination  is  preceded  by 
coldness  of  the  extremities.     See  Aph.  iv,  48,  vii,  1,  22. 

27.  Tenesmus  coming   on  in  a  case   of  pregnancy  causes 
abortion. 

Damascius  remarks  that  this  proceeds  from  sympathy  of  the  uterus  with  the 
rectum. 

28.  Whatever  piece  of  bone,  cartilage,  or  nerve  {tendon?)  is 
cut  off,  it  neither  grows  nor  unites. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  Aph.  vi,  19. 

29.  AYhen  strong  diarrhea  supervenes   in  a  case   of  leuco- 
phlegmatia,  it  removes  the  disease. 

By  leucophlegmatia  was  understood  incipient  anasarca.  See  Galen's  Commentary, 
h.  1.,  and  Celsus,  iii,  21.  It  will  readily  be  understood  that  a  violent  diarrhoea  may 
carry  off  such  a  disease.  Seefurther  Flat,  xviii,  8,9  ;  Judicat.  xi,  21 ;  Coac.  iii,  285, 
326  ;    I  Morb.  vi,  7  ;   II  Morb.  Ixix,  11, 12 ;    Int.  Affect,  xxiii,  12. 

30.  In  those  cases  in  which  frothy  discharges  occur  in  diar- 
rhoea there  are  defluxions  from  the  head. 

There  is  not  perhaps  in  the  whole  collection  an  announcement  so  dilHcult  to  recon- 
cile with  modern  ideas,  and  so  thoroughly  based  on  hypothesis,  as  that  contained  in 
the  present  Aphorism.  It  is  altogether  founded  on  the  humoral  pathology,  of  which 
traces  may  be  recognised  in  many  other  parts  of  our  author's  work.  We  shall  see  a 
pretty  distinct  explanation  of  it  in  the  work.  On  the  Sacred  Disease.   See  Vol.  II,  353, 


7GG  Al'liOlUSMS. 

ed.  Linden.  It  also  occurs  in  the  Coacse  Prainotiones,  v,  13,  14.  I  cannot  affoi'd 
room  for  an  exposition  of  its  principles  in  this  place.  See  the  Commentary  of  Galen, 
h.  1. ;  and  tlie  note  of  Littre,  h.  1.,  and  tom.  i,  p.  193 ;  also  Paulus  jEgineta, 
Dook  III,  20,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

I      31.   "\Ylicii   tlicre   is   a   ftvrinaceous   sediment   in   tlie    urine 

I  during  fever,  it  indicates  a  protracted  illness. 

'  Farinaceous  sediments  were  held  to  be  unfavorable  by  all  the  authorities  on  the 
subject.  Sec  Paulus  /Egineta,  Book  II,  14.  Galen,  in  his  Commentary, 
pronounces  the  most  of  these  cases  to  be  fatal.  Compare  Pra;not.  xi,  7  ;  Coac.  ii,  199, 
V,  12,  04,  05. 

;      32.   In  those  cases  in  wliicli  tlie  urine  is  tliin  at    first,   and 

;  the  sediments  become  bilious,  an  acute  disease  is  indicated. 

It  will  be  seen,  upon  I'eference  to  the  Commentaries  of  Galen  and  Theophilus,  and 
also  to  those  of  Marsilius  and  Littro  in  modern  times,  that  there  is  an  ambiguity  in 
this  Aphorism;  that  the  words  ((hnoOev  St  \(7r-nt),  which  are  here  rendered  "thin 
at  first,"  may  also  signify  "  thin  above."  I  incline  to  adopt  the  former  interpre- 
tation, which  is  also  favoured  by  Galen  and  Theophilus.  I  have  repeatedly  desired  to 
call  the  attention  of  the  profession  to  the  state,  and  in  particular  to  the  specific 
gravity,  of  the  urine  in  febrile  diseases.  Compare  Coac.  v,  6,  8  ;  I  Morb.  xxvii,  28  ; 
Vict.  Acut.  liv,  5. 

33.  In  those  cases  in  which  the  urine  becomes  divided  there 

is  great  disorder  in  the  body. 

Galen  and  the  modern  expositors,  Ileurnius  and  Marsilius,  feel  at  a  loss  how  to 
explain  this  Aphorism  ;  hut  for  my  own  part  I  see  no  difficulty  about  it,  for  I  believe 
it  to  refer  to  a  condition  of  the  urine  wliich  I  have  seen  incases  of  organic  disease  of 
the  liver,  where  the  sediment  is  so  thick  that  there  is  a  strongly-marked  line  of  sepa- 
ration l)etwccn  it  and  the  watery  part.  Such  a  state  of  the  urine  would  no  doubt  be 
nmch  more  common  in  warm  climates,  where  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers 
prevail,  and  consequently  it  was  not  likely  to  escape  the  acute  observation  of 
Hippocrates. 

31.  When  bubbles  settle  on  the  surface  of  the  urine,  they 
indicate  disease  of  the  kidneys,  and  that  the  complaint  will  be 
protracted. 

It  can  scarcely  admit  of  a  doubt,  that  our  author  here  refers  to  alhuminmis  urine, 
which  it  is  well  known  is  ahofrotlnj,  and  is  now  generally  admitted  to  l)e  connected 
with  disease  of  the  kidneys.  See  Paulus  ^Egineta,  Vol.  I,  p.  352,  and  the  autho- 
rities there  quoted. 

35.   When  the  scum  on  the  surface  is  fatty  and  copious,  it 

indicates  acute  diseases  of  the  kidneys. 

It  ajipears  from  Galen,  that  in  some  copies  he  found  rpistasis,  and  in  others 
hypostasis ;  the  one  evidently  referring  to  the  scum  on  the  surface,  and  the  latter  to 
the  sediment :  he  favours  the  former  reading,  and  understands  it  to  refer  to  melting 
of  the  fat  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  kidneys.  Compare  Prcenot.  xii,  1,2;  Coac.  v, 
43;    IV  Epid.  vi,  12,  13. 


APHORISMS.  1()1 

3fi.  Whenever  tlie  aforementioned  symptoms  occur  in 
nephritic  diseases,  and  along  with  them  acute  pains  about  the 
muscles  of  the  back,  provided  these  be  seated  about  the  external 
parts,  3-011  may  expect  that  there  will  be  an  abscess ;  but  if  the 
pains  be  rather  about  the  internal  parts,  you  may  also  rather 
expect  that  the  abscess  will  be  seated  internally. 

Tliis  Aphorism  evidently  refers  to  wliat,  is  supposed  hy  our  author  to  he  ahscess 
in  the  region  of  tlic  kithieys;  the  syini)tonis  hy  which  it  may  he  ascertained  whetlier 
the  ahscess  will  point  externally  or  internally  are  clearly  given.  On  Renal  Ahscess, 
see  in  particular  Rutfus  Ephesius.  (De  Ves.  Ren.  Affect.)  Galen  and  Theophilus  hoth 
state  that  the  matter  sometimes  points  hchind,  and  sometimes  in  the  direction  of  the 
psoas  muscle.  I  am  inclined  therefore  to  helieve  that  lumhar  ahscess  may  he  com- 
prehended under  this  head. 

37.  Hajmatemesis,  without  fever,  does  not  prove  fatal,  but 
with  fever  it  is  bad  ;  it  is  to  be  treated  with  refrigerant  and 
styptic  things. 

As  a  general  rule,  no  douht,  as  stated  by  our  author,  hsematemesis  unattended 
with  fever  is  not  often  dangerous;  \Aiiereas,  when  it  occurs  in  the  last  stage  of  fevers, 
danger  may  he  inferred.  Compare  the  prognosis  in  hemorrhage  from  the  stomach, 
as  given  hy  Dr.  Copland  in  the  Dictionary  of  Practical  Medicine,  vol.  iv,  p.  97. 
Cooling  and  astringent  things  are  recommended,  evidently  under  the  impression  that 
the  disease  is  connected  with  relaxation  of  the  exhalents  of  the  stomach. 

38.  Defluxions  into  the  cavity  of  the  chest  suppurate  in 
twenty  days. 

In  this  Aphorism  we  recognise  traces  of  the  humoral  pathology  referred  to  ahove. 
See  further  Aph.  vi,  20 ;  Loc.  in  Homin.  xviii,  7  ;  I  Morh.  xi,  2,  3.  The  doctrine 
that  catarrhs  are  defluxions  from  the  head  to  the  chest  is  sanctioned  by  the  great 
discoverer  of  the  system  of  auscultation,  Laennec.  See  Paulus  jEgineta,  Vol.  I, 
p.  474. 

39.  When  a  patient  passes  blood  and  clots,  and  is  seized 
with  strangury  and  pain  in  the  perineum  and  pubes,  disease 
about  the  bladder  is  indicated. 

This  Aphorism  is  nearly  word  for  word  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  80. 

40.  If  the  tongue  suddenly  lose  its  powers,  or  a  part  of  the 
body  become  apoplectic,  the  affection  is  of  a  melancholic 
nature. 

By  apoplectic,  in  this  place,  our  author  evidently  means  paralysed.  (See  Paulus 
jEgineta,  Book  III,  18.)  Even  Galen  admits  that  he  is  at  a  loss  to  account  for 
Hippocrates  setting  down  apoplexy  as  a  disease  connected  with  melancholy  or  black 
bile;  for,  he  says,  cancer,  elephantiasis,  leprosy,  psora,  and  lilack  alphos  are  known 
to  be  diseases  which  originate  in  black  bile,  but  apoplexy  has  seemingly  no  alliance 
to  them.  Compare  II  Pra?dict.  xvi,  12;  Coac.  iii,  87,  88,  315,  317.  Damascius  the 
commentator  also  says  that  he  cannot  account  for  the  disease  being  called  melancholic. 


7(58  APHORISMS. 

41.  In  liypercatharsisj  of  old  persons^  hiccup  supervening  is 

not  a  good  symptom, 

Ilypercatharsis  being  dangerous  in  persons  of  all  ages,  must  he  peculiarly  so  in  the 
case  of  old  men,  owing  to  their  infirmities.  Hence,  as  Ileurnius  remarks,  we  sec  the 
propriety  of  being  guarded  iu  administering  drastic  purgatives  to  old  men. 

4,2.  In  a  fever,  which  is  not  of  a  hiUous  nature,  a  copious 
affusion  of  hot  water  upon  the  head  removes  the  fever. 

We  have  seen  from  tlie  work.  On  Eegimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  that  our  author 
used  the  affusiou  of  hot  water  on  the  liead  in  febrile  diseases;  here  he  s^jcaks 
favorably  of  it,  unless  when  tlie  fever  originates  in  bile.  According  to  Damascius, 
he  is  to  be  understood  as  pointing  to  epliemeral  fevers,  excepting  those  connected 
with  inflammation  of  important  parts,  and  those  from  putrefaction  of  the  humours. 
Galen's  elaborate  Commentary  comes  to  the  same  conclusion.  Celsus  speaks  of  this 
practice  as  being  equivocal  in  the  treatment  of  tertian  fevers.  These,  we  know,  are 
connected  with  bile. 

43.  A  woman  does  not  become  ambidexterous. 

The  only  reason  for  women  not  having  a  dexterous  use  of  both  arms  is,  that  being 
of  a  feeble  constitution,  they  do  not  exercise  both  arms.  The  fact,  however,  may 
be  questionable. 

44.  When  empyema  is  treated  either  by  the  cautery  or 
incision,  if  pure  and  white  pus  flow  from  the  wound,  the 
patients  recover  ;  but  if  mixed  with  blood,  slimy  and  fetid,  they 
die. 

We  have  seen  on  several  previous  occasions  that  the  ancients  opened  the  chest  in 
empyema  either  by  the  cautery  or  perforator.  I  have  also  stated  in  the  Commentaiy 
on  the  Prognostics,  that  the  ancients  ai)plied  the  term  empyema  not  only  to  the 
collection  of  pus  Ijetween  the  chest  and  the  lungs,  but  also  to  cavities  of  the  lungs 
arising  from  tubercular  ulceration.  It  is  wortli  remarking,  that  a  few  years  ago  a 
London  surgeon  attempted  to  introduce  the  operation  of  opening  cavities  iu  the 
lungs  which  form  in  tubercular  consumption.  This,  then,  was  but  a  revival  of  the 
ancient  practice  in  such  cases ;  but  both  in  empyema,  properly  speaking,  and  in 
cavities  of  the  lungs,  paracentesis  thoracis  is  a  very  ecpuvocal  operation. 

45.  When  abscess  of  the  liver  is  treated  by  the  cautery  or 
incision,  if  the  pus  which  is  discharged  be  pure  and  white,  the 
patients  recover,  (for  in  this  case  it  is  situated  in  the  coats 
of  the  liver  ;)  but  if  it  resemble  the  lees  of  oil  as  it  flows, 
they  die. 

The  account  here  given  of  the  operation  of  opening  an  abscess  in  the  liver  is 
sufficiently  intclligil)le  of  itself.  One  can  readily  believe  that  the  result  of  the  opera- 
tion will  depend  upon  whether  the  pus  be  good  or  not,  and  whether  it  be  situated  in 
the  membrane  or  in  the  substance  of  the  liver.  Compare  Celsus,  ii,  8.  For  the  re- 
stdts  of  modern  experience  on  the  sul)ject  of  hepatic  abscesses,  see  the  Cyclopaedia 
of  Anatomy,  Abnormal  Anat.  of  the  Liver. 


APHORISMS.  7(\U 

4G.    Pains  of  the   eyes  are  removed  by  drinking  undiluted 
wine,  plenteous  bathing  with  hot  water,  and  venesection. 

This  is  an  al)ri(Igmcnt  of  Ai)lior.  vi,  31.  Galen  makes  some  very  interesting  re- 
marks on  this  Ajjhorism,  and  the  application  of  the  various  methods  of  treatment 
here  enumerated,  in  the  second  chapter  of  tlie  Third  Book  of  Therapeutics. 

47.  If  a  dropsical  patient   be  seized  with  hiccup  the   case 
is  hopeless. 

This  is  nearly  the  same  as  Aph.  vi,  35.  Theophilns  does  not  hesitate  to  pronounce 
this,  and  all  the  Aphorisms  which  arc  repeated,  to  he  supposititious,  and  not  the  work 
of  Hippocrates. 

48.  Strangury   and   dj'siu'ia    are    cured    by   drinking   pure 

wine,  and  venesection  :   open  the  vein  on  the  inside. 

The  ancient  commentators  explain  this  Aphorism  as  follows  :  When  the  diseases 
in  question  are  connected  with  inflammation  in  the  hladder,  or  a  congestion  of 
humours  which  obstruct  the  passage,  the  remedy  is  bleeding  in  the  vein  of  the  inner 
ankle  or  ham ;  but  when  produced  by  flatulent  and  viscid  humours,  they  are  best 
dispelled  by  drinking  pure  wine. 

49.  It  is   a  good  sign  when  swelling  and  redness   on   the 

breast  seize  a  person  very  ill  of  quinsy,   for   in  this  case  the 

disease  is  diverted  outwardly. 

This  Aphorism  is  nearly  the  same  as  Aph.  vi,  37.  Galen  suggests  that  it  is 
supposititious. 

50.  When  the  brain  is  attacked  with  sphacelus,  the  patients 

die  in  three  days  ;  or  if  they  escape  these,  they  recover. 

I  have  given  my  opinion  regarding  sphacelus  of  the  brain  previously  in  this  work, 
and  at  Paulus  /Egineta,  Book  III,  7.  The  commentators  are  all  agreed  that  it 
signifies  incipient  mortification;  it  can  mean  nothing  else  in  this  place  seemingly  but 
ramollissement  of  the  brain.  See  II  Mori),  v,  2,  21,  xx,  2,  8,  9,  10  ;  VII  Epid.  \xx, 
7.  It  is  proper  to  mention,  however,  that  Ileurnius  and  Littre  prefer  referring  it  to 
caries  of  the  bone. 

51.  Sneezing  arises  from  the  head,  owing  to  the  brain  being 

heated,  or  the  cavity  [ventricle  ?)  in  the  head  being  filled  with 

humours ;  the  air  confined  in  it  then  is  discharged,  and  makes 

a  noise,  because  it  comes  through  a  narrow  passage. 

Galen  gives  an  elaborate  discussion  on  the  subject  of  sneezing,  but  it  contains  little 
worth  taking  notice  of.  He  held  it  to  be  a  natural  effort  to  expel  substances  which 
are  creating  irritation  in  the  nasal  passages,  in  like  manner  as  coughing  is  for  the  like 
purpose  in  the  respiratory. 

52.  Fever  supervening   on   painful  affections   of  the  liver 
removes  the  pain. 

The  commentators  are  agreed  that  this  Aphorism  is  not  generally  applicable  in 
diseases  of  the  liver;  for  example,  in  cases  of  inflammation,  but  that  it  is  to  l)e  re- 
stricted to  those  cases  which  are  of  a  flatulent  nature,  or  connected  with  obstruction. 

41) 


770  APHORISMS. 

53.  Those  persons  to  whom   it  is  bencticial  to   have  blood 

taken  from  their  veins,  sliould  have  it  done  in  spring. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  Apli.  vi,  47,  with  a  slight  omission.  Galen  contends  that  it 
must  be  supposititious. 

54.  In  those  cases  wliere  phlegm  is  collected  between  the 
diaphragm  and  the  stomach,  and  occasions  pain,  as  not  finding 
a  passage  into  either  of  the  cavities,  the  disease  will  be  carried 
off  if  the  phlegm  be  diverted  to  the  bladder  by  the  veins. 

We  learn  from  Galen  that  jMariuus,the  celebrated  anatomist,  found  diniculty  in  de- 
ciding where  the  phlegm  was  supposed  to  be  lodged,  and  it  docs  not  appear  quite  clear 
what  jdace  is  meant.  Galen  describes  it  as  being  below  the  diaphragm,  and  within  the 
peritoneum  of  the  epigastric  region.  It  will  be  readily  perceived  from  this  Aphorisu), 
that  our  author  looks  upon  the  veins  as  being  the  great  instruments  of  absorption. 

55.  When  the  liver  is  filled  with  water  and  bursts  into  the 

epiploon,  in   this   case   the   belly  is  filled  with  water  and  the 

patient  dies. 

Galen  understands  this  case  to  refer  to  hydatids  of  the  liver,  but  finds  difficulty  in 
explaining  how  they  can  burst  into  the  epiploon  unless  by  ulceration.  It  would  secu\ 
as  if  our  author  meant  the  cavity  of  the  ])eritoneura.  See  (!alen  and  Littre.  Com- 
pare  Pneiiot.  viii,  G  ;   Coac.  iii,  270,  278  ;   Att'ect.  xxiii,  .3-10 ;    Int.  Atfect,  xxvi,  2. 

56.  Anxiety,   yawning,  rigor, — wnne  drunk  with   an   equal 

proportion  of  water,  removes  these  complaints.        ^' 

This  Ajjliorism  is  based  on  the  humoral  pathology  :  the  symptoms  here  mentioned 
are  supposed  to  be  connected  with  the  prevalence  of  a  flatulent  humour,  which  is 
attenuated  and  dispelled  by  the  hot  wine.  The  construction  of  the  sentence,  as  Galen 
remarks,  rescnddes  a  solecism.  Compare  II  Epid.  vi,  15;  II  Morb.  xxxviii,  G; 
Int.  Atfect.  v,  14  ;    II  Morb.  Mul.  Ixxxviii,  2. 

57.  AVhcn  tubercles  {plnjmata)  form  in  the  urethra,  if  they 
suppurate  and  burst,  the  pain  is  carried  off. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  Apb.  iv,  82. 

58.  In   cases  of  concussion  of  the  brain   produced  by  any 

cause,  the  patients  necessarily  lose  their  speech. 

That  a  severe  concussion  of  the  brain,  by  occasioning  a  rupture  of  the  nerves,  will 
superinduce  loss  of  speech  cannot  be  doubted.  Tlie  term  here  used  (fftifff?;/),  implies 
that  the  concussion  was  supposed  to  be  violent.  Compare  Coac.  iii,  370;  I  Morb. 
iii,  34. 

59.  In  a  person  affected  with  fever,  when  tliere  is  no  swelling 

in  the  fauces,  should   suffocation  suddenly  come  on,   and  the 

patient  not  be  able  to  swallow,   except  with  difficulty,  it   is   a 

mortal  symptom. 

Galen  remarks  that  this  Aphorism  is  nearly  the  same  as  Ai)h.  iv,  40.  It  tbercfoic 
does  not  bland  in  need  of  any  commentary. 


APHORISMS.  771 

59.*^  Tn   the  case   of  a  person    op[)rcss(Hl   by  fever,    if  the 
neck  be  turned   aside,    and  the  patient  cannot  swallow,  while 
there  is  no  swelling  in  the  neck,  it  is  a  mortal  sign. 
Tliis  is  nearly  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  35. 

60.  Fasting  should  be  prescribed  for  those  persons  who  have 
liumid  flesh;  for  fasting  dries  bodies. 

By  humid  flesh  is  meant  flesh  ahounding  with  humours.  That  fasting  produces 
desiccative  effects  on  the  hody  is  generally  held  I)y  our  author.  Con)pare  II  Di;ct, 
xxxviii,  1,2;  III  Diaet.  xvi,  12,  11;  II  Prajdict.  viii,  8,  13 ;  Insomn.  xv,  14,  15 ; 
Affect,  xxviii,  2,  xh,  7,  8,  11,  12. 

61.  When  there  are  changes  in  the  whole  body,  and  the 
body  becomes  sometimes  cold  and  sometimes  hot,  and  the 
colour  changes,  a  protracted  disease  is  indicated. 

This  is  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  40. 

6.2.  A  copious  sweat,  hot  or  cold,  constantly  flowing,  in- 
dicates a  superabundance  of  humidity  ;  we  must  evacuate  then, 
in  a  strong  person  upwards,  and  in  a  weak,  downwards. 

This  Aphorism  is  nearly  allied  to  Aph.  iv,  42.  On  febrile  sweats,  see  further 
Aph.  iv,  41,  46,  i,  21.  It  will  be  remarked  that  the  treatment  is  founded  on  our 
author's  favorite  principle  of  revulsion  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  determining,  in  the  present 
instance,  from  the  skin  to  the  internal  viscera.  Galen,  however,  inclines  to  think 
that  it  is  interpolated. 

68.  Fevers,  not  of  the  intermittent  type,  if  they  become 
exacerbated  every  third  day  are  dangerous  ;  but  if  they  intermit 
in  any  form  whatever,  this  shows  that  they  are  not  dangerous. 

This  is  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  43.     Galen  thinks  it  an  interpolation  here. 

64.  In  cases  of  protracted  fever,  either  chronic  abscesses  or 
pains  in  the  joints  come  on. 

This  is  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  44.     Galen  thinks  it  an  interpolation  here. 

65.  When  chronic  abscesses  {phymata)  or  pains  in  the 
joints  take  place  after  fevers,  the  patients  are  using  too  much 
food. 

This  is  the  same  as  Aph.  iv,  45.     Galen  thinks  it  an  interpolation  here. 

66.  If  one  give  to  a  person  in  fever  the  same  food  which 
is  given  to  a  person  in  good  health,  what  is  strength  to  the 
one  is  disease  to  the  other. 

This  most  important  principle  in  Therapeutics  is  strongly  brought  forth  in  the 
treatise  On  Ancient  Medicine  ;  indeed,  our  author,  in  that  work,  holds  that  it  is  the 
foundation  of  the  whole  art  of  medicine.  See  further,  the  treatise  On  Kegimen  in 
Acute  Diseases,  and  more  especially  what  is  said  in  the  Argument  and  luiles,  on  the 

'  Bis.     It  is  so  in  Littre's  edition. 


772  APHORISMS. 

a(li))iiiistration  of  food  in  fevers.  Galen  is  of  opinion  that  tlie  text  has  hccn  tampered 
with;  l)iit  it  is  not  easy  to  make  out  exactly  in  wliat  way,  as  the  text  of  his  commen- 
tary wonld  appear  to  have  undergone  alterations.  Compare  Aph.  ii,  10,  vii,  (37 ; 
Vet.  Med.  xii,  11. 

67.  We  must  look  to  the  urinary  evacuations,  whether  tliey 
resemble  those  of  persons  in  health ;  if  not  at  all  so,  they  are 
particularly  morbid,  but  if  they  are  like  those  of  healthy  persons, 
they  are  not  at  all  morbid. 

Galen  states  certain  verbal  objections  to  this  Aphorism,  which  make  him  suppose 
that  the  language  is  not  that  of  Hippocrates ;  it  is  evidently  derived,  however,  from 
the  great  principle  upon  which  tlie  Hij)poci-atic  system  of  prognostics  was  founded, 
namely,  the  comparison  of  morbid  with  healthy  appearances. 

68.  When  the  dejections  are  allowed  to  stand  and  not 
shaken,  and  a  sediment  is  formed  like  scrapings  (of  the  bowels), 
in  such  a  case  it  is  proper  to  purge  the  bowels ;  and  if  you 
give  ptisans  before  purging,  the  more  you  give  the  more  harm 

vou  Avill  do. 

Galen  holds  decidedly  that  this  Aphorism  is  supposititious.  His  Commentary 
contains  many  interesting  things,  Init  as  they  principally  relate  to  verbal  criticism,  I 
shall  not  think  of  introducing  them  in  this  place. 

69.  Crude  dejections  are  the  product  of  black  bile ;  if 
abundant,  of  more  copious,  and  if  dcficient_,  of  less  copious  col- 
lections of  it. 

This  Aphorism  is  evidently  supposititious,  as  maintained  by  Galen.  It  would  appear, 
however,  to  be  of  very  ancient  date,  since  the  very  earliest  of  the  commentators, 
namely,  HerophiUis,  Bacchius,  Heraclides,  and  Zeuxis  had  found  it  in  the  copies 
which  they  used.  Compare  Aph.  i,  22;  and  Judicat.  viii,  12.  Although  I  wish  to 
avoid  discussions  on  the  text  as  much  as  possible,  I  cannot  omit  saying  in  this  place, 
that  I  have  not  adopted  the  emendation  of  M.  Littre,  on  the  text  of  Galen,  and  that 
I  prefer  reading  the  passage  relating  to  the  earliest  commentators  as  follows:  uv 
iffTiv  6  'Hp6(pi\og,  Baicxtiog.  'HpaK\eiC)]g,  k.  t.X.  The  article  is  joined  to  the  name 
of  Heropliilus,  to  mark  his  greater  celebrity  than  the  others.  Galen  was  in  the 
practice  of  ])rcfixing  the  article  to  the  name  of  Ilerophilus.  See  the  preface  to 
his  work,  entitled  Explanatio  vocum  Hippocratis.  This,  in  fact,  is  in  accordance  with 
the  classical  usage  of  the  article  as  a  prefix  to  proper  names.  I  have  stated  my 
opinions  on  this  subject,  in  Hermes  Philologicus,  p.  ^)8,  and  English  and  Greek 
Lexicon,  Edinburgh,  18J0,  under  Master. 

70.  The  sputa  in  fevers,  not  of  an  intermittent  type  which 
are  livid,  streaked  with  blood,  and  fetid,  are  all  bad;  it  is 
favorable  when  this  evacuation,  like  the  urinary  and  alvinc 
passes  freely ;  and  whenever  any  discharge  is  suppressed  and 
not  purged  off  it  is  bad. 

This  Aphorism  is  nearly  tlie  same  as  Aph.  iv,  47. 

71.  When  you  wish  to  purge  the  body,  you  must  bring  it  into 


AIMIOIIISMS.  773 

a  state  favora1)le  to  evacuations ;  and  if  you  wish  to  dispose  it  to 
evacuations  upwards,  you  must  bind  the  belly;  and  if  you  wish  to 
dispose  it  to  evacuations  downwards,  you  must  moisten  the  belly. 

The  first  part  of  this  Apliorisiu  is  taken  from  Aph.  ii,  9  ;  the  rcinaiiidcr  is  supposed 
by  Galen  to  be  supposititious. 

72.  Sleep  and  watchfulness,  both  of  them,  when  immoderate, 
constitute  disease. 

This  Aphorism  is  repeated  fioni  Aphor.  ii,  3.  It  would  api)car  from  Galen  (hat  lie 
found  it  wanting  in  some  of  the  copies  which  he  had  consulted. 

73.  In  fevers  which  do  not  intermit,  if  the  external  parts 
be  cold,  and  the  internal  burning  hot,  and  fever  prevail,  it  is 
a  mortal  sign. 

This  aphorism  is  copied  from  Aph.  iv,  48,  with  certain  alterations  wliich  arc  any- 
thing but  improvements,  as  Galen  has  remarked. 

74.  In  a  fever  wdiich  does  not  intermit,  if  a  lip,  the 
nose,  or  an  eye  be  distorted,  if  the  patient  lose  his  sense  of 
sight  or  of  hearing,  while  now  in  a  weak  state, — whatever  of 
these  symptoms  occurs  it  is  mortal. 

This  aphorism  is  repeated  from  Aph.  iv,  49,  which  is  founded  on  I'rognost.  iii. 

75.  Upon  leucophlcgmatia  dropsy  supervenes. 

By  leucophlcgmatia,  as  formerly  stated  by  me,  was  understood  that  state  of  the 
health  which  often  precedes  dropsy.     See  Aph.  vii,  29. 

76.  Upon  diarrhoea  dysentery. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  Aph.  vii.  6,  but  evidently,  as  Galen  holds,  much  altered  for 
the  worse. 

77.  Upon  dysentery  lientery. 

This,  as  remarked  by  Galen,  is  a  portion  of  Aph.  vi,  43. 

78.  Upon  sphacelus  exfoliation  of  the  bone. 

As. Galen  remarks,  the  word  "supervenes"  {tniytviTat)  is  to  be  understood  in  this 
as  in  the  three  preceding  Aphorisms,  lie  further  remarks  that  there  is  an  ambiguity 
in  the  term  sphacelus,  which  may  either  apply  to  disease  of  the  bone  (that  is  to  say 
caries  or  necrosis),  or  to  that  of  the  soft  parts  (meaning  gangrene). 

79  and  80.  Upon  vomiting  of  blood  consumi)tion,  and  a 
purging  of  pus  upwards ;  U])on  consumption  a  deflusiou  from 
the  head  ;  upon  a  defluxion  diarrhoea ;  upon  diarrhoea  a  stoppage 
of  the  purging  upwards ;  upon  the  stoppage  of  it  death. 

As  is  remarked  by  Galen  in  his  Commentary,  the  present  Aphorism  is  evidently 
made  up  from  Aph.  vii,  15,  16,  incorrectly  put  together. 

81.  In  the  discharges  by  the  bladder,  the  belly,  and  tlie 
flesh    {l/ic  skill  /)   if  the   body  has   departed    slightly  from  its 


I 


774  APHORISiMS, 

natural  condition,  the  disease  is  slight ;  if  much;  it  is  great ; 

if  very  mucli,  it  is  mortal. 

This,  according  to  Galen,  is  the  last  of  tlie  Aphorisms  in  most  of  the  copies,  and 
yet,  he  adds,  some  of  them  have  certain  others  composed  from  the  genuine  Aphorisms 
of  our  author,  with  more  or  fewer  additions.  The  pi-esent  Aphorism,  he  states,  is 
composed  of  several  of  tlie  preceding  Apliorisms,  which  embody  our  author's  doctrines 
res])ccting  the  evacuations. 

8.2.   Persons  above  forty  years  of  age  who  are  affected  with 
frenzy,  do   not  readily  recover  ;    the  danger  is  less  when  the 
disease  is  cognate  to  the  constitution  and  age. 
This  Aphorism  is  founded  on  Apli.  iij  34,  and  Aph.  ii,  39. 

83.  In  whatever  diseases  the  eyes  weep  voluntarily,  it  is  a 

good  symptom,  hut  Avheu  involuntarih^,  it  is  a  bad. 

This  is  a  repetition  of  Aph.  iv,  52.  It  is  thus  rendered  by  Celsus,  "  sine  voluntate 
lacrimai'e,"  ii,  4.     By  "voluntarily"  is  meant  seemingly  "from  a  motive." 

84.  When  in  quartan  fevers  blood  flows  from  the  nostrils  it 

is  a  bad  symptom. 

This  Aphorism  is  legitimately  founded  on  the  following  passages  :  Coac.  ii,  37,  38, 
iii,  433 ;  VI  Epid.  ii,  40.  I  see  no  reason,  then,  why  it  should  not  be  received  as 
genuine. 

85.  Sweats    are    dangerous    when   they   do   not    occur   on 

critical  days,  when  they  are  strong,   and  quickly  forced  out  of 

the  forehead,  either  in  the  form  of  drops  or  in  streams,  and  if 

excessively  cold  aiul  copious  ;  for  sucli  a  sweat  must  proceed  from 

violence,  excess  of  pain,  and  prolonged  squeezing  {affiiclion  ?) 

This  Aphorism  is  doubtfully  formed  from  the  foUowing  ]:assagcs :  Judicat.  vi,  9  ; 
Pra?not.  v,  4;    I  Pradict.  v,  7  ;    Coac.  iii,  91,  iv,  38,  39  ;    Vict.  Acut.  liii,  8,  9. 

8(3.    In  a  chronic  disease  an  excessive  flux  from  the  bowels 
is  bad. 

I  know  not  wlieuce  this  Aphorism  is  derived,  and  tlie  language  creates  a  suspicion 
as  to  its  genuineness.  The  expression  here  used  for  "  an  excessive  flux  of  the 
bowels"  (KoiXiiji;  Karacjiopt'/),  docs  not  occur  elsewhere,  as  far  as  I  am  aware. 

87.    Those  diseases  which  medicines  do  not  cure,   iron   [the 

knife?)  cures  ;  those  which  iron  cannot  cure,  fire  cures;  and  those 

A\  hich  fire  cannot  cure,  arc  to  be  reckoned  wholly  incurable. 

This  Aphorism  is  celel)rated  in  modern  literature,  but  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  it 
is  nowhere  alluded  to  by  any  ancient  author,  and  being  transferred  to  this  place  from 
Section  viii,  there  must  be  admitted  to  be  consideral)le  reason  to  (piestion  its  genuine- 
ness. It  is  valuable,  however,  as  containing  a  striking  classification  of  the  remedial 
means  used  in  the  practice  of  medicine.  The  only  passage  in  tlie  Hippocratic  treatises 
at  all  parallel  to  it,  is  contained  in  the  work  De  Arte,  xiii,  12-18. 


THE   OATH 


THE   OATH. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

This  piece^  as  was  stated  in  the  Preliminary  Discourse,  is 
often  referred  to  by  ancient  authors,  and  there  seems  little  or 
no  reason  for  questioning  its  authenticity.  It  is  an  interesting 
document,  as  exhibiting  the  practitioners  of  medicine  in  a  very 
remote  age,  already  formed  into  a  regular  corporation,  bound  by 
an  oath  to  observe  certain  regulations,  and  having  regular  in- 
structors in  the  art.  The  })rcsent  piece  would  seem  to  be  an 
indenture  between  a  physician  and  his  pupil ;  and  it  is  most 
honorable  to  the  profession,  that  so  ancient  a  document  per- 
taining to  it,  instead  of  displaying  a  narrow-minded  and  ex- 
clusive selfishness,  inculcates  a  generoi.is^ine^of_conduct,  and 
enjoins  an  observance  of  the  rules  of  propriety,  and  of  the  laws 
of  domestic  morality,  - 

There  are  few  things  in  it  which  require  either  illustration  or 
comment.  M.  Littre  finds  some  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the 
circumstance  that  the  noviciate  in  the  art  is  interdicted  from 
the  practice  of  lithotomy.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  this 
operation  was  in  antiquit}^  always  practised  by  a  separate  class 
of  operators,  and  that  the  regular  members  of  the  profession 
never  meddled  with  it,  on  an^^  account.  Hence,  in  the  whole 
compass  of  ancient  medical  literature,  there  is  not  a  single  de- 
scription of  the  operation  by  a  person  v/ho  himself  had  actually 
performed  it.  Thus  no  mention  of  it  is  made  in  the  Hipnocratic 
treatises,  although  there  is  the  clearest  evidence  that  our  author 
xised  to  perform  all  the  regular  operations  then  recognised  by 
the  profession  as  legitimate.  Galen  also  speaks  of  bold  ope- 
rations performed  by  him  on  the  head  and  chest,  but  he  never 
once  hints  that  he  meddled  with  the  operation  of  lithotomy. 
The  descriptions  of  the  operation  given  by  Celsus  and  Paulus 
^Egineta  arc  evidently  copied.      The  Arabians  were,  if  possible, 


778  THE  OATH— ARGUMENT. 

still  more  prejudiced  against  lithotomy;  for  Aveazoar  pronounces 
the  operation  to  be  one_,  wliicli  no  respectable  physician  would 
witness,  and  far  less  perform.^  And  even  in  this  country,  at 
least  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  not  perhaps  much  more  than  a 
hundred  years  ago,  it  was  common  for  lithotomy  to  be  per- 
formed by  non-professional  persons.  Thus  I  remember  having 
been  told  in  my  youth,  by  an  old  man  residing  in  the  district 
of  Aberdeenshire,  called  Cromar,  that  in  his  younger  days  there 
was  a  miller  in  that  part  of  the  country  who  was  very  famous 
for  cutting  persons  for  the  stone.  In  many  parts  of  the  East 
the  operation  is  still  cultivated  as  a  separate  branch  of  the  pro- 
fession. See  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  ^^gineta.  Vol.  11, 
p.  3G3.  One,  therefore,  need  not  be  at  all  surprised  at  our 
author's  interdicting  his  pupils  from  the  performance  of  an 
operation  which,  at  that  time,  was  not  reckoned  respectable.  It 
is  true  that,  as  will  be  seen  in  our  notice  of  the  Books  on 
Diseases,  he  makes  mention  there  of  the  process  of  sounding  a 
patient  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  whether  or  not  there  was 
a  stone  in  the  bladder  ;  we  can  well  suppose,  however,  that  the 
general  jn'actitiouer  might  be  called  upon  to  pronounce  upon 
the  nature  of  a  case,  although  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  a  par- 
ticular operation  practised  for  the  relief  of  it.  At  all  events, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  ancient  times,  lithotomy  was 
intrusted  to  a  set  of  operators  separate  from  the  general  pro- 
fession. ^Vhy  this  operation  in  particular  was  proscrii)ed, 
cannot  indeed  be  satisfactorily  ascertained;  but  the  fact  is  as  I 
have  stated,  that,  through  all  anticpiity,  the  higher  medical 
authorities  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  The  conjecture  then 
advanced  hy  Ilcne  Moreau,"  that  castration,  and  not  lithotomy, 
"was  meant  in  this  place,  appears  to  me  utterly  inadmissible,  and 
is  rejected  by  jM.  Littre  in  his  Argument  to  this  piece. 

'  ii,  27. 

-  Til.  Bartlioliiii  Epist.,  Cent.  I,  ci)ist,  Ixx.vi. 


11^ 


THE   OATH. 

I  SWEAR  by  Apollo  the  pliysician,  and  ^sculapius,  and 
Health,  and  AU-lical/  and  all  the  gods  and  goddesses,  that, 
according  to  my  ability  and  judgment,  I  will  keep  this  Oath  and 
this  stipulation — to  reckon  him  who  taught  me  this  Art  equally 
dear  to  me  as  my  parents,  to  share  my  substance  with  him,  and 
i-elieve  his  necessities  if  required ;  to  look  upon  his  ofl'spring  in 
the  same  footing  as  my  own  brothers,  and  to  teach  them  this 
art,  if  they  shall  wish  to  learn  it,  without  fee  or  stipulation ; 
and  that  by  precept,  lecture,^  and  every  other  mode  of  in- 
struction, I  will  impart  a  knowledge  of  the  Art  to  my  own  sons, 
and  those  of  my  teachers,  and  to  disciples  bound  by  a  stipu- 
lation and  oath  according  to  the  laAv  of  medicine,  but  to  none 

'  Every  person  who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  ancient  literature  must  be  aware 
that  Apollo,  in  the  mythology  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  was  regarded  as  the  heal- 
ing god.  In  this  capacity  he  appears  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  Iliad,  as  the 
divinity  who  causes  and  removes  the  pestilence ;  and  in  the  Homeric  Hymn  to 
Apollo  he  is  introduced  in  the  same  capacity.  Hence  the  epithet "  healing"  {liiiog)  is 
applied  to  him  by  Sophocles  (CEd.  Tyr.,  154);  and  its  synonyme,  "the  healer"  or 
"the  physician"  (i';j-poc-),  by  our  author  in  this  place.  The  beautiful  lines  of  Ovid, 
in  reference  to  the  healing  powers  of  Apollo,  are  in  everybody's  mouth  : 

"  Inventum  Medicina  meum  est ;  opiferque  per  orbem 
Dicor,  et  herbarum  subjecta  potentia  nobis."  (^let.  i,  521.) 

^sculapius  was  universally  represented  as  the  son  of  Apollo,  according  to  Pindar, 
the  contemporary  of  our  author,  liy  the  nymph  Coronis  (Pyth.  iii) ;  but  according 
to  the  later  myths,  by  Arsiuoe  (Apollodor.  Bibl.  iii,  10).  I  need  scarcely  say  that 
he  was  the  patron-god  of  the  Asclepiada;,  or  priest -physicians,  to  which  order 
Hippocrates  belonged.  In  the  ancient  systems  of  mythology  he  is  described  as 
having  two  sons,  Podalirius  and  Machaon,  and  four  daughters,  /Egle,  Jaso,  Ilygeia, 
and  Panacea.  Of  these  it  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  notices  only  the  two 
last,  whose  names  are  here  rendered  Health  and  All-heal.  Sprengel  (Hist,  de  la 
Med.  torn,  i,  p.  468,  and  ix,  208),  argues  from  this  invocation  of  Apollo  as  a  healing 
divinity,  along  with  Hygeia  and  Panacea,  that  this  treatise  must  have  emanated  from 
the  school  of  Alexandria ;  I  can  see  no  force,  however,  in  this  argument. 

^  There  has  been  considerable  ditference  of  opinion  what  the  two  kinds  of  in- 
struction are  which  Hippocrates  adverts  to  here.  See  Zuinger,  Foes,  and  Littre. 
The  most  probable  supposition  appears  to  be,  that  the  former  applies  to  general 
precepts,  and  the  latter  to  professional  lectures.  Of  the  one  we  Iiave  a  good  speci- 
men in  the  Hippocratic  treatise  entitled  the  Prajcepts  {TrapayytXicn),  and  of  the 
other  in  the  Auscultationes  Naturalcs  (uKfJoaat^  (pvoiKcii)  of  Aristotle.  That  our 
author  delivered  public  lectures  in  the  cities  he  visited  there  can  be  no  doul)t,  for 
he  is  so  represented  by  his  contemporai'y,  Plato,  in  his  Protagoras.  It  will  be  seen, 
however,  from  this  piece,  that  he  confined  his  instruction  to  bis  own  fanrily  and  that 
of  his  teachers,  and  to  such  pupils  as  were  bound  In'  a  regular  stipulation  or  in- 
denture. 


780  THE  OATH. 

others.  I  Avill  follow  that  system  of  regimen  which,  according 
to  my  ability  and  judgment,  I  consider  for  the  benefit  of  my 
patients,  and  abstain  from  whatever  is  deleterious  and  mis- 
chievous. I  will  give  no  deadly  medicine  to  any  one  if  asked, 
nor  suggest  any  such  counsel ;  and  in  like  manner  I  will  not 
give  to  a  woman  a  pessary  to  produce  abortion. ^  With  purity 
and  with  holiness  I  will  pass  my  life  and  practise  my  Art.  I 
will  not  cut  persons  labouring  under  the  stone,  but  will  leave  this 
to  be  done  by  men  who  are  practitioners  of  this  work.  Into 
whatever  houses  I  enter,  I  will  go  into  them  for  the  benefit 
of  the  sick,  and  will  abstain  from  eveiy  voluntary  act  of  mischief 
and  corruption;  and,  further,  from  the  seduction  of  females  or 
males,  of  freemen  and  slaves.  Whatever,  in  connexion  with 
my  professional  practice,  or  not  in  connexion  with  it,  I  see  or 
hear,  in  the  life  of  men,  which  ought  not  to  ije  spoken  of 
abroad,  I  will  not  divulge,  as  reckoning  that  all  svich  should  be 
kept  secret.  While  I  continue  to  keep  this  Oath  un violated, 
may  it  l)e  granted  to  me  to  enjoy  life  and  the  practice  of  the 
art,  respected  l)y  all  men,  in  all  times  !  But  should  I  trespass 
and  violate  this  Oath,  may  the  reverse  1)C  my  lot ! 

'  We  liave  here  another  notalile  instance  how  much  our  auth.or  was  superior  to 
his  age  in  Imnianity  as  well  as  in  intelligence;  for  his  contemporary,  or  rather  his 
immediate  successor,  Aristotle,  though  the  son  of  a  physician,  and  although  there 
he  some  reason  to  suppose  that  he  was  a  daljhlcr  in  drugs  liefore  he  hetook  himself 
to  iihilosoj'hy,  treats  very  gravely  of  the  practice  of  i)roeiiring  ahortion,  and  does 
not  at  all  ohject  to  it,  if  performed  hefore  the  child  had  (piickened.  (Polit.  vii,  21.) 
Plato  also  alludes  to  the  practice.  (Theatetus.)  Juvenal,  in  his  Sixth  Satire,  speaks 
of  artilicial  ahortion  as  heing  a  very  common  practice  among  the  higher  class  of 
females  in  his  time.  The  mode  of  procuring  al)ortion  is  regularly  descrihed  hy 
Aviceinia  (iii,  xxi,  212),  and  hy  Uhases  (Contin.  vii,  2), — not,  however,  to  he  applied 
for  any  wicked  purpose,  hut  in  the  case  of  women  of  small  stature  who  had  proved  with 
child.  The  means  recommended  hy  these  autliors  are,  severe  hleeding,  especially  from 
the  ankle ;  leaping  from  a  height ;  the  administration  of  enimeiiagogues ;  the  appli- 
cation of  pessaries  medicated  with  hcUehore,  stavisacre,  mezereon,  and  the  like;  hut 
more  especially  forcihle  dilatation  of  the  os  tinc<e  with  a  roll  of  paper,  or  a  tuhe 
made  of  polished  wood,  or  a  quill.  There  can  he  no  douht,  in  short,  that  the  ancients 
had  anticipated  all  our  modern  methods  of  inducing  premature  delivery.  Aviceniia, 
moreover,  also  speaks  of  accomplishing  the  same  purjjose  hy  fumigations,  a  mode 
which  1  helieve  has  not  heen  thought  of  in  recent  times  since  this  operation  was 
revived,  hut  which  one  can  readily  suppose  well  calculated  to  destroy  the  foetus 
when  that  was  the  intention.  I  may  mention,  hy  the  way,  that  fumigation  of  the 
uterus  was  freely  practised  hy  the  medical  authorities  of  the  sixteenth  century.  An 
cxeellrnt  drawing  of  au  ap|)aratus  for  this  pur})ose  is  given  in  the  works  of  Andiio.se 
Pare,  xxiii,  48. 


THE   LAW. 


THE   LAW. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

It  is  not  easy  to  define  accurately  what  the  object  of  this 
little  tract  is,  nor  the  exact  sense  in  which  the  term  "  Law'^  is 
to  be  here  taken.  The  writer,  apparently,  wishes  to  sketch  the 
beau  ideal  of  a  perfect  physician,  and  in  this  point  of  view  the 
title  of  the  work  would  rather  deserve  to  be  rendered  "  tlio 
Standard'^  than  "  the  Law."  Zuinger,  in  his  annotations  on  it, 
remarks  that,  as  in  civil  society  there  is  an  universal  precept, 
applying  to  all  the  citizens,  the  arbiter  of  right  and  wrong,  so 
in  the  medical  commonwealth,  there  is  a  certain  law  which 
serves  as  a  rule,  or  gnomon,  by  which  true  physicians  are  dis- 
tinguished from  the  false.  This  piece,  then^  as  I  have  said,  is 
apparently  meant  as  an  ideal  sketch  of  what  a  true  physician 
ought  to  be,  and  it  gives  the  traits  by  which  the  real  are  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  false.  No  one  will  venture  to  deny 
tliat  the  outline  is  drawn  with  great  abilit}^,  and  therefore  the 
work  cannot  fail  to  be  read  with  interest,  whether  it  be  regarded 
as  the  production  of  Hippocrates  himself  or  of  one  of  his  im- 
mediate  successors. 


7SA 


THE  LAW. 

1.  Medicine  is  of  all  the  Arts  the  most  noble;  but,  owing 
to  the  ignorance  of  those  who  practise  it,  and  of  those  who,  in- 
considerately, form  a  judgment  of  them,  it  is  at  present  far 
behind  all  the  other  arts.  Their  mistake  appears  to  me  to 
arise  principally  from  this,  that  in  the  cities  there  is  no  punish- 
ment connected  with  the  practice  of  medicine  (and  with  it  alone) 
except  disgi'ace,^  and  that  does  not  hurt  those  Avho  are  familiar 
with  it.  !Such  persons  are  like  the  figures^  which  are  intro- 
duced in  tragedies,  for  as  they  have  the  shape,  and  dress,  and 
personal  appearance  of  an  actor,  but  are  not  actors,  so  also 
physicians  are  many  in  title  but  very  few  in  reality. 

2.  Whoever  is  to  acquire  a  competent  knowledge  of  medi- 
cine, ought  to  be  possessed  of  the  following  advantages :  a 
natural  disposition  ;  instruction ;  a  favorable  position  for  the 
study ;  early  tuition ;  love  of  labour ;  leisure.  First  of  all,  a 
natural  talent  is  required ;  for,  when  Nature  opposes,  every- 
thing else  is  vain  ;  ])ut  when  Nature  leads  the  way  to  what  is 
most  excellent,  instruction  in  the  art  takes  place,  which  the 
student  must  try  to  appropriate  to  himself  by  reflection, 
becoming  an  early  pupil  in  a  place  well  adapted  for  instruction. 
He  must  also  bring  to  the  task  a  love  of  labour  and  perse- 
verance, so  tliat  the  instruction  taking  root  may  bring  forth 
proper  and  abundant  fruits.'' 

'  In  this  passage  it  would  seein  to  be  asserted,  that  in  tlie  time  of  the  writer  there 
was  no  punishment  of  mnla  praxis  except  the  disgrace  which  it  entailed.  Many 
other  passages  in  the  Hippocratic  treatises  would  lead  to  the  inference  that  a 
more  severe  responsibility  attached  to  the  physician  for  unfortunate  practice ;  as  we 
often  find  the  practitioner  warned  not  to  have  auything  to  do  with  certain  cases. 
Here  the  author  of  this  treatise  seems  to  regret  the  want  of  a  proper  medical  police. 

*  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  is  meant  by  figures  {Trporri!i7roirn)  in  this  place. 
Zuinger  understands  by  it  the  mutes  introduced  on  the  stage  along  with  the  real 
actors  who  spoke  their  parts.  Foes  rather  understands  it  as  applying  to  masks,  or 
inanimate  figures,  and  this  seems  to  me  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  the  term. 

^  The  requisite  advantages  towards  acquiring  eminence  in  the  art  of  medicine  are 
here  given  with  much  precision.  There  is  a  manifest  resemblance  between  this 
passage  and  the  description  given  by  Quintilian  of  the  requisites  which  the  student 
of  rhetoric  ought  to  possess  in  order  to  attain  eminence  in  his  art.  The  passage  in 
question  is  so  striking,  that  I  shall  not  scruple  to  introduce  it  here,  and  shall  only 
remark  Ijeforehand,  that  as  Quintilian  was  certainly  not  unacquainted  with  the  works 


THE  LAW.  ;S;> 

3.  Instruction  in  medicine  is  like  tlic  culture  of  tlic  pro- 
ductions of  tlie  earth.  For  our  natural  disposition  is,  as  it 
were,  the  soil ;  the  tenets  of  our  teacher  are,  as  it  were,  the 
seed;  instruction  in  youth  is  like  the  planting  of  the  seed  in 
the  ground  at  the  proper  season ;  the  place  where  the  instruc- 
tion is  communicated  is  like  the  food  imparted  to  vegetables 
by  the  atmosphere ;  diligent  study  is  like  the  cultivation  of  the 
fields ;  and  it  is  time  which  imparts  strength  to  all  things  and 
brings  them  to  maturity.^ 

4.  Having  brought  all  these  requisites  to  the  study  of  medi- 
cine^ and  having  acquired  a  true  knowledge  of  it,  Ave  shall 
thus,  in  travelling  through  the  cities,"  be  esteemed  physicians 
not  only  in  name  but  in  reality.  But  inexperience  is  a  bad 
treasure,  and  a  bad  fund  to  those  who  possess  it,  whether  in 
opinion  or  reality,^  being  devoid  of  self-reliance  and  contented- 
ness,  and  the  nurse  both  of  timidity  and  audacity.  For  timidity 
betrays  a  want  of  powers,  and  audacity  a  want  of  skill.  There 
are,  indeed,  two  things,  knowledge  and  opinion,  of  which  the 
one  makes  its  possessor  really  to  know,  the  other  to  be  ignorant. 

5.  Those  things  which  are  sacred,  are  to  be  imparted  only 
to  sacred  persons ;  and  it  is  not  lawful  to  impart  them  to  the 
profane  until  they  have  been  initiated  in  the  mysteries  of 
the  science. 

of  Hippocrates  (Inst.  Orat.  Ill,  6),  he  may  have  had  the  present  tract  in  view  when 
he  wrote  as  follows  :  "  Illiul  tamen  in  primis  testandum  est,  nihil  pr;ecepta  atqne  vires 
valere,  nisi  adjuvaate  natura.  Quapropter  ei  cni  deerit  ingenium,  non  niagis  ha?c 
scripta  sunt,  quam  de  agrorum  cultu  sterilihus  agris.  Sunt  et  alia  ingenita  quidem 
adjumenta,  vox,  latus  patiens  la])oris,  valetudo,  constantia,  decor :  qua;  si  modica 
ohtigerunt,  possunt  ratione  ampliari ;  sed  nonnunquara  ita  desunt,  ut  bona  etiam 
ingenii  studiique  corrumpant :  sicnt  et  hsec  ipsa  sine  doctore  perito,  studio  pertinaci, 
scribendi,  legendi,  dicendi  multa  et  continua  exercitatione,  per  se  nihil  prosunt." 
Inst.  Orat.  Proem.  (6.) 

'  The  points  of  comparison  in  this  paragraph  are  placed  in  a  striking  point  of  view, 
but  the  style  of  writing  rather  savours  of  a  later  age  than  that  of  our  author. 

"^  The  author  here  evidently  refers  to  the  practice  of  the  pcriodeuicB,  or  travelling 
physicians. 

^  See  Foes,  (Ec.  Hipp,  in  voce  vnap. 


50 


ON   ULCERS. 


ON   ULCERS. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

I  HAVE  stated  in  the  Second  Section  of  the  Preliminary 
Discourse,  the  reasons  which  determined  me  to  allow  this 
treatise  a  place  among  the  genuine  works  of  Hippocrates,  and 
I  need  only  add  further  here,  that  a  careful  reconsideration  of 
the  subject  has  confirmed  me  in  the  judgment  on  it  which  I 
then  announced.  When  we  take  into  account  the  positive 
manner  in  which  Galen,  on  very  many  occasions,  dwells  upon 
its  contents  with  the  fullest  confidence  tliat  tliey  are  the 
opinions  of  our  author,  and  reflect  that  all  the  subsequent 
authorities,  including  those  of  the  Arabian  and  Roman  periods, 
and  the  learned  restorers  of  ancient  surgery  in  the  fifteenth 
and  sixteenth  centuries,  agreed  in  recognising  it  as  authentic,  I 
cannot  see  how,  consistently  with  the  principles  upon  which 
it  is  now  generally  admitted  that  questions  regarding  the 
genuineness  of  ancient  works  should  be  settled,  we  could  be  at 
all  warranted  in  rejecting  it  without  disputing  the  claims  of 
the  greater  number  of  treatises  contained  in  the  small  list  of 
the  Hippocratic  works  which  are  still  acknowledged  as  genuine. 
Certain  it  is,  at  all  events,  that  the  evidence  in  support  of  this 
treatise,  is  far  greater  than  that  upon  which  the  treatises 
'  On  Ancient  Medicine,'  and  '  The  Law,'  have  been  sus- 
tained as  being  the  productions  of  Hippocrates.  We  shall  be 
better  able,  however,  to  judge  whether  the  external  evidence 
in  this  case  be  confirmed  or  neutralised  by  the  internal,  when 
we  have  taken  a  careful  inspection  of  its  contents. 

In  the  beginning  of  it  there  is  given  an  exposition  of  the 
principles  upon  which  ulcers  are  to  be  treated.  Agreeably  to 
the  great  rule  of  medical  practice,  so  often  inculcated  in  the 
Hippocratic  treatises,  namely,  that  ^'  diseases  are  to  be  cured 
by  their  contraries,"  he  argues  that  as  a  sound  part  of  the 
body  is  dry,  and    an   ulcerated,   moist,   drying    or   desiccant 


790  ULCERS. 

things  are  indicated  in  the  cure  of  Avounds^  and  sores,  and 
consequently  Ave  must  avoid  using  ail  liquid  things,  Avith  the 
exception  of  wine,  for  Avhich  he  claims  an  especial  indulgence, 
owing,  no  doubt,  to  its  being  possessed  of  desiccaut  powers. 
A  low  diet  is  particularly  enjoined  when  a  sore  shows  any 
tendency  to  gangrene,  and  especially  in  ulcers  of  the  joints 
and  thigh,  when  there  is  danger  of  spasm  (tetanus?),  and  in 
injuries  of  the  head,  Avhen  complicated  Avith  fracture.  Rest  is 
particularly  enjoined,  and  all  scA^ere  exercise  proscribed.  Two 
opposite  modes  of  practice  are  mentioned  in  the  treatment  of 
recent  wounds, — either  to  promote  a  healthy  suppuration  or  to 
use  means  for  preventing  the  formation  of  pus.  The  discharge 
of  blood  from  a  fresh  Avound  is  to  be  encouraged,  and  in  old 
ulcers  the  callous  edges  are  to  be  scarified  in  order  to  evacuate 
the  unhealthy  blood.  After  the  discharge  of  the  blood,  the 
part  is  to  be  covered  with  a  piece  of  sponge,  and  some  slender 
leaves  placed  over  it.  As  a  general  rule,  oil,  and  all  greasy 
things,  are  to  be  avoided  in  the  treatment  of  ulcers.  But, 
if  used  at  all,  they  answer  best  in  cold  and  hot  Aveather. 
(See.§l.) 

Gentle  purging  is  recommended  for  most  ulcers,  and  in 
wounds  of  the  head,  belly,  and  joints,  in  gangrenous  and  other 
intractable  sores,  and  in  those  requiring  sutures.  The  sore  is 
to  be  frequently  Aviped  Avith  a  sponge,  and  a  dry  piece  of  clean 
cloth  is  to  be  applied.  jNIild  weather  is  favorable  to  the 
healing  of  Avounds,  and  heat  is  preferable  to  cold.  Ulcers 
which  are  foul,  Avill  not  heal  until  thcA^  are  cleansed.  When 
the  parts  adjoining  to  a  sore  are  inflamed  or  gangrenous,  or 
Avhen  there  is  a  varix  in  a  part,  the  sore  Avill  not  heal.  (§  2.) 

Circular  sores  are  to  be  treated  by  having  their  edges  scari- 
fied. When  erysipelas  supervenes,  emetics  or  purgatives  are 
to  be  administered.  When  the  parts  around  the  sore  are 
swollen,  a  cataplasm  is  to  be  applied  to  the  adjoining  parts,  but 
not  to  the  sore  itself,  in  order  to  allow  a  free  discharge  of  the 
pus.  After  the  swelling  has  subsided,  a  bandage  is  to  l)e 
applied,  so  as  to  bring  the  separated  parts  close  to  one  another. 
Any  piece  of  flesh  Avhicli  prevents  the  lips  from  coming  close 
together,  is  to  be  removed.  Sponges,  Avith  leaves  above  them, 
as  formerly  directed,  are  to  be  placed  on  the  sore.  (§  3.) 

In  the  next  paragraph  our  author  giA^es  minute  directions  for 


ARGUMENT.  791 

preparing  cata])lusms,  consisting  of  various  ingredients  of  a 
desiccative  and  emollient  nature,  such  as  ravdlcin,  linseed,  and 
tlie  like.  These  are  either  to  he  laid  on  the  sore,  or  with  a 
clean  piece  of  cloth  wetted  in  wine  and  oil,  applied  next  to  the 
sore.  (§  4.) 

In  the  next  paragraph  are  described  several  preparations, 
mostly  of  a  desiccative  and  caustic  nature,  for  the  treatment  of 
ulcers.  The  object  is  sometimes  not  very  accurately  defined, 
but  it  is  impossible  not  to  see,  in  certain  cases,  that  they  arc 
prescribed  for  the  purpose  of  producing  a  superficial  slough  or 
scab,  in  order  to  imitate  one  of  Nature's  modes  of  effecting  a 
cure.  Of  the  articles  entering  into  the  composition  of  these 
medicinal  preparations,  the  flowers  of  copper,  myrrh,  pome- 
granate rind,  and  galls  are  some  of  the  most  important.  (§  5.) 

In  the  sixth  paragraph  there  are  two  prescriptions  for  the 
purpose  of  preventing  inflammation,  and  for  cleansing  foul 
ulcers.      They  are  strongly  discutient  and  detergent. 

In  the  seventh  there  are  also  some  very  important  prescrip- 
tions, evidently  meant  to  act  upon  the  principle  of  producing 
a  seal)  upon  the  sore  :  of  these,  one,  to  which  I  would  direct 
attention,  consists  of  the  impure  sulphate  of  copper,  alum,  and 
elaterium.  (See  the  Annotations.)  It  is  said  to  be  very 
efficacious  in  removing  warts  from  the  genital  memljcr. 

The  eighth  contains  some  prescriptions  for  medicines  which 
are  represented  as  being  sarcotic,  or  incarnative,  that  is  to  say, 
calculated  to  promote  the  filling  up  of  hollow  sores.  They  are 
mostly  of  a  detergent  and  desiccative  nature,  such  as  linseed, 
the  fatty  part  of  a  fig,  horehound,  and  the  like.  The  principle 
upon  w'hich  they  are  applied,  is  not  stated  by  our  author. 

In  the  ninth  paragraph  is  described  the  composition  of  a 
medicinal  preparation  called  caricum,  consisting  of  strong  escha- 
rotic  and  septic  articles,  such  as  hellebore,  the  flakes  of  copper, 
arsenic,  and  cantharides.  It  is  evidently  meant  to  be  used,  for 
the  purpose  of  removing  the  morbid  parts  of  indolent  and 
malignant  ulcers,  and  with  this  view,  it  would  be  difficult, 
even  at  the  present  day,  to  find  ingredients  more  likely  to  be 
efficacious. 

In  the  tenth  paragraph,  likewise,  there  are  given  various 
prescriptions,  consisting  of  articles  mostly  of  a  corrosive  nature, 
such  as  misy  and  chalcitis,  which,  as  explained  in  the  Annota- 


792  ULCERS. 

tions^  tliere  is  every  reason  to  regard  as  having  been  mere 
varieties  of  the  chalcanthos,  or  impure  native  sulpliate  of  copper. 
In  the  text  these  apphcatious  are  designated  as  being  adapted 
to  fresh  wounds^  hut,  as  stated  in  the  Annotations,  there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  there  is  some  mistake  about  this  title. 

In  the  eleventh  is  described  an  application  for  old  ulcers 
and  sections  of  tendons,  consisting  of  melilot,  myrtle,  and  a 
herl)  which  probably  was  some  species  of  the  Tot^mentUla  or 
Potent  a  la. 

In  the  twelfth  there  are  various  prescriptions  for  preparations 
designated  as  emollient,  and  the  term,  although  questioned  by 
some  of  the  earlier  commentators  in  modern  times,  seems  not  so 
very  inappropriate,  as  they  all  consist,  in  a  great  measure,  of 
axunge,  oil,  ceruse,  wax,  the  grease  of  a  goose,  and  so  forth. 

The  thirteenth  treats  of  burns ;  for  these  are  recommended 
things  of  a  cooling  and  digestive  nature  without  ))ungency. 
The  roots  of  the  ilex  boiled  in  wine  or  water  until  of  the  con- 
sistence of  a  liniment,  are  particularly  mentioned.  The  squill 
is  an  ingredient  in  the  composition  of  several  of  these  pre- 
scriptions. 

In  the  fourteenth  paragraph  is  laid  down  the  treatment  of 
oedemata,  or  swellings  in  the  feet,  the  particular  nature  of  which, 
however,  is  not  sufficientlv  defined.  Scarifications  are  much 
recommended  in  the  treatment  of  them. 

The  treatment  of  varix  by  puncture  is  briefly  noticed  in  the 
fifteenth  paragraph. 

The  operation  of  venesection,  and  the  various  circumstances 
relating  to  it,  ai'e  briefly  noticed  in  the  sixteenth. 

The  last  paragraph  is  devoted  to  the  description  of  the 
operation  of  cupping.  As  tlie  contents  of  the  last  two  para- 
graphs are  foreign  to  the  subject  on  hand,  there  is  some  reason 
for  suspecting  them  to  be  an  appendix  to  the  treatise. 

From  this  brief  outline  of  its  contents,  it  will  be  readily 
admitted  that  the  work  is  one  of  considerable  importance,  and 
it  appears  to  me  that,  when  fairly  regarded,  there  is  nothing 
in  it  at  all  derogatory  to  the  high  reputation  of  our  author. 
That  it  is  in  some  respects  defective,  and  contains  matters 
foreign  to  the  professed  object  of  the  treatise,  must,  perhaps, 
be  admitted,  but  the  same  objections  apply  to  certain  other 
treatises   wdiich    are   generallv    recognised    as   being   genuine. 


ARGUMEiNT.  /9;3 

That  it  contains  mucli  valuable  matter  will  scarcely  be  ques- 
tioned by  an}^  practical  surgeon ;  indeed,  one  cannot  fail  to 
remark  with  astonishment,  how  many  of  the  general  principles 
upon  which  ulcers  of  all  descriptions  arc  now  treated,  may  be 
traced  out  in  the  present  work.  In  particular,  it  will  be 
remarked  that  the  mode  of  treating  ulcers  by  the  formation  of 
a  seal),  which  was  much  approved  of  by  Hunter  and  his  friend. 
Sir  Everard  Home,  and  also  that  the  method  of  curing  indolent 
ulcers  by  applications  which  produce  sloughing  of  their  callous 
edges  are  recommended  in  this  treatise. 

Rest,  and  a  spare  diet,  it  will  further  be  remarked,  are  held 
by  otir  author  to  be  the  best  remedial  means  for  promoting 
the  cure  of  an  ulcer,  and  he  particularises  gangrenous  sores  as 
being  more  especially  benefited  by  this  plan  of  treatment. 
This  is  a  rule  of  practice  about  which  there  is  great  difference 
of  opinion  among  our  surgical  authorities  at  the  present  time, 
some  of  them,  in  gangrene  of  the  toes,  contending  for  the  stimu- 
lant, and  others  for  the  opposite  plan  of  treatment.  It  will  be 
seen,  then,  that  the  latter  have  Hippocrates  on  their  side,  and 
along  with  him  a  whole  host  of  ancient  authorities.^  While  upon 
this  subject  I  may  take  the  opportunity  of  mentioning  that  the 
stimulant  plan  of  treatment  is  not  at  all  of  long  standing,  for, 
as  far  as  I  am  aware,  all  the  earlier  modern  authorities  in 
surgery  are  advocates  for  the  mild  plan  of  cure.  I  shall  only 
take  time  to  refer  to  one  of  the  best  authorities  of  the  sixteenth 
century — Tagault.  ^ 

The  views  of  our  author  in  directing  the  choice  of  iucarnants, 
or  sarcotic  medicines  are  not  very  clear,  and  yet  such  as  they 
are,  they  guided  the  practice  of  the  profession  for  full  two 
thousand  years.  For  example,  Galen  expounds  the  principle 
fully,  professing  to  have  adopted  it  from  Hippocrates,  in  the 
fourth  book  of  his  work,  '  On  Therapeutics,'  and  gives  his  most 
decided  adherence  to  it.  The  same  principles  are  expounded 
and  advocated  bv  Avicenna,^  and  Halv  Abbas.^  In  like  manner, 
Tagault  contends  that  an  incarnant  medicine  should  consist  of 
articles  which  are  moderately  desiccative  and  detergent."^  Verv 
similar  views  are  also  advocated   by  Holler,   another  surgical 

'  See  in  particular,  Avicenna,  I,  iv,  28. 

-  Inst.  Chirnrg.  i,  7.  •*  I,  iv,  28. 

*  Tract,  iv,  18.  s  De  Yulncr.  i. 


794  ULCERS. 

authority  of  about  the  same  age.^  Like  Tagaiilt,  he  hokls  that  the 
best  sarcotics  consist  of  articles  which  are  moderately  detergent 
and  desiccative.  Much  the  same  principles  are  laid  down  by 
Marianus  Sanctus." 


ON  ULCERS. 

1.  We  must  avoid  wetting  all  sorts  of  ulcers  except  with 
wine/  unless  the  nicer  be  situated  in  a  joint.  For,  the  dry  is 
nearer  to  the  sound,  and  the  wet  to  the  unsound,  since  an  ulcer 
is  Avet,  but  a  sound  part  is  dry.  And  it  is  better  to  leave  the 
part  without  a  bandage  iniless  a  cataplasm  Ijc  applied.  Neither 
do  certain  ulcers  admit  of  cataplasms,  and  this  is  the  case  with 
the  recent  rather  than  the  old,  and  with  those  situated  in  joints. 
A  spare  diet  and  water  agree  with  all  ulcers,  and  with  the  more 
recent  rather  than  the  older ;  and  with  an  ulcer  w^hich  either  is 
inflamed  or  is  about  to  be  so ;  and  where  there  is  danger  of 
gangrene;  and  with  the  ulcers  and  inflammations  in  joints; 
and  where  there  is  danger  of  convulsion  ;  and  in  wounds  of  the 
belly ;  but  most  especially  in  fractures  of  the  head  and  thigh, 
or  any  other  member  in  which  a  fracture  may  have  occurred.' 
In  the  case  of  an  ulcer,  it  is  not  expedient  to  stand ;  more 
especially  if  the  ulcer  be  situated  in  the  leg ;  but  neither,  also, 
is  it  proper  to  sit  or  walk.^  But  quiet  and  rest  are  particularly 
expedient.''  Recent  ulcers,  both  the  ulcers  themselves  and  the 
surrounding  parts,  will  be  least  exposed  to  inflammation,  if  one 

'  De  Med.  Chinirg.,  vi,  8.  2  j)e  Ulcer.,  iii. 

■^  Dr.  Hosaek  mentions  the  use  of  wine  as  a  dressing  to  wounds  among  the  im- 
provements in  surgical  practice,  which  the  profession  might  derive  from  a  study 
of  Hippocrates.  It  is,  in  fact,  often  used  in  this  way  by  the  French  surgeons. 
Galen,  adhering  to  the  principle  here  laid  down,  extends  in  so  far  the  application 
of  it :  he  says,  the  most  proper  thing  to  he  used  is  wine,  or  oxycrate,  or  the  decoc- 
tion of  an  austere  herb ;  that  is  to  say,  things  possessed  of  a  desiccant  power.  (Meth. 
Aled.,  iv.)     Upon  the  whole,  however,  he  prefers  wine,  (iii,  4.) 

■*  It  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  in  this  work,  as  in  the  preceding  one.  On 
the  Articulations,  is  a  decided  advocate  for  a  low  diet  and  very  mild  treatment  in 
the  management  of  reccut  ulcers. 

^  Galen  comments  upon  this  rule  of  practice  in  his  work.  On  Trembling. 

*  Celsus  renders  this  sentence  as  follows  :  "  Optimum  etiani  medicamentum  quies 
est ;  moveri  et  ambularc  nisi  sanis  alicnum."  (v.) 


ULCERS. 


/y.> 


shall  bring  them  to  a  suppuration  as  expeditiously  as  possible, 
and  if"  the  matter  is  not  prevented  from  escaping  by  the 
mouth  of  the  sore ;  or,  if  one  should  restrain  the  suppuration, 
so  that  only  a  small  and  necessary  quantity  of  pus  may  be 
formed,  and  the  sore  may  be  kept  dry  by  a  medicine  which  does 
not  create  irritation.^  For  the  part  becomes  inflamed  when 
rigor  and  throbbing  supervene;  for  ulcers  then  get  inflamed 
when  suppuration  is  about  to  form.  A  sore  suppurates  Avlicn 
the  blood  is  changed  and  becomes  heated ;  so  that  becoming 
putrid,  it  constitutes  the  pus  of  such  ulcers.^  When  you  seem 
to  require  a  cataplasm,  it  is  not  the  ulcer  itself  to  which  you 
must  apply  the  cataplasm,  but  to  the  surrounding  parts,  so  that 
the  pus  may  escape  and  the  hardened  parts  may  become  soft. 
Ulcers  formed  either  from  the  parts  having  been  cut  through  by 
a  sharp  instrument,  or  excised,  admit  of  medicaments  for  bloody 
Avounds  (a'fu^o),  and  which  will  prevent  suppuration  by  being 
desiccant  to  a  certain  degree."     But,  when  the  flesh  has  been 

'  Vidus  Vidius  understands  the  last  clause  of  this  sentence  {(papfxciKcj  /n)  -ipicKkXn) 
in  a  diflerent  sense ;  he  reads  and  explains  these  words  as  follows :  "  vinculum  non 
2)ostulant,  jure  autem  ita  Latinum  fecimus.  Nam  TrepiaiaXoc  Grajce  subligaculum 
significat,  nee  quidquam  verisimilius  nol)is  visum  est,  quam  Hippocrateni  loqui  de 
medicamento  quod  non  alligetur."  He  understands  it,  then,  to  mean  an  application 
which  does  not  require  to  he  kept  on  the  place  by  a  tight  bandage.  The  reader 
will  remark  that,  in  this  place,  our  author  mentions  two  opposite  modes  of  treating 
fresh  ulcers,  namely,  either  by  promoting  moderate  suppuration,  or  by  using  means 
to  check  it.  The  text,  indeed,  is  in  an  equivocal  state,  but  I  can  make  no  more  of  it. 
In  the  work,  On  Female  Complaints,  the  author  lays  down  the  principles  for  manag- 
ing the  treatment  of  ulcers  as  follows :  "  In  order  to  cure  ulcers  they  are  to  be  kept 
free  of  inflammation,  and  cleansed,  and  filled  up,  and  brought  to  cicatrization;  water 
is  to  be  given  for  di-ink,  but  not  wine ;  little  food,  and  by  no  means  a  full  diet."  (Lib.  i.) 
These  rules,  in  the  main,  it  will  be  remarked,  agree  with  those  here  laid  down,  only 
no  mention  is  made  of  any  means  being  used  to  promote  suppuration ;  but  every 
person  acquainted  with  practice  is  aware  that  a  healthy  suppuration  is  one  of  the 
best  means  of  preventing  inflammation. 

■■'  Our  author  here,  as  elsewhere,  assumes  that  pus  is  nothing  else  but  vitiated 
blood.  Vidus  Vidius  holds  that  this  is  a  fact  so  evident  as  not  to  requUe  any  proof. 
It  certainly  must  be  admitted  to  be  highly  probable,  and  yet  the  chemical  authorities 
of  the  day  are  not  agreed  on  this  point.  See  Simon's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii,  p.  86  ;  and 
Berard,  Diet,  de  Med.,  torn.  xxvi.  The  French  physiologists  seem  to  deny  that  pus 
is  a  direct  transformation  of  the  blood. 

^  The  class  of  applications  here  referred  to  are  described  more  fully  by  C'elsus 
than  by  any  other  ancient  author.  The  object  of  them  all  v.ould  appear  to  be  to 
etfect  a  cure  by  the  formation  of  a  scab  upon  the  sore.  The  words  of  Celsus  are : 
"  Ex  emplastris  autem  nulla  raajorem  usum  praestant,  quam  quae  cruentis  protinus 


796  ULCERS. 

contused  and  roughly  cut  by  the  weapon,  it  is  to  be  so  treated 
tliat  it  may  suppurate  as  quickly  as  possible ;  for  thus  the 
inflammation  is  less,  and  it  is  necessary  that  the  pieces  of  flesh 
which  arc  bruised  and  cut  should  melt  away  by  becoming- 
putrid,  being  converted  into  pus,  and  that  new  flesb  should 
then  grow  up.  In  every  recent  ulcer,  except  in  the  belly,  it 
is  expedient  to  cause  blood  to  flow  from  it  abundantly,^  and  as 
may  seem  seasonable ;  for  thus  will  the  wound  and  the  adjacent 
parts  be  less  attacked  with  inflammation.  And,  in  like  manner, 
from  old  ulcers,  especially  if  situated  in  the  leg,  in  a  toe  or 
finger,  more  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  body.  For  when 
tlie  blood  floAvs  they  become  drier  and  less  in  size,  as  being 
thus  dried  up.  It  is  this  {the  blood?)  esi)ecially  which  prevents 
such  ulcers  from  healing,  by  getting  into  a  state  of  putrefac- 
tion and  corruption.  But,  it  is  expedient,  after  the  flow  of  the 
blood,  to  bind  over  the  ulcer  a  thick  and  soft  piece  of  sponge, 
rather  dry  than  wet,  and  to  place  above  the  sponge  some 
slender  leaves.  Oil,  and  all  things  of  an  emollient  and  oily 
nature,  disagree  Avith  such  ulcers,  unless  they  are  getting  nearly 
well.  Neither  does  oil  agree  with  wounds  which  have  been  re- 
cently inflicted,  nor  yet  do  medicines  formed  with  oil  or  suet, 
more  especially  if  the  ulcer  stands  in  need  of  more  cleansing. 
And,  in  a  word,  it  is  in  summer  and  in  winter  that  we  are  to 
smear  with  oil  these  sores  that  require  such  medicines." 

2.  Gentle  purging  of  the  bowels  agrees  with  most  ulcers,  and 
in  wounds  of  the  head,  belly,  or  joints,  where  there  is  danger 
of  gangrene,  in  such  as  require  sutures,  in  phagedienic,  spreading, 

vulneribus  injiciiintur ;  traiiui  Grtcci  vocant.  Ilacc  enim  reprimnnt  inflammationeni, 
nisi  magna  vis  eani  cogit,  atquc  illiiis  quoque  impctura  niinuunt  ;  tnm  glutinant 
vulnera,  quse  id  patiuntur,  cicatriccm  iisdeni  inducunt ;  constant  auteni  ex  medica- 
mentis  non  pingui!)us,  ideoquc  oX(— air//  nominantur."  He  gives  prescriptions  for  no 
fewer  than  twenty-eight  ointments  of  this  class.  Of  these,  the  first  consists  of 
verdigris,  litliarge,  aUim,  (h'ied  ])itch,  (hied  pine-rosin,  with  a  portion  of  oil  and 
vinegar,  (v,  19.) 

'  Vidus  Vidius  remarks  on  lliis  passage,  that  the  rule  of  jtractice  here  stated  by 
Hippocrates,  namely,  that  a  discharge  of  Idood  from  a  recent  ulcer  is  liighly  bene- 
ficial, had  been  injudiciously  departed  from  by  surgeons  in  his  time,  who  usually  made 
haste  to  stop  the  flow  of  blood  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  same  remark  may  apply 
to  the  surgical  practice  of  the  present  age. 

'■'  What  our  author  here  remarks  on  oil  as  an  ajiplication  to  sores,  deserves  to  I)e 
seriously  considered.  I  cannot  but  think  that  at  the  present  time  it  is  often  very 
injudiciously  a))plied  to  fresh  wounds. 


ULCERS.  797 

and  in  otherwise  inveterate  ulcers.'  And  wbcn  you  want  to 
ajjply  a  l)andage,  no  plasters  are  to  be  used  until  you  have  ren- 
dered the  sore  dry,  and  then  indeed  jou  may  apply  thera.^ 
The  ulcer  is  to  be  frequently  cleaned  Avith  a  sponge,  and  then 
a  dry  and  clean  piece  of  cloth  is  to  be  frequently  applied  to  it, 
and  in  this  way  the  medicine  which  it  is  supposed  will  agree 
with  it  is  to  be  applied,  either  with  or  without  a  bandage.  The 
hot  season  agrees  better  than  winter  with  most  idccrs,  except 
those  situated  in  the  head  and  belly  ;  but  the  equinoctial  season 
agrees  still  better  with  them.  Ulcers  which  have  been  properly 
cleansed  and  dried  as  they  should  be,  do  not  usually  get  into 
a  fungated  state.  When  a  bone  has  exfoliated,  or  has  been 
burned,  or  sawed,  or  removed  in  any  other  way,  the  cicatrices 
of  such  ulcers  become  deeper  tliau  usual.^  Ulcers  which  are 
not  cleansed,  are  not  disposed  to  unite  if  brought  together,  nor 
do  the  lips  thereof  approximate  of  their  own  accord.  When 
the  points  adjoining  to  an  ulcer  are  inflamed,  the  ulcer  is  not 
disposed  to  heal  until  the  inflammation  subside,  nor  when  the 
surrounding  parts  are  blackened  by  mortification,  nor  when  a 
varix  occasions  an  overflow  of  blood  in  the  part,  is  the  ulcer  dis- 
posed to  heal,  unless  you  bring  the  surrounding  parts  into  a 
healthy  condition.* 

3.  Circular  ulcers,  if  somewhat  hollow,  vou  must  scarify  all 
along  their  edges,  or  to  the  extent  of  half  the  circle,  according 
to  the  natural  stature  of  the  man.^  When  erysipelas  supervenes 
upon  any  sore,  you  must  purge  the  body  in  the  way  most  suit- 
able to  the  ulcer,  either  upwards  or  downwards.^    AVhen  swelling 

'  Galen  approves  highly  of  this  practice,  the  merits  of  which  he  discusses  fully. 
(Meth.  Med.,  iv,  6.) 

^  The  text  here  is  in  a  very  unsatisfactory  state.  What  I  have  given  appears  to 
be  the  most  natural  sense  of  the  passage. 

^  Compare  Aph.  vi,  45.  It  will  readily  be  understood  that  there  must  be  a  de- 
pression at  any  place  where  the  bone  has  been  severely  injured  so  as  to  exfoliate. 

■*  See  Galen,  Meth.  Med.,  iv,  5.  The  ordinary  causes  which  prevent  an  ulcer  from 
healing  are  here  stated  very  distinctly. 

*  See  Galen,  Meth.  Med.,  iv,  .'i.  The  medical  litterateurs,  Cassius  Medicus  and 
Alexander  Aphodisiensis,  in  their  Problems,  discuss  the  question  why  circular  sores 
are  particularly  difficult  to  heal.  Every  experienced  surgeon  must  be  aware  of  the 
fact,  however  it  may  be  accounted  for. 

*  Galen,  iv,  5.  Galen  remarks  on  this  passage,  that  whoever  reads  the  present  work 
carefully  will  find  that  he  always  takes  the  indication  from  the  affection,  that  is  to 
say,  that  his  practice  is  always  rational,  instead  of  being  empirical.  He  reverts  to 
this  passage  again  in  §  6. 


798  ULCERS. 

Hi'ises  around  an  nicer,  and  if  tlie  ulcer  remain  free  from  in- 
flammation, there  will  be  a  deposit  of  matter  in  process  of  time. 
And  whatever  ulcer  gets  swelled  along  with  inflammation  and 
does  not  subside  as  the  other  parts  subside  which  became  in- 
flamed and  swelled  at  the  same  time,  there  is  a  danger  that  such 
an  ulcer  may  not  unite.  When  from  a  fall,  or  in  any  other 
way,  a  part  has  been  torn  or  bruised,  and  the  parts  surround- 
ing the  ulcer  have  become  swelled,  and,  having  suppurated, 
matter  flows  from  the  swelling  by  the  ulcer,  if  in  such  cases  a 
cataplasm  be  required,  it  should  not  be  applied  to  the  sore  itself, 
but  to  the  surrounding  parts,  so  that  the  pus  may  have  free 
exit,  and  the  indurated  parts  may  be  softened.  But  when  the 
parts  are  softened  as  the  inflammation  ceases,  then  the  parts 
which  are  separated  are  to  be  brought  towards  one  another, 
binding  on  sponges  and  applying  them,  beginning  from  the 
sound  parts  and  advancing  to  the  ulcer  by  degrees,'  But 
plenty  of  leaves  are  to  be  bound  above  the  sponge.  When  the 
parts  are  prevented  from  coming  together  by  a  piece  of  flesh 
full  of  humours,  it  is  to  be  removed.  AVhen  the  ulcer  is  deep- 
seated  in  the  flesh,  it  is  swelled"  up,  both  from  the  bandaging 
and  the  compression.  Such  an  ulcer  should  be  cut  up  upon  a 
director  (specillum)  if  possible,  at  the  proper  time,  so  as  to 
admit  a  free  discharge  of  the  matter,  and  then  the  proper 
treatment  is  to  be  applied  as  may  be  needed.  For  the  most 
part,  in  every  hollow  ulcer  which  can  be  seen  into  direct  with- 
out any  swelHng  being  present,  if  there  be  putrefiiction  in  it, 
or  if  the  flesh  be  flabby  and  putrid,  such  an  ulcer,  and  the  parts 
Avhich  surround  it,  will  be  seen  to  be  black  and  somewhat  livid. 
And  of  corroding  ulcers,  those  which  are  phagcdasnic,  spread 
and  corrode  most  powerfidly,  and,  in  this  case,  the  parts  sur- 
rounding the  sore  will  have  a  black  and  sub-livid  appearance. 

4.   Cataplasms    for   swellings  and  inflammation  in   the  sur- 
rounding   parts.^       Boiled    mullein,*   the    raw    leaves    of   the 

'  This  princiiile  of  bandaging  is  laid  down  in  tlic  work,  On  the  Surgery. 

-  Vidus  Vidius,  instead  of  "it  is  swelled  up"  {vrroKVfxjuvrai),  reads  "forms  into 
a  varix"  {vTruKiprrovrai). 

■■*  See  Galen,  Metb.  Med.,  iv,  5.  Galen  remarks,  that  all  the  articles  about  to  he 
mentioned  are  possessed  of  desiccative  powers,  as  may  be  learned  on  reference  to  his 
work,  On  Simples. 

■*  The  ^Xojuos  of  Ilipjiocratcs  is  generally  admitted  to  have  been  some  species  of 
Vcrhancuia ;  but  Dierbach  is  undecided  as  to  whether  it  was  ]'.  Ihapms,  sinuatum, 
or  pUcatum.     See  Arzn.  dcs  Ilippocrat.,  p.  70. 


ULCERS.  799 

trefoil/  and  tlie  boiled  leaves  of  tlie  epipctrum/  and  the  poley/' 
and  if  the  ulcer  stand  in  need  of  cleansing,  all  these  things  also 
cleanse  ;  and  likewise  the  leaves  of  the  fig-tree,  and  of  the  olive, 
and  the  horehound,  all  these  arc  to  be  boiled ;  and  more  espe- 
cially the  chaste-tree,*  and  the  fig,  and  the  olive,  and  the  leaves 
of  the  pomegranate  are  to  be  boiled  in  like  manner.  These 
are  to  be  used  raw  :  the  leaves  of  the  mallow  pounded  with 
Avine,  and  the  leaves  of  rue,  and  those  of  the  green  origany." 
"With  all  these,  linseed  is  to  be  boiled  up  and  mixed  by  pound- 
ing it  as  a  very  fine  powder.  When  there  is  danger  of  erysi- 
pelas seizing  the  ulcers,  the  leaves  of  woad''  are  to  be  pounded 
and  applied  raw  in  a  cataplasm  along  with  linseed,  or  the  lin- 
seed is  to  be  moistened  with  the  juice  of  strychnos'  or  of  woad, 
and  applied  as  a  cataplasm.  When  the  ulcer  is  clean,  but  both 
it  and  the  surrounding  parts  are  inflamed,  lentil  is  to  be  boiled 
in  wine  and  finely  triturated,  and,  being  mixed  with  a  little  oil, 
it  is  to  be  applied  as  a  cataplasm ;  and  the  leaves  of  the  hip- 
tree  are  to  be  boiled  in  water  and  pounded  in  a  fine  powder 
and  made  into  a  cataplasm  ;  and  apply  below  a  thin,  clean  piece 
of  cloth  wetted  in  wine  and  oil ;  and  when  you  wish  to  produce 
contraction,  prepare  the  leaves  of  the  hip-tree  like  the  lentil, 
and  the  cress ;  wine  and  finely -powdered  linseed  are  to  be 
mixed  together.  And  this  is  proper  :  linseed,  and  raw  chaste- 
tree,  and  INIelian  alum,^  all  these  things  being  macerated  in 
vinegar. 

5.  Having  pounded  the  white  unripe  grape  in  a  mortar  of 

'  It  is  impossible  to  decide  with  any  certainty  what  species  of  TrifoUum  is  referred  to. 

'^  The  epipeirum  here  mentioned  is  refeiTed  by  Vidus  Vidius  to  some  species  of 
Sempervivum.  Sprengel,  in  his  Hist.  Rei  Herb.,  suggests  tliat  it  may  be  Sedinn 
ochroleucum.     Dierbach  incHnes  to  the  Ocymum  monachorum.  (Op.  laud.,  p.  178.) 

^  The  Teiicrium  poliuni,  L.  See  Paulus  ^Egixeta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  305,  Syd.  Soc 
edition. 

*  Tlie  Afjnus  casfus,  L.     Ibid.,  p.  20. 

•'  Probably  the-  Origanum  Jieracleoficum  and  creticum.  See  Dierbach,  &c.,  p.  174. 
and  Paulws  jEginet.\,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  284. 

*  Cerlainly  a  species  of  Isafi.i  is  here  meant,  probably  the  tinctoria.  See  Dierbach, 
&c.,  p.  123. 

''  Dierbach  inclines  to  refer  it  to  the  Cucubalus  bacciferus,  but  there  is  great  un- 
certainty on  this  head.  See  further  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  359.  I  would 
inchne  to  the  Solanum  nigrum,  which  long  held  a  place  in  our  Mat.  Med. 

*  The  aliun  of  Melos  (now  Milo),  an  island  of  the  /Egeau  Sea,  was  always  much 
sought  after.     See  Dioscorid.,  M.  M.,  v,  122. 


800  ULCERS. 

red  bronze^  and  passed  it  through  the  strainer,  expose  it  to  the 
sun  during  the  day,  but  remove  it  during  the  nighty  that  it  may 
not  suffer  from  the  dew ;  rub  it  constantly  during  the  day,  so 
that  it  may  dry  equally,  and  may  contract  as  much  virtue  as 
possible  from  the  bronze  :   let  it  be  exposed  to  the  sun  for  as 
great  a  length  of  time  as  till  it  acquire  the  thickness  of  honey; 
then  put  it  into  a  bronze  pot  with  the  fresh  honey  and  sweet 
wine,  in  which  turpentine  rosin  has  been  previously  boiled,  boil 
tlie  rosin  in  the  Avine  until  it  become  hard  like  boiled  honey ; 
then  take  out  the  rosin  and  pour  off  the  wine  :  there  should  be 
the  greatest  proportion  of  the  juice  of  imripe  grape,  next  of  the 
Avine,  and  third  of  the  honey  and  myrrh,  either  the  liquid  [stacte) 
or  otherwise.      The  finest  kind  is  to  be  levigated  and  moistened 
by  having  a  small  quantity  of  the  same  wine  poured  on  it;  and 
then  the  myrrh  is  to  be  boiled  by  itself,  stirring  it  in  the  wine; 
and  when   it   appears   to   have   attained   the  proper  degree  of 
thickness,  it  is  to  be  poured  into  the  juice  of  the  unripe  grape; 
and  the  finest  natron^  is  to  be  toasted,  and  gently  added  to  the 
medicine,  along  with  a  smaller  quantity  of  the  flowers  of  copper 
{jlos  arisf  than  of  the  natron.      When  you  have  mixed  these 
things,  boil  for  not  less  than  three  days,  on  a  gentle  fire  made 
Avith  fuel  of  the  fig-tree  or  with  coals,   lest  it  catch  fire.      The 
applications  should  all  be  free  from  moisture,  and  the  sores  should 
not  be  wetted  when  this  medicine  is  applied  in  the  form  of  lini- 
ment.     This  medicine  is  to  be  used  for  old  ulcers,  and  also  for 
recent  wounds  of  the  glans  penis,  and  ulcers  on  the  head  and 
ears.      Another  medicine  for  the  same  ulcers  : — The  dried  gall 
of  an  ox,  the  finest  honey,  white  wine,  in  Avhich  the  shavings 
of  the  lotus^  have  been  boiled,  frankincense,  of  myrrh  an  equal 
part,  of  saffron  an  equal  part,  the  flowers  of  copper,  in  like 
manner  of  liquids,  the  greatest  proportion  of  wine,  next  of  honey, 
and  least  of  the  gall.      Another  : — Wine,  a  little  cedar  honey,^ 
of  dried  things,  the  flowers  of  copper,  myrrh,  dried  pomegranate 

'  The  native  carbonate  of  soda.     See  Paui.is  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  *32. 

=  See  Paulus  .^gineta,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  404-6. 

3  From  the  terms  in  which  it  is  frequently  mentioned  by  our  author,  there  can  he 
no  doubt  that  it  is  the  lote-tree,  that  is  to  say,  the  Zizypkus  lotus,  or  Celtis  austra/is. 
See  Dierbach,  &c.,  p.  92 ;  and  Paulus  .Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  236 ;  and  the  Appen- 
dix to  the  Edinburgh  Greek  Lexicon  under  this  term. 

^  A  sweet  exudation  forming  on  the  juniper-tree  in  hot  countries.  See  Theophrast., 
Fragment.;  Galen,  de  Alim.  Facult.,  iii;  and  Paulus  iEciNEXA,  Vol.  I,  p.  178. 


ULCERS.  801 

rind.  Another  : — Of  the  roasted  flower  of  copper  half  a  draclini, 
of  myrrh  two  lialf-drachnis,  of  saffron  three  drachms,  of  honey 
a  small  quantity,  to  be  boiled  with  Avine.  Anotlicr: — Of  frankin- 
cense a  drachm,  of  gall  a  drachm_,  of  saffron  three  drachms;  let 
each  of  these  be  dried  and  finely  levigated,  then,  having  mixed, 
triturate  in  a  very  strong  sun,  pouring  in  the  juice  of  aiv  unripe 
grape,  until  it  become  of  a  gelatinous  consistence,  for  three 
days;  then  let  them  be  allowed  to  macerate  in  an  austere,  dark- 
colonred,  fragrant  wine,  which  is  gradually  poured  upon  them. 
Another: — Boil  the  roots  of  the  holm-oak^  in  sweet  white  wine; 
and  when  it  appears  to  be  properly  done,  having  poured  off  two 
parts  of  the  wine,  and  of  the  lees  of  wine  as  free  of  water  as 
possible  one  i:)art ;  then  boil,  stirring  it,  so  that  it  may  not  be 
burnt,  at  a  gentle  fire,  until  it  appear  to  have  attained  the  proper 
consistence.  Another: — The  other  things  are  to  be  the  same; 
but,  instead  of  the  wine,  use  the  strongest  white  vinegar,  and  dip 
into  it  wool  as  greasy  as  can  be  procured,  and  then,  moistening 
it  with  the  lees  of  oil,  boil,  and  pour  in  the  juice  of  the  wild 
fig-tree,  and  add  Melian  alum,  and  natron,  and  the  flowers  of 
copper,  both  toasted.  This  cleanses  the  ulcers  better  than  the 
former,  but  the  other  is  no  less  desiccant.  Another: — Dip  the 
wool  in  a  very  little  water;  and  then,  having  added  a  third  part 
of  wine,  boil  until  it  attain  the  proper  consistence.  By  these, 
recent  ulcers  are  most  speedily  prevented  from  getting  into  a 
state  of  suppuration.^ 

6.  Another  : — Sprinkle  on  it  dried  wakerobin,^  and  add  the 
green  bark  of  the  fig-tree,  pounding  it  in  the  juice  :  do  this  witli 
or  without  wine,  and  along  with  honey.  Another: — Boiling 
the  shavings  of  lotus  with  vinegar  (the  vinegar  should  be  AAliite) ; 
then  mix  the  lees  of  oil  and  raw  tar-water,^  and  use  it  as  a 

•  The  Quercus  ilex.  See  Paulus  ^Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  311;  and  Dierbacli, 
&c.,  p.  27. 

^  The  sense  of  this  passage  is  ambiguous ;  the  most  probable  meaning  is,  that 
these  things  check  the  formation  of  pus.  Considering  that  the  articles  are  all  of  an 
astringent  nature,  this  might  seem  the  more  probable  interpretation  ;  but  some  of 
the  interpreters  understand  it  in  the  opposite  sense. 

2  Probalily  the  Arum  maculaturn.  See  Paulus  jEgineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  53 ;  and 
Dierbach,  &c.,  p.  106. 

^  It  is  the  same  as  the  liquid  pitch  of  Dioscorides  (i,  79),  and  is  mentioned  by 
Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  74.  The  description  of  this  preparation  is  rather 
ambiguous. 

51 


802  ULCERS. 

liniment  or  wasli^  and  bandaj^e  above.  These  things  in  powder 
prevent  recent  wounds  from  suppurating,  or  they  may  be  used 
for  cleansing  the  sore  along  with  vinegar,  or  for  sponging 
witli  wine. 

7.  Another: — Sprinkle  [on  the  sore?)  lead  finely  triturated 
with  the  recrement  of  copper;  and  sprinkle  on  it,  also,  the 
shavings  of  lotus,  and  the  scales  of  copper,  and  alum,  and  chal- 
citis,^  with  copper,  both  alone,  and  with  the  shavings  of  lotus. 
And  otherwise,  when  it  is  wanted  to  use  these  in  a  dry  state, 
do  it  Avith  the  Illyrian  spodos"  triturated  with  the  shavings,  and 
with  the  shavings  alone.  And  the  flowers  of  silver  alone,  in  the 
finest  powder;  and  birthwort,^  when  scraped  and  finely  pounded, 
may  he  sprinkled  on  the  part.  Another,  for  bloody  sores  :^ — 
Myrrh,  frankincense,  galls,  verdigris,^  the  roasted  flower  of 
copper,  Egyptian  alum  roasted,  vine  flowers,  grease  of  wool, 
plumbago;^  each  of  these  things  is  to  be  diluted,  in  equal  pro- 
portions, with  wine  like  the  former.  And  there  is  another  pre- 
paration of  the  same  : — The  strongest  vinegar  of  a  white  colour, 
honey,  Egyptian  alum,  the  finest  natron ;  having  toasted  these 
things  gently,  pour  in  a  little  gall ;  this  cleanses  fungous  ulcers, 
renders  them  hollow^,  and  is  not  pungent.  Another: — The  herb 
with  the  small  leaves,  which  gets  the  name  of  Parthenium  parvi- 
florum,'^  and  is  used   for  removing  thymia*^  [ivarts  ?)  from  the 

'  A  variety  of  the  native  sulpliate  of  copper.  See  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  IIT, 
pp.  399-402.  I  am  fully  satisfied,  after  the  most  mature  deliberation  and  fullest 
investigation  of  tlic  subject,  tliat  the  misij,  sor/,  and  chalcitis  were  merely  varieties 
of  the  Clnihciidhos,  and  that  it  was  an  imi)ure  sulphate  of  copper. 

2  Probably  an  impure  oxydc  of  zinc.     See  Paulus  yEgineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  353. 

^  Either  the  /Jrintolochia  lont/a  or  rotunda.     Il)id.,  p.  50. 

■^  By  bloody  sores  is  always  to  be  understood  fresh  wounds.  I  cannot  but  think, 
however,  that  the  text  is  in  a  doubtful  state. 

•''  Tlie  ancient  myrrli,  frankincense,  galls,  and  verdigris,  were  all  the  same  as  the 
modern  articles  which  still  retain  these  names. 

'■  On  the  Molyhdfena,  see  Paulus  yEoiNETA,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  254. 

'  Neither  Vidus  Vidius  nor  any  other  of  the  authorities  on  the  Flora  of  Hippo- 
crates ventures  to  pronounce  decidedly  what  plant  this  was.  See  also  Galen,  Excges. ; 
Foi's  (b.  1.) ;  Dierbacb,  Arzn.  des  Hipp.,  p.  185.  The  most  probable  conjecture  appears 
to  be,  that  it  is  the  Pi/refJirum  partheraum,  W.,  or  feverfew. 

"  See  Vidus  Vidius,  h.  1.  He  hohls  it  to  be  a  sort  of  indurated  tumour,  or  wart ; 
and  of  this,  1  think,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  as  it  is  well  known  that  warts  form 
on  the  genital  mend)er.  See  furtiier,  Celsus,  v,  28  ;  and  Paulus  yEoiNJCTA, 
ISook  VI,  58. 


ULCERS.  SOS 

glans  ponis,  alum,  chalcitis,  a  little  crude  Meliaii  alum  (?)  ;^ 
sprinkle  a  little  dried  elaterium/"  and  a  little  dried  pomegraaatc 
riud  in  like  maimer. 

8.  The  lierb  which  has  got  the  name  of  lagopyrus^s  fills  up 
hollow  and  clean  ulcers  ;  (wdicn  dried  it  resembles  wheat ;  it  has 
a  small  leaf  like  that  of  the  olive,  and  more  long;)  and  the  leaf 
of  horeliound,  with  oil.  Another : — The  internal  fatty  part, 
resembling  honey,  of  a  fig  much  dried,  of  water  two  parts, 
of  linseed  not  much  toasted  and  finely  levigated,  one  part. 
Another  : — Of  the  dried  fig,  of  the  flower  of  copper  levigated  a 
little,  and  the  juice  of  the  fig.  The  preparation  from  dried 
fig  : — The  black  chamoeleon,^  the  dried  gall  of  an  ox,  the  other 
things  the  same.  Of  the  powders  : — Of  the  slender  cress  in  a 
raw  state,  of  horehound,  of  each  equal  parts ;  of  the  dried  fig, 
two  parts;  of  linseed,  two  parts;  the  juice  of  the  fig.  When 
you  use  any  of  these  medicines,  apply  above  it  compresses 
wetted  in  vinegar,  apply  a  sponge  about  the  compresses  and 
make  a  little  more  pressure.  If  the  surrounding  parts  be  in 
an  inflamed  state,  apply  to  them  any  medicine  which  may  appear 
suitable. 

9.  If  you  wish  to  use  a  liquid  application,  the  medicine  called 
caricmiv'  may  be  rubbed  in,  and  the  bandages  may  be  applied 
as  formerly  described  upon  the  same  principle.  The  medicine 
is  prepared  of  the  following  ingredients  : — Of  black  hellebore, 

'  There  is  some  difficulty  respecting  the  alum  and  chalcitis  in  this  passage,  as  may 
be  seen  on  consulting  Vidus  Vidius  and  Foes. 

2  Although  this  term  be  sometimes  used  rather  vaguely  in  the  Hippocratic  trea- 
tises, there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  in  this  place,  it  applies  to  the  fecula  of  the 
Momordica  elaterium.     See  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  102. 

^  Nothing  can  be  made  of  Galen's  notice  of  this  plant  in  his  Exegesis,  the  text 
being  obviously  corrupt.  From  the  resemblance  of  the  names  it  may  be  supposed 
the  same  as  the  Xcf/wwovq  of  Dioscorides,  probably,  then,  the  TrifoUum  arvense. 
The  authorities  subsequent  to  Hippocrates,  in  treating  of  medicines  possessed  of 
sarcotic  or  incarnant  properties,  take  no  notice  of  this  article,  nor  of  any  of  the 
others  recommended  by  our  author  in  this  paragraph.  This  is  singular,  when  we 
consider  how  servilely  they  generally  bow  to  the  authority  of  Hippocrates.  Galen 
treats  of  the  nature  of  incarnant  medicines  with  his  wonted  acumen  and  perspicuity 
of  style  (Meth.  Med.  iii,  2).  On  the  same  subject,  see  further,  Paulus  ^Egineta, 
Vol.  II,  p.  105. 

''  It  was  the  Carthamm  corymboms,  L.     See  Dierbach,  &c.,  p.  13."), 

*  The  derivation  of  this  term  cannot  be  ascertained,  the  notice  of  it  in  the  Exegesis 
of  Galen  being  very  corrupt.  It  has  evidently  nothing  to  do  with  nuts,  as  its  name 
might  imply. 


804  ULCERS. 

of  sandaracli,  of  the  flakes  of  copper,  of  lead  waslied,  with  much 
sulphur,  arsenic,  and  cautliarides.  This  may  be  compounded 
so  as  may  be  judged  most  proper,  and  it  is  to  be  diluted  with 
oil  of  juniper.  When  enough  has  been  rubbed  in,  lay  aside 
the  medicine,  and  apply  boiled  wakerol)in  in  a  soft  state,  either 
rubbing  it  in  dry,  or  moistening  it  with  honey.  But  if  you  use 
the  caricum  in  a  dry  state,  you  must  abstain  from  these  things, 
and  sprinkle  the  medicine  on  the  sore.  The  powder  from 
hellebore  and  sandarach  alone  answers.  Another  liquid  medi- 
cine :- — The  herb,  the  leaf  of  which  i-e.-embles  the  arum  (wake- 
robin)  in  nature,  but  is  Avhite,  downy,  of  the  size  of  the  ivy- 
leaf:'  this  herb  is  applied  with  wine,  or  the  substance  which 
forms  upon  the  branch  of  the  ilex,  when  pounded  with  wine,  is 
to  be  applied.  Another: — The  juice  of  the  unripe  grape,  tlie 
strongest  vinegar,  the  flower  of  copper,  natron,  the  juice  of 
the  wild  fig-tree.  Alum,  the  most  finely  levigated,  is  to  be 
put  into  the  juice  of  the  wild  grape,  and  it  is  to  be  put  into 
a  red  bronze  mortar  and  stirred  in  the  sun,  and  removed  when 
it  appears  to  have  attained  its  proper  consistence. 

10.  These  are  other  powders  :" — Black  hellebore,  as  finely 
levigated  as  possible,  is  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  sore  while  any 
humidity  remains  about  it,  and  while  it  continues  to  spread. 
The  bandaging  is  the  same  as  when  plasters  are  used.  Another,  in 
like  manner: — The  driest  lumps  of  salt  are  to  be  put  into  a 
copper,  or  earthen  pot,  of  equal  size,  as  much  as  possible,  and 
not  large,  and  the  finest  honey,  of  double  the  size  of  the 
salt,  as  far  as  can  be  guessed,  is  to  be  poured  upon  the 
lumps  of  salt,  then  the  vessel  is  to  be  put  upon  coals  and 
allowed  to  sit  there  until  the  whole  is  consumed.  Then,  having 
sponged  the  ulcer  and  cleaned  it,  bandage  it  as  before,  and 
compress  it  a  little  more.  Next  day,  wherever  the  medicine 
has  not  been  taken  in,  sprinkle  it  on,  press  it  down,  and  ban- 
dage.     But  Avhen  you  wish  to  remove  the  medicine,  pour  in 

'  Villus  Vidius  suggests  that  it  is  the  fussilar/o,  but  it  cannot  l)e  determined  with 
much  certainty. 

-  These  powders,  in  the  original,  are  described  as  being  apph'cations  for  fresh  or 
bloody  wounds  {ivaiita).  But,  as  Vidus  Vidius  states,  there  is  evidently  an  error 
of  the  text,  and  he  proposes  to  amend  it  by  substituting  vffi(>jnva  in  its  place.  The 
emendation  is  plausible ;  but  when  a  passage  in  an  ancient  author  is  manifestly  cor- 
rupt, it  seldom  happens  that  any  ingenuity  can  amend  it  satisfactorily.  Tt  seems 
wiser,  then,  to  reject  the  epithet  altogether. 


ULCI':il«.  80.J 

liot  vinegar  until  it  separate,  and  again  do  tlie  .same  things, 
sponging  it  away,  if  necessary.  Another  corrosive  powder: — 
Of  the  most  finely-levigated  misy/  sprinkle  uj)on  the  moist  and 
gangrenous  parts,  and  a  little  of  the  flower  of  copper,  not 
altogether  levigated.  Another  powder  equally  corrosive  : — 
Having  sponged  the  ulcer,  burn  the  most  greasy  wool  upon  a 
shell  placed  on  the  fire  until  tiie  whole  be  consumed  ;  having 
reduced  this  to  a  fine  powder,  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  sore,  apply 
the  ])andage  in  the  same  manner.  Another  powder  for  the 
same  ulcers: — The  black  chamseleon,  when  prepared  with  the 
juice  of  the  fig.  It  is  to  be  prepared  roasted,  and  alkanet^ 
mixed  with  it.  Or,  pimpernel,^  and  Egyptian  alum*^  roasted, 
and  sprinkle  on  them  the  Orchomenian  powder.'  For  spread- 
ing ulcers: — Alum,  both  the  Egyptian  roasted,  and  the  Melian  ; 
but  the  part  is  to  be  first  cleaned  with  roasted  natron  and 
sponged ;  and  the  species  of  alum  called  chalcitis^  roasted.  It 
is  to  be  roasted  until  it  catch  fire. 

'  A  substance  nearly  allied  to  the  chalcitis,  probably  an  impure  sulphate  of 
copper  containing  a  large  admixture  of  iron.  See  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill, 
pp.  'i.'il,  402.  'These  substances  would  appear  to  have  been  well  known  by  the 
surgical  autliorities  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  are  recommended 
by  them  for  the  very  purpose  here  indicated  by  our  author.  See  in  particular, 
Tagault  (de  Vulner.,  ii).  He  mentions  both  the  misy  and  chalcitis  as  being  very 
powerful  escharotics.  What  he  says,  in  another  work,  regarding  the  nature  of  the 
misy,  sori,  and  clialcitis,  is  so  much  in  accordance  with  my  own  views  as  published 
in  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  .Egineta  (1.  c),  that  (since  it  may  be  said  that 
adhuc  subjudice  lis  est)  I  am  induced  to  give  his  words  in  this  place :  "  Misy  autem 
ct  sori  chalcitidi  genere  cognata  sunt,  ex  una,  ut  ita  cum  Galeuo  dicam,  radice  per- 
ducta.  Itaque  tria  h;ec  (quae  sub  vitreoli  genere  eomprehenduntur)  majoris  tantum 
ct  minoris  ratione  ditferunt."  (De  Ulceribus,  iii.) 

*  It  may  either  be  the  Anchusa  tinctoria,  or  Echium  creticum.  See  Dierbach, 
&c.,  p.  09. 

^  Without  doubt  the  AnagalUs  arvensis,L.  See  Paulus  .Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  43; 
and  Dierbach,  &c.,  p.  150. 

'  Galen  informs  us  that  the  Egy^ptian  alum  was  the  same  as  the  rmxiriQ  of  the 
Greeks ;  there  can  be  no  doubt,  then,  that  it  was  the  hair  salt  of  Werner,  and  con- 
tained a  large  admixture  of  the  sulphate  of  magnesia  and  iron.  See  Paulus 
.(Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  3G1. 

*  The  Orchomenian  powder  cannot  be  determined  with  any  certainty.  Vidus 
Vidius  and  Foes  suggest  that  it  was  the  same  as  the  adarce,  for  which  see  P.\ulus 
yEGIXETA,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  22. 

^  The  text  is  {irobably  corrupt.  Galen,  in  his  Exegesis,  supposes  it  to  refer 
simjdy  to  the  Clialcitis,  for  which  see  above.  Others  hold  that  both  the  chalcitis 
and  the  alum  were  ingredients  in  the  composition.     See  Foes,  h.  1. 


HOG  ULCEUS. 

11.  For  old  ulcers  which  occur  on  the  fore  part  of  the  legs; 
they  become  bloody  and  black : — Having  pounded  the  flower 
of  the  melilot  and  mixed  it  with  honey,  use  as  a  plaster.  For 
nerves  {tendons  ?)  which  have  been  cut  asunder : — Having 
pounded,  sifted,  and  mixed  with  oil  the  roots  of  the  wild  myr- 
tle, bind  on  the  part;  and  the  herb  cinquefoil^  (it  is  white 
and  downy,  and  more  raised  above  the  ground  than  the  black 
cinquefoil),  having  pounded  this  herb  in  oil  bind  it  on  the  part, 
and  then  remove  it  on  the  third  day. 

12.  Emollients"  (?)  : — These  medicines  are  to  be  used  in 
winter  rather  than  in  summer.  Emollient  medicines  which 
make  the  cicatrices  fair  : — Pound  the  inner  mucous  part  of  the 
squill  and  pitch,  with  fresh  swine^s  seam,  and  a  little  oil,  and  a 
little  rosin,  and  ceruse.  And  the  grease  of  a  goose,  fresh 
swine's  seam,  and  squill,  and  a  little  oil.  The  whitest  wax,  fresh 
clean  grease,  or  squill  and  white  oil,  and  a  little  rosin.  Wax, 
swine's  scam  (old  and  fresh),  and  oil,  and  verdigris,  and  squill 
and  rosin.  Let  there  be  two  parts  of  the  old  grease  to  the 
fresh,  and  of  the  other  things,  q.  s.  Having  melted  the 
grease  that  is  fresh,  pour  it  into  another  pot ;  having  levigated 
|)lumbago  finely  and  sifted  it,  and  mixed  them  together,  boil 
and  stir  at  first ;  boil  until  when  poured  upon  the  ground  it 
concretes ;  then  taking  it  off  the  fire,  pour  it  all  into  another 
vessel,  with  the  exception  of  the  stony  sediment^  and  add  rosin 
and  stir,  and  mix  a  little  oil  of  juniper,  and  what  has  been 
taken  ofi".  In  all  the  emollient  medicines  to  which  you  add 
the  rosin,  when  you  removed  the  medicine  from  the  fire,  pour  in 
and  mix  the  rosin  while  it  is  still  warm.  Another : — Old 
swine's  seam,  wax,  and  oil,  the  dried  shavings  of  the  lotus, 
SVankincensc,    ])lum])ago, — namely,    of    the    frankincense    one 

'  It  ciuuiot  be  positively  dcterniir.cd ;  l)ut  Foes  and  Dierbacli  regard  it  as  being 
sonic  species  either  of  the  Tormentilta  or  Potentilla.  The  former,  I  need  scarcely 
say,  was  lately  restored  to  the  Mat.  Med.  The  Potentilla  anserina  would  answer 
})retty  well  to  our  author's  description. 

^  Foes  suspects  that  this  term  is  corrupt,  and  yet  when  one  examines  attentively 
the  composition  of  the  prcjjarations  contained  in  this  paragraph,  they  will  be  found 
to  consist  very  much  of  oily  ingredients,  so  that,  after  all,  the  term  does  not  appear  so 
very  objectionable.  Galen,  moreover,  seems  to  sanction  the  word,  only  reading 
jidKOiolta  instead  of  na\()aK(0()(n,  as  used  in  the  text  here.  The  reading,  however, 
is  uncertain  in  some  parts  of  this  paragraph,  as  may  be  seen  on  consulting  Vidus 
Yidius,  and  Foes. 


ULCEUS.  807 

part^  and  of  the  other  one  part,  and  of  the  shavings  of  the 
lotus  one  part ;  but  let  there  be  two  parts  of  the  ohl  grease^ 
one  of  wax,  and  of  fresh  swine's  seam  one  part.  Another  : — 
Or  old  swine's  scam  along  with  the  fresh  grease  of  a  goat ; 
when  cleaned,  let  it  retain  as  little  as  possible  of  its  membrane  : 
having  triturated  or  pounded  it  smooth,  pour  in  oil,  and  s])rinkle 
the  lead  with  the  spodium  and  half  the  shavings  of  the  lotus. ^ 
Anotlicr : — Swine's  scam,  spodium,  blue  chalcitis,^  oil. 

13.  For  Burns  : — You  must  boil  the  tender  roots  of  the  ilex, 
and  if  their  l)arlv  be  very  thick  and  green,  it  must  be  cut  into 
small  parts,  and  having  poured  in  white  wine,  boil  upon  a  gentle 
fire,  until  it  ai)pear  to  you  to  be  of  the  proper  consistence,  so 
as  to  be  used  for  a  liniment.  And  it  may  be  prepared  in  water 
after  the  same  manner.  Another,  not  corrosive: — Old  swine's 
seam  is  to  be  rubbed  in  bv  itself,  and  it  is  to  be  melted  alony; 
with  squill,  the  root  of  Avhich  is  to  be  divided  and  applied  with 
a  bandage.^  Next  day  it  is  to  be  fomented ;  and  having 
melted  old  swine's  seam  and  wax,  and  mixed  Avith  them  oil, 
frankincense,  and  the  shavings  of  lotus  and  vermilion,  this  is 
to  be  used  as  a  liniment.  Having  boiled  the  leaves  of  the 
w  akerobin  in  wine  and  oil,  apply  a  bandage.  Another : — 
When  you  have  smeared  the  parts  with  old  swdne's  seam,  let 
the  roots  of  asphodel  be  pounded  in  wine  and  triturated,  and 
rubbed  in.  Another: — Having  melted  old  swine's  seam,  and 
mixed  with  rosin  and  bitumen,  and  having  spread  it  on  a  piece 
of  cloth  and  warmed  it  at  the  fire,  apply  a  bandage.  When 
an  ulcer  has  formed  on  the  back  from  stripes  or  otherwise,  let 
squill,  twice  boiled,  be  pounded  and  spread  upon  a  linen  cloth 
and  bound  on  the  place.      Afterwards  the  grease  of  a  goat,  and 

'  The  text  of  this  presciiption  appears  to  l)e  very  corrupt.  See  Vidus  Vidius  and 
Foes. 

-  By  l/lue  chalcitis  may  either  be  meant  the  cyanus,  that  is  to  say,  "the  lihic  copper" 
of  Jameson,  or  the  chalcanthos,  that  is  to  say,  "  hkie  vitriol."  Compare  the  note  of 
Foes  with  Paulus  ^Egineta,  VoL  III,  pp.  201,  402,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

■*  Without  doubt  it  was  the  scilla  maritima.  See  Dierbach,and  Paulus  jCgineta, 
Vol.  Ill,  p.  343.  It  will  be  remarked  that  our  author  would  appear  to  have  been 
fond  of  using  it  as  a  detergent  application  to  burns.  Dioscoriiles  recommends  it  for 
lissurcs  on  the  feet  (ii,  202).  Our  author's  appUcations  are  either  emollient,  con- 
sisting of  vegetable  and  animal  oils,  or  detergent  and  astringent,  formed  from  the 
ilex  and  squills.  For  a  digest  of  the  ancient  modes  of  treating  burns,  see  Paulvs 
.Egineta,  Dook  IV,  11,  Svd.  Soc.  edit. 


808  ULCERS. 

fresli  swine's  seam,  spodium,  oil,  aud  frankincense  arc  to  be 
rubbed  iu. 

14.  Swellings  which  arise  on  the  feet,  either  spontaneously 
or  otherwise,  Avheii  neither  the  swellings  nor  the  inflammation 
subside  under  the  use  of  cataplasms,  and  although  sponges  or 
wool,  or  anything  else  be  bound  upon  the  sound  part  ;^  but 
the  swelling  and  inflammation  return  of  themselves  again,  an 
influx  of  blood  into  the  veins  is  the  cause,  when  not  occasioned 
by  a  bruise.  And  the  same  story  applies  if  this  happen  in 
any  other  part  of  the  body.  But  blood  is  to  be  abstracted, 
especially  from  the  veins,  which  are  the  seat  of  the  influx,  if 
they  be  conspicuous ;  but  if  not,  deeper  and  more  numerous 
scarifications  are  to  be  made  in  the  swellings ;  and  whatever 
l)art  you  scarify,  this  is  to  be  done  with  the  sharpest  and  most 
slender  instruments  of  iron.  When  you  have  removed  the 
iDlood,  you  must  not  press  hard  upon  the  part  with  the  specillura, 
lest  you  produce  contusion.  Bathe  with  vinegar,  and  do  not 
allow  a  clot  of  blood  to  remain  between  the  lips  of  the  wounds, 
and  having  spread  greasy  wool  with  a  medicine  for  bloody 
wounds,  and  having  carded  the  wool  aud  made  it  soft,  bind  it 
on,  having  wetted  it  with  wine  and  oil.  And  let  the  scarified 
l)art  be  so  placed  that  the  determination  of  the  blood  may  be  up- 
wards and  not  downwards ;  and  do  not  wet  the  part  at  all,  and 
let  the  patient  be  put  upon  a  restricted  diet  and  drink  water. 
If  upon  loosing  the  bandages  you  find  the  scarifications  inflamed, 
apply  a  cataplasm  of  the  fruit  of  the  chaste-tree  and  linseed. 
But  if  the  scarifications  become  ulcerated  and  break  into  one- 
auother,  we  must  be  regulated  by  circumstances,  and  otherwise 
apply  whatever  else  appears  to  be  proper. 

15.  When  a  varix  is  on  the  fore  part  of  the  leg,  and  is  very 
superficial,  or  below  the  flesh,  and  the  leg  is  black,  and  seems 
to  stand  in  need  of  having  the  blood  evacuated  from  it,  such 
swellings  are  not,  by  any  means,  to  be  cut  open  ;  for,  generally, 
large  ulcers  are  the  consequence  of  the  incisions,  owing  to  the 
influx  from  the  varix.  But  the  varix  itself  is  to  be  punctured 
iu  many  places,  as  circumstances  may  indicate.^ 

'  The  swellings  or  oedemata  here  described,  are  not  very  well  defined,  at  least  they 
appear  so  to  us,  probably  from  our  unacquaintance  with  the  iliseases  of  Greece.  See 
further,  the  Commentary  on  Paulus  .IIgineta,  Book  IV,  27,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

•  Allusion  is  made  to  this  mode  of  treating  varix,  in  the  treatise  Dc  Medico.     On 


ULCERS.  809 

IG.  Wlicn  you  have  oponefl  a  vein  and  abstracted  blood, 
and  althoui^-h  the  fillet  be  loosed  the  bleeding  does  not  stop,  the 
member,  whether  the  arm  or  leg,  is  to  bo  put  into  the  reverse 
position  to  that  from  which  the  blood  flows  ;  so  that  the  blood 
may  flow  backwards,  and  it  is  to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  this 
position  for  a  greater  or  less  space  of  time.^  Then  bind  up 
the  part  while  matters  are  so,  no  clots  of  blood  being  allowed 
to  remain  in  the  opening.  Then  having  applied  a  double 
compress,  and  wetted  it  with  wine,  apply  above  it  clean  wool 
which  has  been  smeared  with  oil.  For,  although  the  flow  of 
blood  be  violent,  it  will  be  stopped  in  this  way.  If  a  thrombus 
be  formed  in  the  opening,  it  will  inflame  and  suppurate. 
Venesection  is  to  be  practised  when  the  person  has  dined 
more  or  less  freely  and  diaink,  and  when  somewhat  heated, 
and  rather  in  hot  weather  than  in  cold. 

17.  When  in  cupping,  the  blood  continues  to  flow  after  the 
cupping-instrument  has  been  removed,  and  if  the  flow  of  blood, 
or  serum  be  copious,  the  instrument  is  to  be  applied  again 
before  the  part  is  healed  up,  so  as  to  abstract  what  is  left 
behind.  Otherwise  coagula  of  blood  will  be  retained  in  the 
incisions,  and  inflammatory  ulcers  will  arise  from  them.  In 
all  such  cases  the  parts  are  to  be  bathed  with  vinegar,  after 
which  they  are  not  to  be  wetted ;  neither  must  the  person  lie 
upon  the  scarifications,  but  they  are  to  be  anointed  with  some 
of  the  medicines  for  bloody  wounds.  When  the  cupping- 
instrument  is  to  be  applied  below  the  knee,  or  at  the  knee, 
it  should  be  done,  if  possible,  while  the  man  stands  erect.^ 

the  more  formidable  operation  practised  by  the  ancients  for  the  cure  of  varix,  see  the 
Commentary  on  Paulus  yEoiNEXA,  Book  VI,  82,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 

'  The  last  two  paragraphs,  on  venesection  and  cupping,  have  little  or  no  connexion 
with  the  subject  of  this  treatise.  Very  likely  they  are  an  appendix  added  to  the 
work.     Both  these  operations  are  more  fully  treated  of  in  the  work  De  Medico. 

*  The  object  in  directing  the  cupping-instrument  to  be  applied  while  the  patient 
stands  erect  would  seem  to  be,  as  Foes  remarks,  that  the  skin  will  thus  be  in  its 
natural  state,  and  the  blood  will  flow  the  more  freely.  Yet,  although  the  direction 
seems  to  be  a  very  proper  one,  it  is  not  attended  to  by  modern  practitioners  of  the 
art  of  cupping. 


ON    FISTUL/E. 


ON   FISTULA.. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

This  little  tract  is  evidently  a  continuation  of  the  work  '  On 
Ulcers/  and  is  equally  I'eplctc  with  interesting  and  important 
matters.  As  stated  in  the  Preliminary  Discourse,  the  ancient 
authority  in  support  of  its  genuineness  is  very  strong. 

In  the  first  paragraph,  the  author  gives  an  account  of  the 
formation  o^  fistuUe  in  cmo,  which  he  attributes  to  tubercles,  or 
to  injuries  inflicted  on  the  parts  adjoining  to  the  anus,  in 
riding,  rowing,  or  from  an}^  such  act  of  violence. 

His  first  advice  is,  that  the  surgeon  should  lose  no  time  in 
making  an  incision,  even  before  the  matter  is  fully  formed.  If 
the  fistula  already  exist,  the  surgeon  is  to  examine  it  with  a  stalk 
of  fresh  garlic.  Then  the  herb  seseli  is  to  be  given  as  a 
diuretic,  and  the  bowels  cleared  out  by  means  of  purgatives.  (§  2.) 

In  the  third  paragraph  is  described  the  first  method  of  treat- 
ing fistula  in  auo,  namely,  by  introducing  into  it  a  tent  formed 
from  a  strip  of  linen  (or  cotton)  cloth,  smeared  with  the  caustic 
juice  of  one  of  the  spurges  (euphorbia) ;  after  which  a  round 
ball,  resembling  a  modern  pessary,  is  directed  to  be  introduced 
per  anum,  the  object  of  which,  as  stated  by  Foes,  may  have 
been  to  expand  the  sore,  so  as  to  allow  the  caustic  to  be  well 
diffused  over  it ;  or,  perhaps,  it  was  merely  meant  to  keep  the 
tent  secured  in  the  fistula.  On  the  sixth  day  the  tent  is  to 
be  removed,  and,  the  ball  being  filled  with  alum,  it  is  to  be 
again  introduced,  and  allowed  to  remain  for  a  time.  The  object 
of  this  second  introduction  of  the  ball,  is  not  to  me  sufl[iciently 
clear ;  perhaps  it  was  to  keep  the  sides  of  the  fistula  expanded 
while  in  the  process  of  healing.  Myrrh  is  to  be  applied,  pro- 
bably with  the  intention  of  cleansing  the  sore. 

In  the  fourth  paragraph,  the  apolinose,  or  operation  by  the 
ligature,  is  described    in   a   very   minute   and  circumstantial 


'S14  FISTULA. 

manner.  No  one  wlio  reads  the  description  can  mistake  the 
principle  of  the  operation,  whatever  difficulty  he  may  find  in 
understanding  certain  expressions  contained  in  it.  The  object 
evidently  is  to  cut  open  the  fistula  by  gradually  tightening  a 
thread  which  has  been  passed  through  both  its  orifices,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  raise  up  a  healthy  action  in  the  part.  When 
the  fistula  is  fairly  laid  open,  pieces  of  sponge,  smeared  with 
some  gentle  escharotic,  such  as  the  flos  teris,  are  to  be  applied 
with  the  view  of  consuming  the  callous  flesh,  and  keeping  the 
fistula  expanded  until  it  heal  equally. 

In  the  fifth  is  described  the  treatment  when  the  disease  con- 
sists of  several  sinuses  which  are  not  all  fjiirly  laid  open  by  the 
preceding  process  ;  in  which  case  our  author  directs  the  sinus 
to  be  S3'ringcd  with  a  stimulant  and  escharotic  injection,  so  as 
to  remove  all  the  callous  parts. 

In  the  sixth,  a  most  accurate  description  is  given  of  an  acute 
attack  of  phlegmon  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  anus,  with  the 
treatment  thereof  by  hip-baths,  cataplasms,  suppositories,  and 
various  other  stimulant  and  soothing  applications. 

In  the  seventh,  strangury  is  correctly  described  upon  the 
principles  of  the  humoral  pathology. 

In  the  eighth  paragraph,  another  common  and  very  serious 
aggravation  of  these  complaints  is  minutely  dcscriljed,  and  the 
treatment  is  carefully  laid  down.  In  certain  cases,  astringent 
and  escharotic  apjilications  of  a  powerful  nature  are  to  1)e  made. 

In  the  ninth  is  described  the  mode  of  procedure  when 
great  difficulty  is  experienced  in  accomplishing  the  reduction  of 
the  gut.  The  treatment  in  this  case  consists  in  rest  and  the 
application  of  suitable  astringents. 

In  the  tenth  is  explained  the  treatment  of  procidentia  ani 
Avhen  attended  with  a  discharge  of  blood.  It  consists  either  of 
astringent  cataplasms,  containing  wakerobin,  wild  vine,  &c.,  or 
narcotics,  such  as  the  seed  of  hemlock. 

In  the  eleventh  is  described  the  treatment  when  inflamma- 
tion comes  on.  The  applications  consist  of  cataplasms,  formed 
principally  of  astringent  and  sedative  articles,  such  as  ivy, 
mandrake,  and  the  like. 

When  the  pain  is  unattended  with  inflammation,  tlie  applica- 
tions recommended  are  of  a  stimulant  nature,  such  as  natron, 
alum,    roasted  salts,   the  green  leaves  of  capers,  and  the  like ; 


ARGUiMENT.  815 

hut  tlioy  arc  to  he  varied  according  to  the  nature  of  the  com- 
plaint.  Sec  the  lust  paragraph. 

From  wliat  has  now  heen  stated  with  regard  to  tlic  contents 
of  this  treatisCj  it  will  he  readily  allowed^  that  the  author  of  it 
had  formed  a  very  correct  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  disease  ;  and 
that  the  plans  of  treatment  he  lays  down  are  all  very  rational, 
and  bespeak  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  suljject. 

Gruner  and  Ackerman  argue  against  the  genuineness  of  this 
treatise,  from  the  circumstance  of  its  containing  a  manifest 
allusion  to  the  humoral  pathology  in  the  seventh  paragraph. 
But  if  this  were  sufficient  reason  for  regarding  it  as  spurious, 
we  ought,  on  the  same  grounds,  to  reject  the  Aphorisms,  in 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  there  are  frequent  and  decided  allusions 
to  the  hypothesis  of  the  humours.  And  it  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  Galen  invariably  represents  Hippocrates  as  the 
founder  of  the  humoral  doctrine,^  Moreover,  it  is  to  be  re- 
marked, that  the  doctrine  is  introduced  here  in  quite  a  practical 
form,  without  any  of  the  systematic  parade  which  the  later 
authorities  display  in  dealing  with  it,  Ackerman  further  pro- 
nounces against  its  authenticity,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  written 
in  a  confused  style.  Now  this  may  be  doubted ;  but  if  it  were 
true,  the  inference  which  Ackerman  draws  from  it  would  not 
be  warrantable,  as  the  same  oljjection  might  be  started  against 
the  authenticity  of  the  works  '  On  Fractures,'  '  On  the  Articu- 
lations,' and  '  The  Epidemics,'  none  of  these  treatises  being 
at  all  remarkable  for  methodical  arrangement. 

'  Comment.  I,  in  Lil).  rle  Nat.  Human.,  torn,  v,  p.  11,  ed.  Basil;  De  Elem.  Sec. 
Ilippocr.,  i;  De  Nat.  Facult.,  i. 


SIG 


ON  FISTULA. 

1.  FisTULyE  are  produced  by  contusions  and  tubercles,  and 
they  are  also  occasioned  by  rowing,  or  riding  on  horseback,  when 
blood  accumulates  in  the  nates  near  the  anus.  For,  having 
become  putrid,  it  spreads  to  the  soft  parts  (the  breech  being  of 
a  humid  nature,  and  the  flesh  in  which  it  spreads  being  soft), 
until  the  tubercle  break  and  corrupt  below  at  the  anus.  When 
this  happens,  a  fistula  is  formed,  having  an  ichorous  discharge, 
and  fasces  pass  by  it,  with  flatus  and  much  abomination.  It  is 
produced,  then,  by  contusions  when  any  of  the  parts  about  the 
anus  are  bruised  by  a  Idow,  or  a  fall,  or  a  wound,  or  by  riding, 
or  rowing,  or  any  such  cause.  For  blood  is  collected,  and  it,  be- 
coming corrupted,  suppurates;  and  from  the  suppuration  the  same 
accidents  happen,  as  have  been  described  in  the  case  of  tubercles. 

2.  In  the  first  place,  then,  when  you  see  any  such  tubercle 
formed,  you  must  cut  it  open  while  still  unripe,  before  it  sup- 
purate and  burst  into  the  rectum.  But  if  a  fistula  be  already 
formed  when  you  undertake  the  case,  take  a  stalk  of  fresh 
garlic,^  and  having  laid  the  man  on  his  back,  and  separated 
his  thighs  on  both  sides,  push  down  the  stalk  as  far  as  it  will 
go,  and  thereby  measure  the  depth  of  the  fistula.  Then,  having 
bruised  the  root  of  sescli^  to  a  very  fine  powder,  and  poured  in 
some  water,  let  it  macerate  for  four  days,  and,  mixing  the 
water  with  honey,  let  the  patient  drink  it,  fasting,  to  the  amount 
of  three  cyathi,  and  at  the  same  time  purge  away  the  ascarides. 
Those  who  are  left  without  treatment  die. 

3.  In  the  next  place,  having  moistened  the  strip  of  cotton 
cloth,^  with  the  juice  of  the  great  tithymallus,'^  and  sprinkling 

'  Instead  of  the  stalk  of  fresh  garlic,  Paulus  iEoiNEXA  recommends  a  hog's 
bristle,  or  a  sound  to  be  used  in  exploring  the  fistula  (B.  VI,  78). 

■■^  Most  probal)ly  the  Seseli  tortuosam.  See  Dierl)ach,  &c.  p.  187,  and  Paulus 
yEGiNETA,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  330.  All  the  ancient  authorities  hold  it  to  be  a  powerful 
diuretic,  and  probably  it  is  here  recommended  for  this  purpose. 

^  'Odoviov  (ivaGivov  may  either  signify  "  cotton  cloth,"  or  "linen  cloth."  For 
although  the  (ivauoQ  of  Theophrastus  (H.  P.  iv,  9)  he  unquestional)ly  the  c'tv^pov 
tpio(p6pov,  or  cotton  tree  {Gossypium  arhoreum),  it  is  now  well  ascertained  that  the 
mummy  cloth  to  which  Herodotus  applies  the  name  (fSixraog),  (vii,  181),  is  linen. 
I  need  scarcely  remark  that  either  cotton  or  linen  cloth  will  serve  the  purpose  of 
forming  a  tent  to  be  used  as  directed  by  our  author. 

''  Some  species  of  the  Euphorbia,  probably  the  characias.  See  Dierbach,  &c.  p.  II 1  ; 
and  Paulus  ^Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  3/4. 


FISTUL.E.  817 

on  it  the  flos  asris,  roasted  and  triturated,  and  having  made  it 
into  a  tent  equal  in  length  to  the  fistula,  and  having  passed  a 
thread  through  the  ends  of  the  tent  and  again  througli  the 
stalk,  and  having  placed  the  patient  in  a  reclining  position, 
and  having  examined  the  ulcerated  parts  of  the  rectum  with  a 
speculum,  pass  the  stalk  by  it,  and  when  it  reaches  the  rectum, 
take  hold  of  it  and  draw  it  out  until  the  tent  be  pushed 
through,  and  be  brought  on  a  level  above  and  below.  When  it 
{the  tent  ?)  has  been  pushed  inwards,  introduce  a  ball  of  horn^ 
into  the  rectum  (the  rectum  having  been  previously  smeared 
with  Cimolian  chalk),  and  leave  it  there,  and  when  the  patient 
wants  to  go  to  stool,  let  it  be  taken  out  and  again  replaced, 
and  let  this  practice  be  continued  for  five  days.  On  the  sixth 
day  let  it  be  removed,  and  drawing  the  tent  out  of  the  flesh, 
and  afterwards  pounding  alum  and  filling  the  ball  [pessary?) 
and  introducing  it  into  the  rectum,  leave  it  until  the  alum 
melts.  Anoint  the  rectum  with  myrrh  until  the  parts  appear 
to  be  united. - 

4.  Another  method  of  cure  : — 'Taking  a  very  slender  thread 
of  raw  lint,^  and  uniting  it  into  five  folds  of  the  length  of  a 
span,  and  wrapping  them  round  with  a  horse  hair ;  then  having 
made  a  director  (specillum)  of  tin,  with  an  eye  at  its  extremity, 
and  having  passed  through  it  the  end  of  raw  lint  wrapped  round 
as  above  described,  introduce  the  director  into  the  fistula,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  introduce  the  index  finger  of  the  left  hand 
per  anum ;  and  when  the  director  touches  the  finger,  bring  it 
out  with  the  finger,  bending  the  extremity  of  the  director  and 
the  end  of  the  threads  in  it,  and  the  director  is  to  be  with- 
drawn, but  the  ends  of  the  threads  are  to  be  knotted  twice  or 
thrice,  and  the  rest  of  the  raw  threads  is  to  be  twisted  round 

'  Meaning  perhaps  a  small  pessary  in  the  modern  sense  of  that  term. 

*  The  method  of  treating  fistulse  by  tents,  impregnated  with  some  caustic,  such  as 
the  juice  of  the  spurge  is  here  very  cuTumstantially  described,  and  although  some 
parts  of  the  description  be  somewhat  obscure,  the  general  import  of  it  cannot 
be  mistaken.  Other  corrosive  substances  are  recommended  by  Paulus  ^gineta, 
B.  iv,  49  ;  and  Celsus,  vi,  78. 

^  The  thread  of  raw  lint  (w/ioXivov)  was  evidently  a  sort  of  flaxen  thread,  but  in 
what  manner  it  was  prepared,  and  what  was  its  exact  textm-e,  I  cannot  pretend  to 
explain  satisfactorily.  As  far  as  regards  the  principle  of  the  operation,  this,  however, 
is  not  of  much  consequence ;  for  a  cotton,  a  flaxen,  or  a  silk  tliread,  woidd  evidently 
serve  the  purpose. 

52 


818  FISTULtE. 

and  fastened  into  a  knot.  Then  the  patient  is  to  be  told  that 
he  may  go  and  attend  to  his  matters.^  The  rest  of  the  treat- 
ment : — Whenever  any  part  of  the  thread  gets  loose  owing  to 
the  fistula  becoming  putrid,  it  is  to  be  tightened  and  twisted 
every  day ;  and  should  the  raw  thread  rot  before  the  fistula  is 
eaten  through,  you  must  attach  another  piece  of  raw  thread 
to  the  hair,  pass  it  through,  and  tie  it,  for  it  was  for  this  pur- 
pose that  the  hair  was  rolled  round  the  raw  lint,  as  it  is  not 
liable  to  rot.  When  the  fistula  has  sloughed  through,  a  soft 
sponge  is  to  be  cut  into  very  slender  pieces  and  applied,  and 
then  the  flowers  of  copper,  roasted,  are  to  be  frequently  applied 
with  a  director;  and  the  sponge  smeared  with  honey  is  to  be 
introduced  with  the  index  finger  of  the  left  hand,  and  pushed 
forwards ;  and  another  bit  of  sponge  being  added,  it  is  to  be 
bound  on  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  operation  for  hemor- 
rhoids. Next  day,  having  loosed  the  bandages,  the  fistula  is 
to  be  washed  with  hot  water,  and  cleaned,  as  far  as  possible, 
with  the  finger  of  the  left  hand  by  means  of  the  sponge,  and 
again  the  flos  eeris  is  to  be  applied.  This  is  to  be  done  for 
seven  days,  for  generally  the  coat  of  the  fistula  takes  that  time 
to  slough  through.  The  same  mode  of  bandaging  is  to  be  per- 
severed in  afterwards,  until  the  cure  be  completed.  For  in  this 
Avay,  the  fistula  being  forcibly  expanded  by  the  sponge  will  not 
fill  up  and  heal  unequal!}^,  but  it  will  all  become  whole  together. 
During  the  treatment,  the  part  should  be  bathed  with  plenty 
of  warm  water,  and  the  patient  kept  on  a  spare  diet." 

'  This  seems  to  be  our  author's  meaning,  which  is  thus  expressed  by  Celsus, 
"interdum  autem  licet  negotia  agere,  ambulare,  lavari,  cibum  capere  perinde  ac 
sanissimo." 

*  The  operation  called  apolinose,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  ligature,  is  very  celebrated. 
It  is  described  by  Paulus  .Egineta,  in  the  words  of  our  author,  at  Book  vi,  78 ; 
and  by  Celsus  in  very  distinct  terms  (vii,  4).  It  is  now  greatly  fallen  into  disuse 
in  this  country  ;  but  as  the  operation  with  the  scalpel  sometimes,  in  the  hands  of 
the  most  experienced  surgeons,  is  followed  by  fatal  hemon'hage,  I  do  not  see  why 
the  ligature  should  be  discarded  in  all  cases.  See  the  history  of  the  operation  in 
Sprengel's  History  of  I\Iedicine,  torn,  vii,  French  edition  ;  and  at  Paulus  jEgineta, 
Book  VI,  78,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  The  operation  with  the  ligature  is  described  by 
Malgaigne  in  his  Operative  Surgery,  but  he  represents  it  as  being  tedious  and  pain- 
ful. From  our  author's  description,  it  would  appear  that  his  method  consisted  in 
introducing  a  small  bundle  of  threads  into  the  fistula  for  the  purpose  of  raising  an 
increased  action  of  the  vessels  in  the  part.  In  principle,  then,  liis  plan  would  seem 
10  have  resembled  that  which  is  recommended  by  Langenbeck  in  such  cases.     It  is 


FISTUL/E.  819 

5.  When  the  fistula  does  not  get  eaten  through^  ha\ang  first 
examined  it  with  a  sonnd,  cut  down  as  far  as  it  passes,  and 
sprinkle  with  the  flos  icrh,  and  let  it  remain  for  five  days.  Then 
pour  warm  water  upon  it,  and  above  lay  flour  mixed  with  water, 
and  bind  on  it  the  leaves  of  beet.  When  the  flos  seris  comes 
away,  and  the  fistulous  sore  becomes  clean,  cure  it  as  before 
described.  But  if  the  fistula  be  in  a  part  which  does  not  admit 
of  this  treatment,  and  if  it  be  deep,  syringe  it  with  the  flowers 
of  copper,  and  myrrh,  and  natron,  diluted  with  urine,  and  in- 
troduce a  piece  of  lead  into  the  orifice  of  the  fistula  so  that  it 
may  not  close.  Syringe  the  fistula  by  means  of  a  quill  attached 
to  a  bladder,  so  that  the  injection  may  distend  the  fistula.  But 
it  docs  not  heal  unless  it  be  cut  open. 

6.  If  the  anus  gets  inflamed,  and  there  is  pain,  fever,  a  frequent 
desire  of  going  to  stool  without  passing  anything,  and  the  anus 
appears  to  protrude,  owing  to  the  inflammation,  and  if  at  times 
strangury  come  on,  this  disease  is  formed,  when  phlegm,  col- 
lected from  the  whole  body,  is  determined  to  the  rectum.^ 
Warm  things  are  beneficial  in  this  case ;  for  these,  when  applied, 
can  attenuate  and  dissolve  the  phlegm,  and  dilute  the  acrid 
and  salt  particles,  so  that  the  heat  subsides,  and  the  irritation 
in  the  rectum  is  removed.  Wherefore  it  is  to  be  treated  thus  : — 
The  patient  is  to  be  put  into  a  hip-bath  of  hot  water,  and  sixty 
grains  of  the  grana  gnidia"  are  to  be  pounded  and  infused  in 
a  hemina  of  wine,  with  half  a  hemina  of  oil,  and  injected.  This 

thus  described  by  Chelius :  "  In  still  longer  continued  fistulous  passages,  especially 
when  their  walls  have  become  callous,  we  endeavour  to  excite  a  proper  degree  of 
inflammation  of  the  walls  of  the  passage,  usually  by  the  introduction  of  a  seton,  or 
of  a  bundle  composed  of  many  threads,  which  is  tied  together  externally  upon  the 
fistulous  passage,  and  daily  drawn  tighter.  According  to  Langenbeck,  the  introduc- 
tion of  a  ligature  is,  in  many  cases,  preferable  to  incision,  which  oftentimes  is  im- 
practicable, without  injuring  large  vessels,  and  so  on.  By  the  ligature  inflammation 
is  produced,  good  consistent  pus  and  granulations  are  produced,  &c.  As  these 
symptoms  come  on,  the  ligature  is  to  be  gradually  drawn  tighter."  (English  edition 
by  South,  vol.  i,  p.  93.)  The  operation  with  a  single  thread  was  strongly  recom- 
mended lately  by  Luke  of  the  London  Hospital.  See  Lancet,  vol.  i,  1845,  new 
series.     It  is  also  advocaled  by  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,  Med.  Gaz.,  1093. 

'  In  this  paragraph  our  author  evidently  descril)es  a  case  of  phlegmon,  which  usually 
precedes _^s/M^a  in  ano.  See  Pott,  and  Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary,  under  this  head, 
where  very  similar  descriptions  are  given. 

^  The  fruit  of  the  Daphne  gnidium.  See  Paulus  ^IJIgineta,  Vol.  IH,  179.  The 
grains  are  recommended  in  this  case  to  form  a  stimulant  injection. 


820  FISTULiE. 

brings  away  phlegm  and  fneces.  When  the  patient  does  not 
take  the  liip-bath,  l)oil  eggs  in  dark-coloured  fragrant  wine, 
and  apply  to  the  anus,  and  spread  something  warm  below, 
either  a  bladder  filled  with  warm  water,  or  linseed  toasted  and 
ground,  and  its  meal  stirred  up  and  mixed  equally  with  dark, 
fragrant  wine,  and  oil,  and  thus  applied  very  warm  as  a  cata- 
plasm ;  or,  having  mixed  barley  and  Egyptian  alum  pulverized, 
form  into  an  ol)long  l)all  [suppository  ?)  and  warming  it  gently 
at  the  fire,  make  it  into  a  cataplasm,  foment,  form  it  into  shape 
with  the  fingers,  and  then  making  it  quite  tepid,  introduce  it 
into  the  anus.  The  external  parts  are  to  be  anointed  with 
cerate,  and  a  cataplasm  of  boiled  garlic,  with  dark  wine  diluted, 
is  to  be  applied.  But  if  you  remove  these  things,  let  him  take 
the  hip-bath  of  hot  water,  and  having  mixed  together  the 
juice  of  strychnos,  the  grease  of  a  goose,  swine's  seam,  chry- 
socolla,^  rosin,  and  white  wax,  and  then  having  melted  in  the 
same  and  mixed  together,  anoint  with  these  things,  and  while 
the  inflammation  lasts,  use  the  cataplasm  of  boiled  garlic.  And 
if  by  these  means  he  be  freed  from  the  pain,  it  is  enough ; 
but  if  not,  give  him  the  white  meconium  {Euphorbia  pejihis  ?), 
or,  if  not  it,  any  other  phlemagogue  medicine.  While  the  in- 
flammation lasts,  the  diet  should  be  light. 

7.  The  strangury  comes  on  in  this  way  : — The  bladder  being 
heated  from  the  rectum,  phlegm  is  attracted  by  the  heat,  and 
by  the  phlegm  [iiijlaiiunatioii  ?)  the  strangury  is  occasioned. 
If,  then,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  it  cease  with  the  disease, 
well ;   Ijut,  if  not,  give  any  of  the  medicines  for  strangury.^ 

8.  If  procidentia  ani  take  place,  having  fomented  the  part 
Avith  a  soft  sponge,  and  anointed  it  with  a  snail,^  bind  the 
man's  hands  together,  and  suspend  him  for  a  short  time,  and 
the  gut  will  return.  But  if  it  still  prolapse,  and  will  not  re- 
main up,  fasten  a  girdle  round  his  loins  and  attach  a  shawl 
behind,  and  having  pushed  up  the  anus,  apply  to  it  a  soft 
sponge,  moistened  with  hot  water  in  which  the  shavings  of  lotus 
have  been  boiled ;  pour  of  this  decoction  upon  the  anus  by 
squeezing  the  sponge,  then,  bringing  the  shawl  below  between 

'  Probaljly  an  impure  carbonate  of  copper.    See  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol.  Ill,  416. 
-  On  tlie  complication  of  phlegmon  of  the  rectum  with  strangury,  see  further, 
Aph.  V,  J8,  vii,  13;  Int.  Attect.  xJi,  6. 
^  No  doubt  the  HelLr  pomaiia. 


FISTUL/E.  821 

the  legs,  fasten  it  at  the  navel.  But  if  he  wish  to  evacnate  the 
howcls,  let  him  do  so  upon  a  very  narrow  night-stool.  Or,  if 
the  patient  be  a  child,  let  him  he  placed  on  the  feet  of  a  woman, 
with  his  back  reclined  to  her  knees,^  and  when  the  bowels 
are  evacuated,  let  the  legs  be  extended.  In  this  Avay  the  anns 
will  be  the  least  disposed  to  fall  out.  When  a  watery  and 
ichorous  discharge  flows  from  the  rectum,  wash  it  out  with 
burnt  lees  of  wine,^  and  w'ater  from  myrtle,  and  having  dried 
maiden-hair,'^  pound  and  sift  it,  and  apply  as  a  cataplasm.  But 
if  there  l)e  a  discharge  of  blood,  having  washed  with  the  same,;ind 
pounded  chalcitis,  and  the  shavings  of  cypress,*^  or  of  juniper,  or 
of  stone-pine,''  or  of  turpentine,  the  latter  in  equal  proportions 
with  the  chalcitis,  apply  as  a  cataplasm.  Anoint  the  external 
parts  with  thick  cerate. 

9.  When  the  gut  protrudes  and  will  not  remain  in  its  place, 
scrape  the  finest  and  most  compact  silphium  [aasafoetida  ?) 
into  small  pieces  and  apply  as  a  cataplasm,  and  apply  a  sternu- 
tatory medicine  to  the  nose  and  provoke  sneezing;  and  having 
moistened  pomegranate  rind  with  hot  water,  and  having  powdered 
alum  in  white  wine,  pour  it  on  the  gut,  then  apply  rags,  bind 
the  thighs  together  for  three  days,  and  let  the  patient  fast,  only 
he  may  drink  sweet  wane.  If  even  thus  matters  do  not  pro- 
ceed properly,  having  mixed  vermilion  with  honey,  anoint. 

10.  If  procidentia  ani  be  attended  with  a  discharge  of  blood, 
pare  off  the  rind  of  the  root  of  wakerobin,  then  pound  and 
mix  flour  with  it,  and  apply  it  warm  as  a  cataplasm.  Another  : 
— Having  scraped  off  the  rind  of  the  most  tender  roots  of  the 
wild  vine,  which  some  call  psUothnon,  boil  in  a  dark  austere 
wine  undiluted;  then  having  pounded,  apply  as  a  tepid  cata- 
plasm ;   but  mix  also  flour  and  stir  it  up  with  white  wine  and 

'  This  singular  substitute  for  a  nursery  niglit-tablc  I  have  never  seen  mentioned 
by  any  other  author,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect.  Tlic  object  of  the  contrivance  here 
mentioned  evidently  is  to  prevent  the  child  from  straining  hard,  so  as  to  bring  down 
the  gut. 

-  This,  no  doubt,  was  an  impure  caustic  potass.  See  Paulus  yEcixETA,  Vol.  Ill, 
185,  and  II,  2G5. 

^  The  Adiantum  capiUus  Veneris.  See  Paulus  iEoiNETA,  B.  Ill,  22 ;  and 
Dierbach,  &c.  86. 

••  The  C'upressHs  sempennrcns,  Yet.  iii,  204  ,  Dierl)ach,  Sec.  218. 

5  Namely,  the  P/nus  piuea,  L.  See  Paulus  iEciNEXA,  Vol.  Ill,  302  ;  and 
Dierbach,  &c.  p.  215. 


822  FISTULiE. 

oil  in  a  tepid  state.  Anotlicr : — Hariiig  pounded  the  seed  of 
hemlock,  pour  on  it  a  fragrant  white  wine,  and  then  apply  in 
a  tepid  state  as  a  cataplasm. 

11.  But  if  it  be  inflamed,  having  boiled  in  water  the  root  of 
the  ivy,  finely  powdered,  and  mixing  the  finest  flour,  and 
stirring  it  \i\)  with  white  wine,  apjjly  as  a  cataplasm,  and  mix  up 
some  fat  vvith  these  things.  Another : — Take  the  root  of  the 
mandrake,  especially  tlie  green  (fresh)  root,  but  otherwise  the 
dried,  and  having  cleaned  the  green  root  and  cut  it  down,  boil 
in  diluted  wine,  and  ai)ply  as  a  cataphism ;  but  the  diy  may 
be  pounded  and  applied  as  a  cataplasm  in  like  manner. 
Another : — Having  bruised  the  inner  part  of  a  ripe  cucumber 
to  a  soft  state,  apply  as  a  cataplasm.^ 

12.  If  there  be  pain  witliout  inflammation,  having  roasted 
red  natron  and  pounded  it  to  a  fine  powder,  and  added  alum 
and  roasted  salts,"  finely  triturated,  mix  together  in  equal  pro- 
portions; then  having  mixed  it  up  witli  the  best  pitch  and 
spread  upon  a  rag,  apply,  and  bind.  Another : — Having 
pounded  the  green  leaves  of  capers,  put  into  a  bag  and  bind  on 
the  part ;  and  when  it  appears  to  burn,  take  it  away  and  apply 
it  afterwards;  or,  if  you  have  not  the  leaves  of  capers,  pound 
the  rind  of  its  roots,  ami  having  mixed  it  up  Avith  dark-coloured 
wine,  bind  on  the  part  in  the  same  manner.  This  is  a  good 
application  also  for  pains  of  the  spleen.  Of  these  poultices, 
those  which  are  cooling,  stop  the  discharge;  those  which  are 
emollient  and  heating,  discuss ;  and  those  which  are  attractive, 
dry  up  and  attenuate.  This  disease  is  formed  when  bile  and 
phlegm  become  seated  in  the  parts.  "When  the  anus  is  in- 
flamed, it  should  be  anointed  with  the  ointment,  the  ingredients 
of  which  are  rosin,  oil,  wax,  plumbago,  and  suet,  these  being 
all  melted  and  applied  quite  hot  as  a  cataplasm. 

'  One  cannot  help  being  struck  with  tlic  aihiiirablc  judgment  with  which  ilie 
ingredients  in  these  cataplasms  are  selected.  What  articles  so  likely  to  sootlie  irri- 
tation and  allay  pain,  as  hemlock,  maudragora,  cucumber,  and  the  like  ? 

■^  The  process  of  roasting  salts  is  minutely  described  by  Dioscorides  (v,  125). 


ON  HEMOllRHOIDS. 


ON  HEMORRHOIDS. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

That  this  little  work  is  a  continuation  of  the  preceding  one 
'  On  Fistulse/  is  admitted  by  all  the  authorities,  ancient  and 
modern. 

In  the  first  paragraph  is  described  the  formation  of  hemor- 
rhoids from  bile  or  phlegm,  Avhich  are  determined  to  the  rectum 
and  inflame  the  blood  in  the  veins,  so  that  they  become  gorged, 
and  the  gut  swells,  and  when  the  parts  are  injured  by  the  passage 
of  hard  fieces^  the  vessels  squirt  out  blood. 

In  the  second,  the  author  boldly  declares  that  such  operations 
as  those  of  cutting,  sewing,  binding,  and  applying  septics  to 
the  anus,  although  formidable  in  name,  are  by  no  means  so 
much  so  in  reality,  as  might  be  suspected.  He  then  describes 
in  very  lucid  terms  the  method  of  applying  the  actual  cautery 
to  the  hemorrhoids.  He  directs  the  patient  to  be  properly 
secured,  and  the  piles  having  been  made  to  protrude,  are  to 
be  burnt  bv  means  of  red-hot  irons.  The  after-treatment  is 
then  distinctly  laid  down,  first  by  cataplasms  and  by  means  of 
a  soft  sponge,  secured  with  a  shawl. 

In  the  third,  the  operation  of  excising  the  hemorrhoids  is 
described  along  with  the  subsequent  management  by  means  of 
astringent  applications  and  a  piece  of  sponge. 

In  the  fourth,  the  condyloma  is  described,  and  the  mode  of 
operating  upon  it  when  it  protrudes  is  most  minutely  descriljed. 
He  directs  that  the  tumour  should  be  torn  away  with  the 
finger,  and  the  decoction  of  galls  applied  to  the  place. 

In  the  fifth  is  described  the  proper  mode  of  procedure  when 
the  tumour  is  far  up  the  rectum.  The  great  principle  of 
treatment  which  he  lays  doAvn  is  to  remove  it  by  the  roots,  in 
which  case,  he  says,  there  is  no  risk  of  bleeding,  whereas,  if  it 


826         HEMORRHOIDS— ARGUMENT. 

be  separated  elsewhere,  there  will  be  a  dangerous  discharge 
of  blood. 

In  the  sixth  is  described  the  process  of  burning  the  hemor- 
rhoid, first  by  means  of  an  iron  conducted  within  a  canula,  or 
if  neither  excision  nor  the  actual  cautery  be  practicable,  Avith 
caustics,  by  means  of  which,  he  says,  the  pile  will  separate  like 
a  piece  of  burnt  hide.  Tlie  ingredients  in  his  applications 
are  sulphate  of  copper,  alum,  and  the  like. 

In  the  last  paragraph  is  given  the  treatment  of  what  was 
described  by  the  ancients  as  hemorrhoids  of  the  female  parts 
of  generation.  It  consists  in  fomenting  them  with  certain 
things  of  a  soothing  and  stimulant  nature. 

What  gives  this  treatise  the  most  interest  is  the  description 
contained  in  it  of  the  method  of  curing  hemorrhoids  l)y  the 
actual  and  potential  cauteries.  Neither  of  these  methods 
are  much  known  in  this  country,  but  both  are  often  practised 
in  France.  The  caustic  most  frequently  used  is  the  Vienna 
paste,  which,  I  believe,  is  a  preparation  from  the  potassa  fusa. 
It  is  applied  by  means  of  a  forceps,  porte-caustique.  I  have 
often  applied  successfully  the  simple  caustic  potass.  The  French 
surgeons  also  operate  with  the  actual  cautery.  See  the  English 
edition  of  Malgaigne's  Operative  Surgery,  p.  4 15. 


ON   HEMORRHOIDS. 

1.  The  disease  of  the  hemorrhoids  is  formed  in  this  way: 
if  bile  or  phlegm  be  determined  to  the  veins  in  the  rectum,  it 
heats  the  blood  in  the  veins  :  and  these  veins  becoming  heated 
attract  blood  from  the  nearest  veins,  and  being  gorged  the 
inside  of  the  gut  swells  outwardly,  and  the  heads  of  the  veins 
are  raised  up,  and  being  at  the  same  time  bruised  by  the 
f;eces  passing  out,  and  injured  by  the  blood  collected  in  them, 
they  squirt  out  blood,  most  frequently  along  with  the  faeces, 
but  sometimes  without  f;eces.      It  is  to  be  cured  thus  : 

2.  In  the  first  place  it  should  be  known  in  what  soi't  of  a 
place  they  are  formed.  For  cutting,  excising,  sewing,  l)inding, 
applying  i)uti-efacient  means  to  the  anus, — all  these  appear  to 
1)0   very   formidable   things,    and  yet,    after  all,  tliey   are  not 


HEMORRHOIDS.  827 

attended  with  miscliief.  I  recommend  seven  or  eight  small 
pieces  of  iron  to  be  prepared,  a  fathom  in  size,  in  thickness 
like  a  thick  specillum,  and  bent  at  the  extremitj^  and  a  broad 
piece  should  be  on  the  extremity,  like  a  small  obolus.^  Having 
on  the  preceding  day  first  purged  the  man  with  medicine,  on 
the  day  of  the  operation  apply  the  cautery.  Having  laid 
him  on  his  back,  and  placed  a  pillow  below  the  breech,  force 
out  the  anus  as  much  as  possible  with  the  fingers,  and  make 
the  irons  red-hot,  and  burn  the  pile  until  it  be  dried  up,  and 
so  as  that  no  part  may  be  left  behind.  And  burn  so  as  to 
leave  none  of  the  hemorrhoids  unburnt,  for  you  should  burn 
them  all  up."  You  will  recognise  the  hemorrhoids  without 
difficulty,  for  they  project  on  the  inside  of  the  gut  like  dark- 
coloured  grapes,  and  when  the  anus  is  forced  out  they  spirt 
blood.  When  the  cautery  is  applied  the  patient^s  head  and 
hands  should  be  held  so  that  he  may  not  stir,  but  he  himself 
should  cry  out,  for  this  will  make  the  rectum  project  the  more. 
When  you  have  performed  the  burning,  boil  lentils  and  tares, 
finely  triturated  iu  water,  and  apply  as  a  cataplasm  for  five  or 
six  days.  But  on  the  seventh,  cut  a  soft  sponge  into  a  very 
slender  slice,  its  width  should  be  about  six  inches  square.  Then 
a  thin  smooth  piece  of  cloth,  of  the  same  size  as  the  sponge,  is 
to  be  smeared  with  honey  and  applied ;  and  with  the  index 
finger  of  the  left  hand  the  middle  of  the  sponge  is  to  be  pushed 
as  far  up  as  possible ;  and  afterwards  wool  is  to  be  placed  upon 
the  sponge  so  that  it  may  remain  in  the  anus.  And  having 
girded  the  patient  about  the  loins  and  fastened  a  shawl  to  the 
girdle,  bring  up  this  band  from  behind  between  the  legs  and 

'  I  would  direct  the  attention  of  my  surgical  readers  to  the  form  of  the  ancient 
cautery  or  burning  iron ;  it  resembled  a  small  coin,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  a  disc.  I 
have  often  thought  that  modern  practitioners  in  surgery  erred  in  making  their  cauteries 
globular,  instead  of  making  them  flat  discs  like  the  ancient.  Several  of  the  burning 
ii'ons  delineated  by  Scultet  are  of  this  shape.  See,  in  particular.  Tab.  xxxviii,  f.  4.  Le 
cauttre  nummulaire  of  the  French  surgeons  is  formed  exactly  upon  the  model  of  the 
ancient  cautery  here  noticed  by  Hippocrates.  See  Malgaigne,  Med.  Operat.,  p.  22. 
He  describes  it  as  being  "  un  disque  de  douze  lignes  do  diametre  sur  quatre 
d'epaisseur." 

^  This  is  contrary  to  the  advice  given  at  Aph.  vi,  12,  and  is  the  only  passage  in 
this  small  tract  which  would  lead  me  to  question  its  genuineness.  Celsus  (ii,  7)  and 
Paulus  jEgineta  (B.  VI,  79)  follow  the  rule  laid  down  in  the  Ajjhor.  (1.  c.)  Aetius, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  an  advocate  for  the  practice  here  recommended,  (Tetr.  iv,  2,  5.) 


828  HEMORRHOIDS. 

attach  it  to  the  girdle  at  the  navel.  Then  let  the  medicine 
which  I  formerly  said  is  calculated  to  render  the  skin  thick 
and  strong,  be  Ijound  on.  These  things  should  be  kept  on  for 
not  less  than  twenty  days.  The  patient  should  once  a  day 
take  a  draught  from  flour  or  millet,  or  bran,  and  drink  water. 
When  the  patient  goes  to  stool  the  part  should  be  washed  with 
hot  water.      Every  third  day  he  should  take  the  batli.^ 

3.  Another  method  of  cure  : — Having  got  the  anus  to  protrude 
as  much  as  possible,  foment  with  hot  water,  and  then  cut  off 
the  extremities  of  the  hemorrhoids.  But  this  medicine  should 
be  prepared  beforehand,  as  an  application  to  the  wound  :  — 
Having  put  urine  into  a  bronze  vessel,  sprinkle  upon  the  urine 
the  flower  of  bronze  calcined  and  finely  triturated;  then, 
when  it  is  moistened,  shake  the  vessel  and  dry  in  the  sun. 
When  it  becomes  dry,  let  it  be  scraped  down  and  levigated, 
and  apply  with  the  finger  to  the  part,  and  having  oiled  com- 
presses, apply  them,  and  bind  a  sponge  above. ^ 

4-.  Another  method  : — There  grows  upon  the  bleeding  con- 
dyloma," a  protuberance  like  the  fruit  of  the  mulberry,  and  if 
the  condyloma  be  far  without,  an  envelope  of  flesh  is  adherent 
to  it.  Having  placed  the  man  over  two  round  stones^  upon 
his  knees,  examine,  for  you  will  find  the  parts  near  the  anus 
between  the  buttocks  inflated,  and  blood  proceeding  from 
within.  If,  then,  the  condyloma  below  the  cover  be  of  a  soft 
nature,  bring  it  away  Avith  the  finger,  for  there  is  no  more 
ditficulty  in  this  than,  in  skinning  a  sheep,  to  pass  the  finger 
between  the  hide  and  the  flesh.  And  this  should  be  accom- 
plished without  the  patient^s  knowledge,  while  he  is  kept  in 
conversation.  When  the  condyloma  is  taken  off",  streaks  of 
blood  necessarily  flow  from  the  whole  of  the  torn  part.  It 
must   be  speedily  v.ashed  with   a  decoction  of  galls,   in  a  dry 

'  The  treatment  of  hemorrhoids  by  tlie  cautery  is  not  described  by  Celsus,  Pauhis, 
or  Albucasis,  and  is  coudeiuued  by  Andreas  a  Cruce. 

-  I  need  scarcely  remark  that  the  oi)eration  of  excising  hemorrhoids  has  been 
revived  of  late  years,  but  that  it  is  not  devoid  of  danger.  Sir  Astley  Cooper  relates 
cases  in  which  it  was  followed  by  fatal  hemorrhage.  The  application  recommended 
liy  our  author  is  probably  intended,  in  a  great  measure,  for  restraining  the  bleeding. 

'■^  This  is  a  term  still  in  use.  See  Liston's  Pract.  Surg.  The  treatment  of  condy- 
luma  ani  is  minutely  given  by  Celsus,  vi,  18,  and  vii,  30. 

■■  Or  mortars,  meaning  those  used  in  houses  for  pouutliug  corn.  See  Ilesychius, 
and  Foes  in  his  annotations  on  this  place. 


HEMORRHOIDS.  829 

wine,  and  the  bleeding  vein  will  disappear  along  with  the 
condyloma,  and  its  cover  will  be  replaced.  The  older  it  is, 
the  more  easy  the  cure. 

5.  But  it"  the  condyloma  be  higher  up,  you  must  examine 
it  with  the  speculum,  and  you  should  take  care  not  to  be 
deceived  by  the  speculum ;  for  when  expanded,  it  renders  the 
condyloma  level  with  the  surrounding  parts,  but  when  con- 
tracted, it  shows  the  tumour  right  again.  It  is  to  be  removed 
by  smearing  it  with  black  hellebore  on  the  finger.  Then,  on 
the  third  day,  wash  it  out  with  a  dry  wine.  You  need  not  be 
surprised  that  there  is  no  discharge  of  blood  when  you  remove 
the  condyloma,  for  neither,  if  you  cut  off  the  hands  or  legs  at 
the  articulations  will  there  be  any  flow  of  blood ;  but  if  you 
cut  them  off  above  or  below  the  joints,  you  will  find  there 
hollow  veins  which  pour  out  blood,  and  you  will  have  difficulty 
in  stopping  the  bleeding.  In  the  same  manner,  the  bleeding 
vein  in  the  anus,  if  you  cut  it  above  or  below  the  point  of 
separation  of  the  condyloma,  will  pour  forth  blood ;  but  if  you 
take  away  the  condyloma  at  its  junction  (with  the  natural 
parts  ?)  there  will  be  no  flow  of  blood. ^  If  matters  then  be 
thus  put  to  rights,  it  will  be  well ;  but  otherwise  burn  it,  taking 
care  not  to  touch  the  place  with  the  iron,  but  bringing  it 
close  so  as  to  dry  it  up,  and  apply  the  flos  a^ris  in  the  urine. 

6.  Another  method  of  curing  hemorrhoids  : — You  must  pre- 
pare a  cautery  like  the  ariuulo  phrafjuiites,'^  and  an  iron  that 
exactly  fits  is  to  be  adapted  to  it ;  then  the  tube  being  intro- 
duced into  the  anus,  the  iron,  red  hot,  is  to  be  passed  down 
it,  and  frequently  drawn  out,  so  that  the  part  may  bear  the 
more  heat,  and  no  sore  may  result  from  the  heating,  and  the 
dried  veins  may  heal  up.    But  if  you  are  neither  disposed  to  burn 

'  The  directions  given  by  Celsus  are  to  the  same  effect :  "  At  tuljercula,  qua3 
KovcvXwfiarci  appellantur,  iibi  indurucrunt,  hffic  ratione  curantur.  Alvus  ante  omnia 
ducetur;  tum  vulsella  tuberculum  apprehensum  juxta  radices  exciditur."  (vii,  30,  2.) 

2  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  reed  described  by  Dioscorides,  i,  114.  The 
meaning  of  our  author,  I  suppose,  is,  that  the  canula  used  in  burning  internal 
hemorrhoids  sliould  resemble  the  stalk  of  the  Arundo  phragmifes.  I  think  it  re- 
markal)le  that  the  ingenious  mode  of  procedure  here  described  should  not  be  noticed 
by  any  of  the  subsequent  authorities  on  operative  surgery.  The  use  of  the  canula, 
however,  in  the  application  of  the  cautery  for  the  purpose  of  stopping  bleeding 
arteries,  is  not  unknown  at  the  present  day.  See  South's  edition  of  Chelius,  &c., 
vol.  i,  p.  315  ;  and  Malgaigne's  Operative  Surgery,  p.  16,  English  edition.  The 
cautery  with  the  canula  is  well  delineated  by  Scultet,  Arm.  Chirurg.,  t.  xvi. 


830  HEMORRHOIDS. 

iior  excise^  having  first  fomented  with  plenty  of  hot  water  and 
turned  out  the  anns,  levigate  myrrh,  and  having  burnt  galls  and 
Egyptian  alum,  in  the  proportion  of  one  and  a  half  to  the 
other  things,  and  as  much  of  melanteria;^  these  things  are  all 
to  be  used  in  a  dry  state.  The  hemorrhoid  will  separate 
under  the  use  of  these  medicines,  like  a  piece  of  burnt  hide. 
You  are  to  proceed  thus  until  the  whole  are  removed,  and  a 
half  part  of  burnt  chalcitis  does  the  same  thing.  But  if  you 
wish  to  effect  the  cure  by  suppositories,  take  the  shell  of  the 
cuttle  fish,  a  third  part  of  i^lumbago,  bitumen,  alum,  a  little 
of  the  flos  teris,  galls,  a  little  verdigris ;  having  poured  a 
small  quantity  of  boiled  honey  on  these,  and  formed  an  oblong 
suppository,  apply  until  you  remove  them." 

7.  An  hemorrhoid  in  a  woman  may  be  thus  cured.  Having 
fomented  with  plenty  of  hot  water,  boil  in  the  Avater  certain 
of  the  fragrant  medicines,  add  pounded  tamarisk,  roasted 
litharge  and  galls,  and  pour  on  them  white  wine,  and  oil,  and 
the  grease  of  a  goose,  pounding  all  together.  Give  to  use 
after  fomenting.  In  fomenting,  the  anus  is  to  be  made  to 
protrude  as  much  as  possible." 

'  Probably  "  the  ferruginous  arseniate  of  copper."  See  Paulus  /Egineta,  Vol. 
Ill,  p.  214,  Syd.  Soc.  edit.  It  is  proper  to  mention,  that  there  is  a  mistake  there 
in  stating  that  this  substance  is  not  mentioned  by  Hippocrates. 

»  This  method  of  removing  internal  jiiles  by  means  of  caustics  and  septics,  is  de- 
scribed by  Cclsus,  Aetius,  and  Paulus.  Of  the  ingredients  which  they  contain,  the 
most  powerful  is  arsenic.  1  have  more  than  once  removed  hemorrhoids  by  means 
of  tlie  poiassa  fusa,  and  condylomata  by  preparations  of  arsenic. 

'  On  this  S!il)ject,  see  the  authorities  (pioted  in  the  Commentary  on  Paulus 
.Egineta,  Book  VI,  71,  Syd.  Soc.  edit. 


ON  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 


ON  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

I  HAVE  stated,  under  tlie  proper  head  in  the  Preliminary 
Discourse,  my  reasons  for  deciding  to  allow  this  treatise  a  place 
among  the  genuine  works  of  Hippocrates.  Though  it  must  be 
admitted  that,  both  in  style  and  matter,  it  bears  but  little  re- 
semblance to  the  other  authentic  productions  of  our  author,  it 
would  be  contrary  to  the  critical  rules  which  I  formerly  laid 
down,  were  I  to  reject  a  treatise  which  has  so  respectalile  an 
amount  of  ancient  authority  on  its  side.  1  shall  proceed,  then, 
to  give  a  brief  outline  of  its  contents,  and  afterwards  subjoin 
a  few  remarks  on  certain  interesting  subjects  connected  with  it. 

The  author  enters  at  once  upon  the  controverted  question, 
whether  or  not  epilepsy  be  a  sacred  disease ;  that  is  to  say, 
whether  or  not  it  be  an  infliction  from  the  gods.  Here, 
as  in  the  treatise  '  On  Airs,  Waters,  Places,'  he  decidedly 
maintains  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  sacred  disease,  for 
that  all  diseases  arise  from  natural  causes,  and  no  one  can  be 
consistently  ascribed  to  the  gods  more  than  another.  He 
argues  that  the  only  reason  for  its  having  been  regarded  as 
divine  is,  that  its  nature  is  incomprehensible  ;  but  upon  this 
principle,  he  justly  remarks,  many  other  diseases,  the  nature  of 
which  is  above  the  level  of  human  understanding,  such  as  the 
paroxysms  of  intermittent  fevers,  might  be  set  down  as  divine. 
He  does  not  hesitate  to  declare  it  as  his  opinion  that  epilepsy 
had  been  referred  to  a  supernatural  cause  by  persons  who  pre- 
tended to  cure  it  by  spells  and  purifications,  and  who  sought 
to  screen  their  own  want  of  ability  to  effect  anything  in  the 
way  of  remedy  tinder  the  pretext  that  it  was  an  infliction  from 
the  gods.  He  points  out  very  acutely  the  cunning  of  these 
impostors  in  not  actually  prescribing  anything  for  the  cure  of  it, 
as  in  this  case  their  want  of  skill  must  have  been  made  apparent 

53 


834  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

to  everybody ;  and  in  merely  enjoining  certain  restrictions  with 
regard  to  food  and  the  modes  of  life^  so  that  if  any  improvement 
slioukl  take  place  the  credit  would  be  theirs ;  whereas,  if  the 
patient  got  worse,  the  blame  could  be  laid  on  the  gods.  Our 
author's  train  of  reasoning  on  this  head  is  most  logical  and 
conclusive.  He  argues,  that  if  these  persons  had  the  power 
of  removing  disease,  they  must  also  have  the  power  of  inducing 
it,  and  consequently  they  would  be  superior  to  the  gods  them- 
selves. He  further  contends,  that  if  magical  arts  could  effect 
what  they  are  represented  as  being  capable  of,  that  is  to  say, 
could  darken  the  sun  and  pull  down  the  moon,  it  would  follow 
that  these  celestial  objects  are  not  of  a  divine  nature,  seeing 
they  are  mastered  by  human  power.  He  then  enters  into  a 
most  convincing  line  of  argument  against  those  who  pretended 
to  cure  epileptics  by  purifications ;  contending  that  if  these 
persons  were  in  reality  possessed  by  a  god,  their  bodies  would 
be  purified,  instead  of  polluted,  by  the  presence  of  a  divine 
being. 

He  further  argues  against  the  supposition  that  the  disease 
is  divine  from  the  known  fact  that  it  is  hereditary,  for  which 
he  attempts  to  account  upon  physiological  principles.  He  also 
contends  that  it  particularly  attacks  persons  of  a  peculiar  tem- 
perament, namely,  the  pituitous,  which  he  justly  contends  would 
not  be  tlie  case  if  the  disease  were  derived  from  a  supernatural 
source. 
•^  He  goes  on  to  state,  that  the  disease  is  connected  with  the 
brain  ;  and  of  the  blood-vessels  which  connect  it  with  the  trunk 
he  gives  a  description  Avhich  cannot  but  appear  to  ns  very  re- 
markable. It  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  description  of 
the  vascular  system  contained  in  the  treatise  '  On  Human 
Nature,'  but  is  not  quite  so  far  removed  from  modern  ideas  on 
the  subject.  There  are,  also,  certain  points  of  resemblance 
between  it  and  the  description  of  them  given  in  the  Second 
Book  of  Epidemics.  One  of  his  leading  doctrines  regarding 
the  veins,  is  that  they  are  the  spiracles  of  the  body,  and  inhale 
the  pneuma  (or  spirits)  by  the  lungs,  and  carry  it  to  the 
surface  of  the  body,  where  it  passes  out  of  the  system  by  the 
exhalents.  The  pneuma  (or  breath)  he  holds  to  be  the  vehicle 
of  sensibiUty  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  hence,  if  its  course 
be  intercepted,  the  part  beyond  becomes  insensible. 


ARGUMENT.  835 

lie  goes  oil  to  ml  urge  upon  tlie  nonnr-xiop  ot  tlio.  dL'SCiise 
witli  t'le  br.iiii^  a  {luctriue  which  lie  illustrates  by  a  pretty  full 
exposition  of  the  humoral  pathology  as  illustrated  by  various 
defluxioas  upon  dillerent  parts  of  the  body.  It  is  important 
to  remark  that  he  represents  eruptions  of  ulcers  on  the  head 
and  othc  r  parts  of  the  body  in  iu fancy,  as  being  calculated 
to  ward  oft"  the  attack  of  serious  diseases  in  after  life. 
Local  diseases  are  accounted  for  as  being  occasioned  by 
defluxions  on  particular  parts,  and  the  epileptic  paroxysm 
is  described  as  being  a  struggle  between  the  humours  and 
pneuma  in  the  vessels.  This  hypothesis  he  explains  very 
elaborately.  Epileptic  convulsions  arc  represented  as  being 
generally  fatal  to  children,  because  their  veins  are  small,  and 
cannot  admit  the  defluxion.  He  gives  a  curious  account  of  a 
natural  cure  which  the  disease  sometimes  undergoes,  by  fixing 
upon  some  member  of  the  bod}^,  such  as  the  mouth,  tlic  eye, 
the  neck,  or  the  hand.  In  adults  this  does  not  take  place,  as 
their  vessels  are  large,  and  the  blood  is  not  choked  by  the 
influx  of  the  phlegm.  When  the  disease  seizes  old  persons 
it  is  apt  to  induce  fatal  attacks  of  apoplexy,  owing  to  the 
scantiness  of  the  blood  in  their  veins,  which  is  coagulated  by 
the  cold  defluxion. 

The  formation  of  the  disease  in  children  is  ascribed  to  a 
melting  down  of  the  brain,  owing  to  exposure  to  heat,  and  to 
an  excretion  from  the  same.  In  some  cases  it  is  occasioned 
by  the  south  wind  succeeding  to  cold  north  winds,  and  it  is 
also  sometimes  produced  by  sudden  fear.  In  old  persons  the 
disease  is  most  commonly  engendered  in  winter,  and  in  that 
season  the  transitions  from  the  one  state  to  the  other  are  apt 
to  be  attended  with  the  most  fatal  consequences ;  and  this  may 
happen  at  any  season  of  the  year,  and  in  spring  more  frequently 
than  in  summer,  as  in  the  former  season  the  changes  are  more 
sudden  than  in  the  latter.  After  the  twentieth  year,  epilepsy 
is  not  apt  to  take  place,  as  the  brain  by  that  time  is  consistent, 
so  that  it  does  not  readily  melt  down,  and  the  blood  in  the 
veins  is  copious.  But  if  the  disease  had  become  habitual  from 
childhood,  in  such  a  case  attacks  are  apt  to  occur  during 
changes  of  the  weather,  more  especially  during  the  prevalence 
of  the  south  winds,  whereby  the  brain  is  rendered  more  humid. 
That  the  disease  is  produced  by  humiditj^  of  the  brain,  he  shows 


836  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

from  what  is  observed  in  tlic  inferior  animals  who  are  subject 
to  it ;  for  if  the  brain  of  a  goat  so  aftccted  be  dissected,  it 
will  be  found  to  be  waterv,  and  to  have  a  bad  smell.  This, 
he  acutely  argues,  is  an  ocular  proof  that  in  them  it  is  not  a 
god,  but  a  disease,  which  infests  their  body;  and  he  infers,  from 
analogy,  that  the  case  is  the  same  Avith  man. 

Children  he  represents  as  being  most  liable  to  attacks  during 
the  prevalence  of  south  winds,  the  effects  of  which  upon  all 
bodies  exposed  to  it,  he  describes  in  very  striking  terms ;   and 

"^hence  forms  a  strong  argument  in  support  of  his  opinion,  that 
the  south  wind  has  a  great  efiect  npon  the  brain,  and  thereby 
superinduces  this  disease.  He  thereupon  gives  a  very  interest- 
ing exposition  of  the  humoral  pathology  in  explanation  of  the 
origin  of  epilepsy  and  catarrhs.  He  afterwards  repeats  his 
former  declaration,  that  epilepsy  is  no  more  a  divine  disease 
than  any  other  is,  but  has  its  seat  in  the  brain,  which  he  holds 
to  be  the  organ  of  the  senses  and  of  the  intellect, — that,  in  a 
word,  it  is  the  part  by  which  we  know,  feel,  think,  and  judge 
what  is  right  and  Mliat  is  wrong,  what  is  foul  and  what  is  fair, 
— that  it  is  the  seat  of  the  passions,  and  the  organ  which  is 
deranged  in  cases  of  insanity.      These  maniacal   affections  he 

ii^  holds  to  be  connected  with  phlegm  and  bile,  and  the  varieties 
of  them  he  describes  very  circumstantially.  The  more  violent 
of  them  are  referred  to  the  bile,  and  the  opposite  class  to  the 
phlegm.  He  argues  that  the  pnemna  (breath  or  spirits)  passes 
direct  to  the  brain,  and  thence  is  distributed  to  all  parts  of  the 
body.  He  contends  that  the  diaphragm  has  nothing  to  do 
with  feeling  and  sensibility,  as  its  name  would  imply,  any  more 
than  the  auricles  of  the  heart  have  to  do  with  the  sense  of 
hearing.  He  further  argues  against  the  physiological  hypo- 
thesis, that  the  heart  is  the  part  in  which  thought  and  the 
mental  emotions  are  seated.  The  work  concludes  with  another 
repetition  of  his  declaration,  tliat  the  disease  is  no  more  divine 
than  any  other,  and  he  contends  that  by  studying  the  intem- 
peraments,  and  administering  such  things  as  are  calculated  to 
correct  each  of  them,  the  physician  may  hope  to  accomplish 
the  cure  of  epilepsj^,  as  well  as  of  other  diseases,  provided  he 
will  abandon  the  use  of  spells,  purifications,  and  other  illiberal 
tricks  of  the  same  nature. 

From  this  brief  outline  of  its  contents,  the  reader  cannot 


ARGUMENT.  837 

fail  to  porccivo  lliat  tlic  work  is  liiglily  iiitcrcstiiifr^  and  of  a 
very  original  nature.  The  argument  here  direeted  against  tlic 
vnlgar  belief  tliat  ci)ilepsy  is  derived  from  a  snpernatural  cause, 
is  perfectly  conclusive.  If,  as  here  laid  down,  epilepsy  obey 
the  same  laws  as  diseases  imivcrsally  admitted  lo  l)e  sprung 
from  natural  causes, — if,  like  certain  of  them,  it  be  hereditary, 
and  attack  peculiar  temperaments,  and  if  it  be  seated  in  a 
particular  organ  of  the  body,  it  is  contrary  to  all  soinid  logic 
to  set  it  down  as  divine,  and  the  others  as  natural. 

There  arc  two  subjects  touched  u\Hm  in  this  treatise,  which 
arc  so  abstruse,  and  at  the  same  time  so  important,  that  I  cannot 
omit  the  present  occasion  of  attempting  to  throw  some  light 
upon  them, — 1  allude  to  the  philosophical  doctrine  regarding 
the  pueuma,  and  the  hypothesis  whereby  the  nature  of  epilepsy 
is  explained. 

From  the  exposition  of  the  ancient  physical  doctrines  given 
in  the  Third  Section  of  the  Prelimiunry  Discourse,  it  will  be  si^^ 
readily  understood  that  the  higher  classes  of  the  j)hilosophers 
agreed  in  holding  that  all  activity,  intelligence,  and  force,  arc 
derived  from  mind, — that,  in  a  word,  ii  is  the  active  power  in 
all  and  each  of  the  bodies  m  hich  compose  the  universe.  Hence 
a  sententious  poet  of  a  somewhat  earlier  date  than  our  author, 
ventured  to  proclaim  that — 

"  'Tis  Mind  that  sees,  and  Mind  that  hears ;  all  other  things  are  deaf  and  hlind."' 

But  although  the  philoso})hcrs  taught  that  mind  is  the  only 
active  principle  in  the  universe,  they  maintained  that  it  performs 
all  its  operations  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  refined 
material  sid)stanee,  which  partakes  of  the  nature  of  light  or 
fire.  Thus,  in  the  animal  frame  thc}^  recognised  the  existence 
of  a  pneuma,  that  is  to  say,  a  breath  or  spirit,  which  they  held 
to  be  a  sort  of  etherial  matter,  that  serves  as  the  vehicle  of 
the  intellectual  and  sentient  princii)fe,  by  the  instriimentality 
of  which,  the  latter  was  supposed  to  operate  upon  the  organs 
of  the  body.  The  pneuma,  in  short,  is  not  mind,  but  its  first 
instrument  in  all  living  crcatm'es."      l>ut,  as  we  have  stated  in 

'  Not/f  6p^  Kai  vovg  ciKorei'  t  dWa  koj/Ihi  kciI  rv<l)\a.  (Clemens  Alex  ,  toin.  i, 
p.  442,  ed.  Pott.;  ^Maximus  Tyrius,  i.)  I  may  mention  that  it  is  donlifful  whether 
the  last  clause  of  the  line  he  genuine.     It  docs  not  occur  in  Maxinius  Tyrius. 

*  Oil  this  suhject  the  reader  may  lind  it  interesting  to  consult  the  notes  of  Moshcim 


838  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

the  Preliminary  Discourse,  the  author  of  one  of  the  Hippocratic 
treatises,  wonld  seem  to  have  confounded  mind  with  heat,  and 
the  same  idea  runs  through  the  present  work,  where  it 
certainly  appears  that  Hippocrates  (or  whoever  was  the  author 
of  the  work)  expresses  himself  as  if  he  held  the  opinion  that 
breath  and  the  soul  are  the  same  tiling.^  This,  I  say,  would 
seem  to  he  the  doctrine  which  our  author  holds,  but,  as  we 
stated  before,  his  ideas  on  abstruse  points  of  philosophy  are 
not  always  so  well  defined  as  could  have  been  wished ;  in  short, 
he  had  not  learned,  like  his  immediate  successor,  Aristotle,  to 
distinguish  accurately  betAveen  the  immaterial  principle  and 
its  primary  instrument.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at,  when 
we  reflect  that  a  similar  confusion  of  ideas  prevails  with  many 
writers  of  the  present  day  who  maintain  that  some  electrical 
or  magnetical  substance  is  the  principle  of  life  in  all  animals, 
and  do  not  perceive  the  necessity  of  admitting  an  immaterial 
principle,  as  the  conductor  of  its  operations.  Altogether,  it  is 
impossible  not  to  remark  a  most  striking  coincidence  between 
the  tenets  of  the  ancient  philosophers  regarding  a  pneuma, 
and  those  of  certain  modern  mesmerists  respecting  a  magnetical 
principle  existing  in  the  microcosm. 
J,  With  regard  to  the  cause  of  epilepsy,  it  will  be  remarked 
that  our  author  assigns  its  seat  to  the  brain,  and  holds  that  the 
materics  morhi  is  a  cold  phlegm  or pUv'/ fa,  secreted  in  that  organ, 

on  Ciulworth's  Intellectual  Systctn,  pp.  107G,  1090,  1172  ;  edit.  1723.  The  opinions 
of  Aristotle  may  be  learned  from  the  third  cha])ter  of  the  Second  Book,  De  Gene- 
rationc.  A  tenet,  which  has  been  always  reckoned  peculiar  to  him,  is  that  the  spirit 
is  analogous  to  the  substance  of  which  the  stars  are  composed,  by  which  he  probal)ly 
meant  ether,  that  is  to  say,  light  or  heat.  This  would  appear  to  have  been  a  doctrine 
very  generally  maintained  in  ancient  times ;  it  forms  part  of  the  popular  philosophy 
of  the  Augustan  age,  as  expounded  by  Virgil  in  the  Sixth  /Eneid,  1.  724.  The  poet 
here  describes  the  pneuma  as  being  "  aurai  simplicis  ignem  ;"  and  in  the  Georgics  he 
calls  it  "  ffithereos  haustus."  (iv,  220.)  The  best  modern  exposition  of  the  ancient 
doctrines  regarding  the  pneuma,  is  that  by  Abraham  Kaau,  in  his  work,  Perspiratio 
Dicta  Hippocrati,  which  is  replete  with  acute  and  profound  views  on  many  points 
connected  with  philosoi)hy  and  physiology.  The  reader  will  also  find  much  delightful 
information  on  the  higher  philosophy  of  the  ancients  in  Berkeley's  Siris,  a  most  pro- 
found and  original  work.  The  doctrine  of  the  pneuma  thus  broached  liy  Hippocrates 
gave  rise,  several  centuries  afterwards,  to  a  very  important  sect  called  the  Pneumatic. 
On  it,  see  in  particular  the  French  edition  of  Sprengell's  Hist,  of  Med.,  tom.  ii,  p.  09  ; 
and  the  Preliminary  Disquisition  to  Boerhaave's  edition  of  Aretjcus. 

'  Moses  would  seem  to  identify  breath  and  the  vital  princii)le.     See  Genesis,  ii,  7. 


ARGUMENT.  .^39 

which  passing  down  into  tlic  blood-vessels,  and  encounter- 
ing tlie  pneuma,  or  principle  of  life,  produces  those  dreadful 
convulsions  to  which  epileptics  are  subject.  I  may  be  permitted 
to  state,  that  this  doctrine  of  our  author's,  respecting  a  cold 
pituitous  humour  or  phlegm  secreted  in  the  brain,  is  decidedly 
adopted  by  Aristotle,  who  probably  received  this,  as  he  did  most 
of  his  physiological  opinions,  from  Hippocrates.^  Lucretius,  the 
Epicurean  poet,  also,  although  he  rejects  the  mental  philosophy 
of  the  Platonists  and  Peripatetics,  espouses  an  hypothesis  quite 
similar  to  our  author's,  in  order  to  account  for  the  phenomena 
of  epilepsy.  The  description  is  so  striking,  that  I  subjoin  a 
literal  translation  of  it,  by  Mason  Good  : 

"  Oft  too  some  wretch,  before  our  startled  sight, 
Struck  as  with  hghtning,  by  some  keen  disease. 
Drops  sudden  : — by  the  di'ead  attack  o'erpowered 
He  foams,  he  groans,  lie  trembles,  and  he  faints; 
Now  rigid,  now  convulsed,  his  labouring  lungs 
Heave  quick,  and  quivers  each  exhausted  limb. 
Spread  through  the  frame,  so  deep  the  dire  disease 
Perturbs  his  spirit ;  as  the  briny  main 
Foams  through  each  wave  beneath  the  tempest's  ire. 
He  groans  since  every  member  smarts  with  pain, 
And  from  his  inmost  breast,  with  wontless  toil. 
Confused  and  harsh,  articulation  springs. 
He  raves  since  soul  and  spirit^  are  alike 
Disturbed  throughout,  and  severed  each  from  each 
As  urged  above  distracted  by  the  bane. 
But  when,  at  length,  the  morbid  cause  declines, 
And  the  fermenting  humours  from  the  heart 
Flow  back — with  staggering  foot  the  man  first  treads, 
Led  gradual  on  to  intellect  and  strength." 

(De  Rernm  Natura,  iii,  1.  48G-504.) 

I  may  just  mention  further,  that  this  doctrine  of  a  jjucuma, 
or  animal  spirits,  was  adopted  by  all  the  Arabian  authorities, 
of  which  I  shall  only  take  time  to  refer  to  Avicenna,  iii,  ],  4. 
It  has  also  been  held  under  a  variety  of  shapes,  by  some  of  the 
first  names  in  ancient  and  modern  philosophy,  as  is  correctly 
stated  in  the  following  interesting  extract :  "  Hippocrates,  Galen, 
and  Yieussens,  thought  that  the  spirits  are  formed  of  an  aerial 

'  De  Partibus  Animal.,  ii,  7. 

'  The  poet  applies  the  term  animuH  to  the  mind  or  soul ;  and  anima  to  the  jmoiona 
or  spirit.     C'elsus  renders  the  jinetunn  of  Hippocrates  by  spiri/its.     See  Pr<cfatio. 


840  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

principle.  Van  Helmont,  Willis,  and  Stenon  assimilated  them 
to  light.  Newton  said  that  they  consist  of  part  of  that  very 
elastic  element  npon  which  the  reflexion  and  rarefaction  of 
the  solar  rays  depend.  Descartes  regarded  them  as  an  igneous 
principle ;  Boerhaave  thought  that  they  approach  to  the  nature 
of  Avater.  Saussure  and  De  Haen  confound  them  with  electric 
matter."  (Dumas,  Physiol.,  iv,  73.)  At  present,  however,  as 
hinted  above,  the  form  w^hich  the  hypothesis  has  assumed  is 
that  of  animal  magnetism,  which,  it  is  well  known,  has  many 
intelligent  supporters,  of  whom  I  shall  only  mention  one,  my 
intelligent  countryman,  Mr.  Colquhoun,  the  author  of  Isis 
Revel  at  a. 

The  other  part  of  our  author's  hypothesis,  I  mean  the  con- 
nexion of  the  disease  w  ith  a  pituitous  secretion  from  the  braiu, 
however  much  some  may  he  disposed  thoughtlessly  to  deride 
it,  received  a  most  remarkable  confirmation  from  the  observa- 
tions of  the  celebrated  anatomists,  the  Weuzels.  The  following 
account  of  their  opinions  I  extract  from  Dr.  Copland^s  Dictionary 
of  Practical  IMedicine :  "  The  Wenzels  in  their  numerous 
dissections,  directed  attention  to  the  state  of  the  pituitary  and 
pineal  ylunds.  These  able  pathologists  found  the  pituitary 
(jJand  and  infundibulum  variously  altered  in  colour,  consistence, 
size,  and  structure,  in  nearly  all  the  cases  of  epilepsy  they 
examined.  .  .  Alterations  in  the  sphenoid  bone  and  pituitary 
gland  have  been  found  also  by  Geediug,  Newsman,  Sims,  and 
myself."   (See  under  Epilepsy,  §  4S.') 

Before  concluding,  I  have  a  few  additional  remarks  to  make 
on  the  question  whether  or  not  the  present  treatise  be  the 
production  of  Hippocrates  himself  I  am  aware  that  many 
learned  critics,  such  as  Gruncr  and  Ackerman,  looking  to  the 
difference  of  style  and  matter  between  it,  and  the  genuine 
works  of  Hippocrates,  such  as  the  Prognostics  and  Aphorisms, 
have  not  hesitated  to  decide  that  it  must  be  the  production 
of  an  entirely  difterent  mind.  But  why  should  it  appear 
incredible  that  the  great  master  of  Grecian  medicine  should 
have  devoted  his  leisure  hours  to  the  study  of  the  transcendental 
philosophy  then  in  so  high  repute,  and  that  he   should  have 

'  Sec  t'uitliei,  Sydur's  edition  of  Sir  Abtluy  Cooi)er's  Lecdiies,  p.  20. 


ARGUMENT.  841 

displayed  the  versatility  of  liis  genius  in  the  manner  lie  handles 
the  new  subject  of  his  research  ?  I  have  stated  in  the  short  bio- 
graphy I  have  given  of  him  at  the  commencement  of  this  work, 
that  he  was  familiarly  acquainted  with  Democritus  of  Abdera, 
and  it  is  well  known  that  he  visited  Athens  at  the  time  when 
Socrates  had  diverted  the  minds  of  his  countrymen  from  verbal 
disputations  to  the  cultivation  of  a  sound  and  masculine  philo- 
sophy. "When  we  reflect  how  narrow  the  field  of  intellectual 
research  then  was,  compared  with  what  it  has  now  become,  it 
need  not  appear  at  all  remarkable  that  the  enlarged  mind  of 
our  author  should  have  ventured  to  grapple  w  ith  all  those  great 
questions  in  physical  and  mental  philosophy,  wdiich  the  sages 
of  his  time  were  attempting  to  solve.  Galen,  in  fact,  on 
many  occasions,  pronounces  Hippocrates  to  have  been  a  great 
philosopher,  as  well  as  a  great  physician ;  and  that  there  is  no 
incompatability  in  the  two  characters  is  apparent  from  examples 
of  verv  recent  date.  Mv  lamented  friend.  Dr.  Abercrombic, 
not  onlv  wrote  elaborate  Morks  on  Pathology  and  the  Practice 
of  jNIedicine,  but  also  published  treatises  on  Moral  and  Intel- 
lectual Philosophy.  Ilaller  Avas  not  only  a  great  physician 
and  physiologist,  but  also  a  highly  popular  poet.  Why  then 
should  it  appear  incredible  that  Hippocrates  should  have  dis- 
played as  wide  a  grasp  of  mind  as  a  Haller  or  an  Abercrombie? 
I  know  that  the  opinion  is  now  pretty  generally  propagated, 
that  a  medical  man  ought  to  be  exclusively  occupied  with 
professional  pursuits,  and  have  no  leisure  to  devote  to  the 
cultivation  of  elegant  literature;  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  hear 
of  a  physician's  being  run  down  by  the  craftsmen  of  our  art,  as 
a  person  who,  it  is  inferred,  must  be  deficient  in  a  practical 
acquaintance  with  medicine,  because  it  is  admitted  that  he  has 
made  respectable  acquirements  in  the  liberal  sciences,  and  in 
philosophy.  Such  members  of  the  medical  profession  (or,  I 
should  rather  say,  craft),  though  they  can  find  no  time  to 
devote  to  Homer  or  Aristotle,  to  Milton  or  Kant,  find  plenty 
of  leisure  to  frequent  all  the  haunts  of  fashionable  resort,  and 
as  Galen  somewhere  says  of  his  professional  contemporaries,  when 
the  rich  and  the  noble  do  not  want  them  in  the  sick  chamber, 
they  are  always  ready  to  attend  them  in  the  ball-  or  the  banquet- 
room.  But  is  such  a  waste  of  intellectual  existence  indis- 
pensably necessary,  in  order  to  attain  success  in  the  practice 


842  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

of  our  profession  ?  And  might  not  a  man  become  a  useful 
and  respectable  member  of  it,  by  discharging  the  duties  of  his 
profession  actively  when  called  upon,  and  then  retiring  to  the 
study  of  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences  ?  I  shall  conclude  this 
Argument  and  my  present  task,  by  quoting  the  memorable 
words  in  which  Cicero  apologises  for  his  having  spent  a  certain 
portion  of  his  time  in  the  cultivation  of  elegant  literature, 
and  of  philosophy,  leaving  the  reader  to  apply  the  same  in 
the  case  of  Hippocrates,  and,  I  may  be  permitted  to  add,  in 
that  of  the  humble  Editor  of  the  present  volume,  who  trusts  he 
shall  not  be  set  down  as  an  idle  and  unprofitable  practitioner 
of  the  Art,  l)ecause  he  has  found  leisure  amidst  the  turmoil  and 
distraction  of  a  professional  life,  to  communicate  to  his  country- 
men the  important  opinions  contained  in  the  genuine  remains 
of  The  Coan  Sage  : — "  Ego  vcro  fateor  me  his  studiis  esse  de- 
ditum;  ceteros  pudeat,  siqui  ita  se  Uteris  abdidcrunt,  ut  nihil 
possint  ex  his  neque  ad  communem  ferre  fructum,  neqne  in 
adspectum,  lucemque  proferre.  Quare  quis  tandem  me  rcpre- 
hendat,  aut  quis  raihi  jure  succenseat  si,  quantum  ceteris  ad 
suas  res  obeundas,  quantum  ad  festos  dies  ludorum  celebrandos, 
quantum  ad  alias  voluptates,  et  ad  ipsam  requiem  animi  et 
corporis  conceditur  temporum  ;  quantum  alii  tril)uunt  tempcs- 
tivis  conviviis  ;  quantum  deniquc  alcre,  quantum  pilse,  tantuni 
mihi  cgomet  ad  hsec  studia  recolenda  sumsero  ?"^ 

'  Pro  Archia  Poiita. 


843 


ON  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

It   is   tlms    with  regard   to  the    disease   called    Sacred :    it 
appeal's  to  me  to  be  nowise  more  divine  nor  more  sacred  than 
other  diseases,  but  has  a  natiu'al  cause  from  which  it  originates 
like   other   affections.      Men  regard   its   nature   and  cause  as 
divine  from  ignorance  and  wonder_,  because  it  is  not  at  all  like 
to  other  diseases.      And  this  notion  of  its  divinity  is  kept  up 
by  their  inability  to  comprehend  it,  and  the  simplicity  of  the 
mode  by  which  it  is  cured,  for  men  are  freed  from  it  by  puri- 
fications and  incantations.   But  if  it  is  reckoned  divine  because 
it  is  wonderful,  instead  of  one  there  are  many  diseases  which 
would  be  sacred ;  for,  as  I  will  show,  there  are  others  no  less 
wonderful  and  prodigious,  which  nobody  imagines  to  be  siicred. 
The  quotidian,  tertian,  and  quartan  fevers,  seem  to  me  no  less 
sacred  and  divine  in  their  origin  than  this  disease,  although  they 
are  not  reckoned  so  wonderful.    And  I  see  men  become  mad  and 
demented  from  no  manifest  cause,  and  at  the  same  time  doing 
many  things  out  of  place ;  and  I  have  known  many  persons  in 
sleep  groaning  and  crying  out,  some  in  a  state  of  suffocation, 
some  jumping  up  and  fleeing  out  of  doors,  and  deprived  of  their 
reason  until  they  awaken,  and  afterwards  becoming  well  and 
rational  as  before,  although  they  be  pale  and  weak;   and  this 
will  happen  not  once  but  frequently.^      And  there  are  many 
and  various  things  of  the  like  kind,  which  it  would  be  tedious  to 
state  narticularlr.   And  thev  who  first  referred  this  disease  to  the 
gods,  appear  to  me  to  have  been  just  such  persons  as  the  con- 
jurors, purificators,  mountebanks,  and  charlatans  now  are,  who 
give  themselves    out    for  being   excessively   religious,   and   as 
knowing  more  than  other  people.      Such  persons,  then,  using 
the  di^dnity  as  a  pretext  and  screen  of  their  own  inability  to 
afford  any  assistance,  have  given  out  that  the  disease  is  sacred, 
adding  suitable  reasons  for  this  opinion,  they  have  instituted 
a  mode  of  treatment  which  is  safe  for  themselves,  namely,  by 
applying  purifications  and  incantations,  and  enforcing  abstinence 
from  baths  and  many  articles  of  food  which  are  unwholesome 

'  Our  author  in  this  place  evidently  alludes  to  nightmai-e  and  somiiamhulisin. 


844  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

to  men  in  diseases.  Of  sea  substances,  tlie  sur-mullet,'  the 
blacktailj"  the  nnillet/  and  the  eel :  for  these  are  the  fishes 
most  to  be  guai'ded  against.  And  of  fleshes,  those  of  the 
goat,  the  stag,  the  sow,  and  the  dog :  for  these  are  the 
kinds  of  flesh  which  are  aptest  to  disorder  the  bowels.  Of 
fowls,  the  cock,  the  turtle,*  and  the  bustard,^  and  such  others 
as  are  reckoned  to  be  particularly  strong.  And  of  potherbs, 
mint,  garlic,  and  onions  :  for  what  is  acrid  does  not  agree  with  a 
weak  person.  And  they  forbid  to  have  a  black  robe,  because 
black  is  expressive  of  death  ;  and  to  sleep  on  a  goat's  skin,  or 
to  wear  it,  and  to  put  one  foot  upon  anotlici%  or  one  hand  upon 
another :  for  all  these  things  are  held  to  be  hinderances  to  the 
cure.  All  these  they  enjoin  with  reference  to  its  divinity,  as 
if  possessed  of  more  knowledge,  and  announcing  beforehand 
other  pretents,  so  that  if  the  person  should  recover,  theirs 
would  be  the  honour  and  credit ;  and  if  he  should  die,  they 
would  have  a  certain  defence,  as  if  the  gods,  and  not  they,  were 
to  blame,  seeing  they  had  administered  nothing  either  to  cat  or 
drink  as  medicine,  nor  had  overheated  him  with  baths,  so  as  to 
prove  the  cause  of  what  had  happened.  But  I  am  of  opinion 
that  (if  this  were  true)  none  of  the  Libyans,  who  live  in  the  in- 
terior, would  be  free  from  this  disease,  since  they  all  sleep  on 
goats'  skins,  and  live  upon  goat's  flesh ;  neither  have  they 
couch,  robe,  nor  shoe,  that  is  not  made  of  goat's  skin,  for  they 
have  no  other  herds  but  goats  and  oxen.  But  if  these  things, 
when  administered  in  food,  aggravate  the  disease,  and  if  it  be 
cured  by  abstinence  from  them,  then  is  God  not  the  cause  at 
all ;  nor  Avill  purifications  be  of  any  avail,  but  it  is  the  food 
which  is  beneficial  and  prejudicial,  and  the  influence  of  the 
di\dnity  vanishes.  Thus,  then,  they  who  attempt  to  cure 
these  diseases  in  this  way,  appear  to  me  neither  to  reckon 
them  sacred  nor  divine.  For  when  they  are  removed  by  such 
purifications,  and  this  method  of  cure,  what  is  to  prevent  them 
from  being  brought  upon  men  and  induced  by  other  devices 

'  Namely,  the  Mullus  hnrbatus.     See  under  -n/yXj;,  in  the  Appendix  to  Diinl)ar's 
Greek  Lexicon. 

^  Namely,  the  Spants  melanurus.   See  under  f^ii\avovpoc,  in  the  above  cited  work. 
^  Namely,  tlie  Miigil  cpphalus.     See  under  KirrTpfVL-,  as  above. 
'  Namely,  tlie  Culumba  turtur.     See  under  rpvywi',  as  al)i)ve. 
*  Namely,  the  0//.s  tanla.     Sec  under  mtiq,  as  above. 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  845 

similar  to  these  ?^  So  tl)at  tlie  cause  is  no  longer  divine,  but 
human.  For  Avhocver  is  able,  by  purifications  and  conjura- 
tions, to  drive  away  such  an  affection,  will  be  able,  l)y  other 
practices,  to  excite  it ;  and,  according  to  this  view,  its  divine 
nature  is  entirely  done  away  with.  By  such  savings  and 
doings,  they  profess  to  be  possessed  of  superior  knowledge,  and 
deceive  mankind  by  enjoining  lustrations  and  purifications  upon 
them,  while  their  discourse  turns  upon  the  divinity  and  the 
godhead."  And  yet  it  would  appear  to  me  that  their  discourse 
savours  not  of  piety,  as  they  suppose,  but  rather  of  impiety,  and 
as  if  there  were  no  gods,  and  that  what  they  hold  to  be  holy 
and  divine,  were  impious  and  unholy.  This  I  will  now  explain. 
For,  if  they  profess  to  know  how  to  bring  down  the  moon,  and 
darken  the  sun,  and  induce  storms  and  fine  weather,  and  rains 
and  droughts,  and  make  the  sea  and  land  unproductive,  and  so 
forth,  whether  they  arrogate  this  power  as  being  derived  from 
mysteries  or  any  other  knowledge  or  consideration,  they  appear 
to  me  to  practise  impiety,  and  either  to  fancy  that  there  are 
no  gods,  or,  if  there  are,  that  they  have  no  ability  to  ward  off 
any  of  the  greatest  evils.  How,  then,  are  they  not  enemies  to 
the  gods  ?  For,  if  a  man  by  magical  arts  and  sacrifices  will 
bring  down  the  moon,'^  and  darken  the  sun,  and  induce  storms, 

'  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  proper  reading  is,  l-iyi-/v(.aQai,  and  not  uTzoyiyvtaQai. 
Agreeably  to  this  reading,  the  meaning  is  more  clear. 

^  The  term  iu  the  original  (jdainoviov)  is  of  dubious  meaning.  In  the  works  of 
earher  Greek  authors, it  and  caijuov  are  generally  put  in  a  good  sense  ;  but  in  Chris- 
tian times  they  are  almost  always  taken  iu  a  bad  sense,  and  applied  to  evil  spirits. 
Hence  demoniacs  were  held  to  be  persons  possessed  with  evil  spirits  or  devils.  In 
this  light,  I  need  scarcely  remark,  they  are  universally  represented  in  the  New 
Testament.  That  the  persons  there  described  as  being  possessed  with  impure  spirits 
were  the  same  as  the  demoniacs  of  the  Greeks,  and  that  they  were  epileptics  and 
maniacs,  cannot  admit  of  the  very  slightest  doubt.  It  will  be  seen  below  that  our 
author  understands  the  popular  belief  to  be,  that  the  bodies  of  such  persons  were 
possessed  by  demons,  who,  he  argues,  must  be  good  beings  and  not  bad.  The  earlier 
Christians,  however,  held  that  all  the  gods  of  the  heathens  were  demons  in  a  bad 
sense,  that  is  to  say,  devils. 

3  This  was  supposed  to  be  a  veiy  common  exploit  of  the  ancient  witches.     Hence 

Virgil  says, 

"  Carmiua  vel  caelo  possunt  deducere  lunam." 

And  TibuUus,  in  like  manner  : 

"  Hanc  ego  de  cffilo  ducentem  sidera  vidi."     (El.  i,  2.) 

And  in  similar  terras  Horace  says, 

"  et  polo 
Deripere  lunam  vocibus  possum  meis."     (Epod.  xvii.) 


846  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

or  fine  weatlier,  I  should  not  believe  that  there  was  anything 
divine,  but  human,  in  these  things,  provided  the  power  of  the 
divine  were  overpowered  by  human  knowledge  and  subjected 
to  it.  But  perhaps  it  will  be  said,  these  things  are  not  so,  but, 
men  being  in  want  of  the  means  of  life,  invent  many  and 
various  things,  and  devise  manv  contrivances  for  all  other 
things,  and  for  this  disease,  in  every  phase  of  the  disease,  as- 
signing the  cause  to  a  god.  Nor  do  they  remember  the  same 
things  once,  but  frequently.^  Foi',  if  they  imitate  a  goat,  or 
grind  their  teeth,  or  if  their  right  side  be  convulsed,  they  say 
that  the  mother  of  the  gods  is  the  cause.  But  if  they  speak 
in  a  sharper  and  more  intense  tone,  they  resemble  this  state  to 
a  horse,  and  say  that  Posidon  {Neptune)  is  the  cause.  Or  if  any 
excrement  be  passed,  which  is  often  the  case,  owing  to  the 
violence  of  the  disease,  the  appellation  of  Enodius  [Hecate  ?)  is 
adhibited ;  or,  if  it  be  passed  in  smaller  and  denser  masses, 
like  bird's,  it  is  said  to  be  from  Apollo  Nomius.  But  if  foam 
be  emitted  by  the  mouth,  and  the  patient  kick  with  his  feet. 
Ares  [Mars)  gets  the  l^lame.  But  terrors  which  happen  during 
the  night,  and  fevers,  and  delirium,  and  jumpings  out  of  bed,  and 
frightful  apparitions,  and  fleeing  away, — all  these  they  hold  to  be 
the  plots  of  Hecate,  and  the  invasions  of  the  Heroes,  and  use 
purifications  and  incantations,  and,  as  appears  to  me,  make  the 
divinity  to  be  most  m  icked  and  most  impious.  For  they  purify 
those  labouring  under  this  disease,  with  the  same  sorts  of  blood 
and  the  other  means  that  are  used  in  the  case  of  those  who  are 
stained  with  crimes,  and  of  malefactors,  or  who  have  been  en- 
chanted by  men,  or  who  have  done  any  wicked  act;  who  ought  to 
do  the  very  reverse,  namely,  sacrifice  and  pray,  and, bringing  gifts 
to  the  temples,  supplicate  the  gods.  But  now  they  do  none  of 
these  things,  but  purify ;  and  some  of  the  purifications  they 
conceal  in  the  earth,  and  some  they  throw  into  the  sea,  and 
some  they  carry  to  the  mountains  where  no  one  can  touch  or 
tread  upon  them.  But  these  they  ought  to  take  to  the  temples 
and  present  to  the  god,  if  a  god  be  the  cause  of  the  disease. 
Neither  truly  do  I  count  it  a  worthy  opinion  to  hold  that  the 
body  of  man  is  polluted  by  god,  the  most  impure  by  the  most 
holy  ;  for  were  it  defiled,  or  did  it  sufter  from  any  other  thing,  it 
would  be  like  to  be  purified  and  sanctified  rather  than  polluted 

'  The  text  appears  to  be  corinpt ;  at  least  the  meaning  is  very  equivocal. 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  847 

by  god.  For  it  is  the  divinity  which  purifies  and  sanctifies 
the  greatest  of  offences  and  the  most  wicked,  and  which  proves 
our  pi'otection  from  them.  And  we  mark  out  the  boundaries 
of  the  temples  and  the  groves  of  the  gods^  so  that  no  one  may 
pass  them  unless  he  be  pure,  and  when  we  enter  them  we  are 
sprinkled  with  holy  water,  not  as  being  polluted,  but  as  laying 
aside  any  other  pollution  which  we  formerly  had.  And  thus 
it  appears  to  me  to  hold,  Avith  regard  to  purifications.  But 
this  disease  seems  to  me  to  be  nowise  more  divine  than  others ; 
but  it  has  its  nature  such  as  other  diseases  have,  and  a  cause 
whence  it  originates,  and  its  nature  and  cause  are  divine  only 
just  as  much  as  all  others  arc,  and  it  is  curable  no  less  than 
the  others,  unless  Avhen,  from  length  of  time,  it  is  confirmed, 
and  has  become  stronger  than  the  remedies  applied.  Its  origin 
is  hereditary,  like  that  of  other  diseases.^  For  if  a  phlegmatic 
person  be  born  of  a  phlegmatic,  and  a  bilious  of  a  bilious,  and 
a  phthisical  of  a  phthisical,  and  one  having  spleen  disease,  of 
another  having  disease  of  the  spleen,  vrhat  is  to  hinder  it  from 
happening  that  where  the  father  and  mother  were  subject  to 
this  disease,  certain  of  their  offspring  should  be  so  affected  also  ? 
As  the  semen  comes  from  all  parts  of  the  body,  healthy  par- 
ticles will  come  from  healthy  parts,  and  unhealthy  from  un- 
healthy parts.^  And  another  great  proof  that  it  is  in  nothing 
more  divine  than  other  diseases  is,  that  it  occurs  in  those  who 
are  of  a  phlegmatic  constitution,  but  does  not  attack  the  bilious. 
Yet,  if  it  were  more  divine  than  the  others,  this  disease  ought 
to  befall  all  alike,  and  make  no  distinction  between  the  bilious 
and  phlegmatic.  But  in  them,  the  brain  is  the  cause  of  this 
affection,  as  it  is  of  other  very  great  diseases,  and  in  what 
manner  and  from  what  cause  it  is  formed,  I  will  now  plainly 
declare.  The  brain  of  man,  as  in  all  other  animals,  is  double, 
and  a  thin  membrane  [meninx)  divides  it  through  the  middle, 
and  therefore  the  pain  is  not  always  in  the  same  part  of  the 
head ;  for  sometimes  it  is  situated  in  either  side^  and  some- 
times the  whole  is  affected ;    and  veins  ran  towards  it  from  all 

'  That  epilepsy  is  often  hereditary,  is  admitted  hy  our  best  authorities  in  modern 
times,  as  Zacutus  Lusitauus  (Prax.  ad  Mir.,  i,  36),  Stahl  (de  Hacred.  Dispos.  ad  Var. 
Affect.),  Boerhaave  (Aphor.  1075),  :M.  Esqnirol,  and  Dr.  Copland  (Dictionary  of 
Practical  ^Medicine,  under  Epilepsy,  p.  789). 

2  See,  in  hke  manner,  On  Airs,  Waters,  &c.,  §  15. 


848  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

parts  of  the  body,  many  of  which  are  small,  but  two  are  thick, — 
the  one  from  the  liver,  and  the  other  from  the  spleen.  And 
it  is  thus  with  regard  to  the  one  from  the  liver  :  a  portion  of  it 
runs  downwards  through  the  parts  on  the  right  side,  near  the 
kidney  and  the  psoas  muscle,  to  the  inner  part  of  the  thigh, 
and  extends  to  the  foot.  It  is  called  vena  cava.  The  other 
runs  upwards  by  the  right  veins  and  the  lungs,  and  divides 
into  branches  for  the  heart  and  the  right  arm.  The  remain- 
ing part  of  it  rises  upwards  across  the  clavicle  to  the  right 
side  of  the  neck,  and  is  superficial  so  as  to  be  seen ;  near  the 
ear  it  is  concealed,  and  there  it  divides ;  its  thickest,  largest, 
and  most  hollow  part  ends  in  the  brain;  another  small  vein 
goes  to  the  right  ear,  another  to  the  right  eye,  and  another  to 
the  nostril.  Such  are  the  distributions  of  the  hepatic  vein. 
And  a  vein  from  the  spleen  is  distributed  on  the  left  side, 
upwards  and  downwards,  like  that  from  the  liver,  but  more 
slender  and  feeble.  By  these  veins  we  draw  in  much  spirit 
{gas?)  for  they  are  the  spiracles  of  our  l)odies  inhaling  air  to 
themselves  and  distributing  it  to  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  to 
the  smaller  veins,  and  they  cool  and  afterwards  exhale  it.  For 
the  breath  [pneuma)  cannot  be  stationary,  but  it  passes  upwards 
and  downwards,  for  if  stopped  and  intercepted,  the  part  where 
it  is  stopped  becomes  powerless.  In  proof  of  tliis,  Avhen,  in 
sitting  or  lying,  the  small  veins  are  compressed,  so  that  the 
breath  [jmeuma)  from  the  larger  vein  does  not  pass  into  them, 
the  part  is  immediately  seized  with  numbness  ;  and  it  is  so  like- 
wise with  regard  to  the  other  veins.  This  disease,  then,  affects 
phlegmatic  persons,  l)ut  not  bilious.  It  begins  to  be  formed 
while  the  foitus  is  still  in  utero.  For  the  brain,  like  the  other 
organs,  is  depurated  and  grows  before  birth.  If,  then,  in  this 
purgation  it  be  properly  and  moderately  depurated,  and  neither 
more  nor  less  than  what  is  proper  be  secreted  from  it,  the  head 
is  thus  in  the  most  healthy  condition.  If  the  secretion  (melting) 
from  the  whole  brain  be  greater  than  natural,  the  person,  when 
he  grows  up,  will  have  his  head  diseased,  and  full  of  noises,  and 
will  neither  be  able  to  endure  the  sun  nor  cold.  Or,  if  the 
melting  take  place  from  any  one  part,  either  from  the  eye  or  ear, 
or  if  a  vein  has  become  slender,  that  part  will  be  deranged  in 
proportion  to  the  melting.  Or,  if  the  depuration  do  not  take 
place,    but  it    [Uie   secretion?)   accumulates   in   the  brain,   it 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  849 

necessarily  becomes  phlegmatic.      And  such  children  as  have 
an  eruption  of  ulcers  on  the  head,  on  the  ears,  and  along  tlic 
rest  of  the  body,  with  copious  discharges  of  saliva  and  mucus, — 
these,  in  after  life,  enjoy  best  health;  for  in  this  way  the  phlegm 
which  ought  to  have  been  purged  off  in  the  womb,  is  discharged 
and  cleared  away,  and  persons  so  purged,  for  the  most  part,  are 
not  subject  to  attacks  of  this  disease.      But  such  as  have  had 
their  skin  free  from  eruptions,  and  have  had  no  discharge  of 
saliva   or   mucus,  nor  have   undergone   the    proper   purgation 
in  the  Avomb,  these  persons  run  the  risk  of  being  seized  with 
this  disease.     But  if  the  defluxion  be  determined  to  the  heart, 
the   person   is  seized  with  palpitation   and   asthma,  the   chest 
becomes  diseased,  and  some  also  have  curvature  of  the  spine. 
'  For  when  a  defluxion  of  cold  phlegm  takes  place  on  the  lungs  and 
heart,  the  blood  is  chilled,  and  the  veins,  being  violently  chilled, 
palpitate  in  the  lungs  and  heart,  and  the  heart  palpitates,  so 
that  from  this  necessity  asthma  and  orthopnoea  supervene.      For 
it  does  not  receive  the  spirits  [pneuma)  until  the  defluxion  of 
phlegm   be   mastered,  and  being  heated  is  distributed  to  the 
veins,  then  it  ceases  from  its  palpitation  and  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing, and  this  takes  place  as  soon  as  it  obtains  an  abundant 
supply  j   and  this  will  be  more  slowly,  provided  the  defluxion 
be  more  abundant,  or  if  it  be  less,  more  quickly.      And  if  the 
defluxions  be  more  condensed,  the  epileptic  attacks  will  be  more 
frequent,  but  otherwise  if  it  be  rarer.    Such  are  the  symptoms 
when  the  defluxion  is  upon  the  lungs  and  heart ;   but  if  it  be 
upon  the  bowels,  the  person  is   attacked  with  diarrhcea.      And 
if,  being  shut  out  from  all  these  outlets,  its  defluxion  be  deter- 
mined to  the  veins  I  have  formerly  mentioned,  the  patient  loses 
his  speech,  and  chokes,  and  foam  issues  by  the  mouth,  the  teeth 
are  fixed,  the  hands  are  contracted,  the  eyes  distorted,  he  be- 
comes insensible,  and  in  some  cases  the  bowels  are  evacuated. 
And  these  symptoms  occur  sometimes  on  the  left  side,  some- 
times on  the  right,  and  sometimes  in  both.    The  cause  of  every 
one  of  these  symptoms  I  will  now  explain.     The  man  becomes 
speechless   when   the   phlegm,    suddenly  descending  into   the 
veins,  shuts  out  the  air,  and  does   not  admit  it  cither  to  the 
brain  or  to  the  vena  cava,  or  to  the  ventricles,  but  interrupts 
the  inspiration.   For  when  a  person  draws  in  air  by  the  mouth 
and  nostrils,  the  breath  {pneuma)  goes  first  to  the  iDrain,  then 

54 


850  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

the  greater  part  of  it  to  the  internal  cavity,  and  part  to  the 
lungs,  and  part  to  the  veins,  and  from  them  it  is  distributed  to 
the  other  parts  of  the  body  along  the  veins;  and  whatever  passes 
to  the  stomach  cools,  and  does  nothing  more ;  and  so  also  with 
regard  to  the  knigs.  But  the  air  which  enters  the  veins  is  of 
use  (to  the  body)  by  entering  the  brain  and  its  ventricles,  and 
thus  it  imparts  sensibility  and  motion  to  all  the  memliers,  so  that 
when  the  veins  are  excluded  from  the  air  by  the  phlegm  and  do 
not  receive  it,  the  man  loses  his  speech  and  intellect,  and  the 
hands  become  powerless,  and  are  contracted,  the  blood  stopping 
and  not  being  diffused,  as  it  was  wont ;  and  the  eyes  are  dis- 
torted owing  to  the  veins  being  excluded  from  the  air;  and 
they  palpitate;  and  froth  from  the  lungs  issues  by  the  mouth. 
For  when  the  breath  [piieuma)  does  not  find  entrance  to  him, 
he  foams  and  sputters  like  a  dying  person.  And  the  bowels 
are  evacuated  in  consequence  of  the  violent  suffocation;  and 
the  suffocation  is  produced  when  the  liver  and  stomach  ascend 
to  the  diaphragm,  and  the  mouth  of  the  stomach  is  shut  up  : 
this  takes  place  when  the  breath  {pneuma)  does  not  enter  by 
the  mouth,  as  it  is  wont.  The  patient  kicks  with  his  feet  when 
the  air  is  shut  up  in  the  lungs  and  cannot  find  an  outlet,  owing 
to  the  phlegm;  and  rushing  by  the  blood  upwards  and  down- 
wards, it  occasions  convulsions  and  pain,  and  therefore  he  kicks 
with  his  feet.  All  these  symptoms  he  endures  when  the  cold 
phlegm  passes  into  the  warm  blood,  for  it  congeals  and  stops 
the  blood. ^  And  if  the  defluxion  be  copious  and  thick,  it  im- 
mediately proves  fatal  to  him,  for  by  its  cold  it  prevails  over  the 
blood  and  congeals  it;  or,  if  it  be  less,  it  in  the  first  place  obtains 
the  mastery,  and  stops  the  respiration;  and  then  in  the  course 
of  time,  when  it  is  difiused  along  the  veins  and  mixed  with 
much  warm  blood,  it  is  thus  overpowered,  the  veins  receive  the 
air,  and  the  patient  recovers  his  senses.  And  of  little  children 
which  are  seized  with  this  disease,  the  greater  part  die,  provided 
the  defluxion  be  copious  and  humid,  for  the  veins  being  slender 
cannot  admit  the  phlegm,  owing  to  its  thickness  and  abundance; 
but  the  blood  is  cooled  and  congealed,  and  the  child  immedi- 
ately dies.  But  if  the  phlegm  be  in  small  quantit}^,  and  make 
a  defluxion  into  both  the  veins,  or  to  those  on  either  side,  the 

'  See  Lucretius,  De  Reium  Nat.,  iii,  1.  480  ;  and  the  translation  of  the  same  as 
given  in  the  Argument. 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  851 

children  survive,  but  exhibit  notable  marks  of  the  disorder ;  for 
either  the  mouth  is  drawn  aside,  or  an  eye,  the  neck,  or  a 
hand,  Avherever  a  vein  being  filled  with  phlegm  loses  its  tone, 
and  is  attenuated,  and  the  part  of  the  body  connected  with  this 
vein  is  necessarily  rendered  Aveaker  and  defective.  But  for  the 
most  part  it  affords  relief  for  a  longer  interval ;  for  the  child 
is  no  longer  seized  with  these  attacks,  if  once  it  has  contracted 
this  impress  of  the  disease,  in  consequence  of  which  the  other 
veins  are  necessarily  affected,  and  to  a  certain  degree  attenuated, 
so  as  just  to  admit  the  air,  but  no  longer  to  permit  the  influx 
of  phlegm.  However,  the  parts  are  proportionally  enfeebled 
whenever  the  veins  are  in  an  unhealthy  state.  When  in 
striplings'  the  defluxion  is  small  and  to  the  right  side,  they 
recover  without  leaving  any  marks  of  the  disease,  but  there  is 
danger  of  its  becoming  habitual,  and  even  increasing  if  not 
treated  by  suitable  remedies.  Thus,  or  very  nearly  so,  is  the 
case  when  it  attacks  children.  But  when  it  attacks  persons  of 
a  more  advanced  age,  it  neither  proves  fatal,  nor  produces  dis- 
tortions. For  their  veins  are  hollow  {large  ?),  and  filled  with 
hot  blood;  and  therefore  the  phlegm  can  neither  prevail  nor  cool 
the  blood,  so  as  to  coagulate  it,  but  it  is  quickly  overpowered 
and  mixed  with  the  blood,  and  thus  the  veins  receive  the  air,  and 
sensibility  remains  ;  and,  owing  to  their  strength,  the  aforesaid 
symptoms  are  less  likely  to  seize  them.  But  when  this  disease 
attacks  very  old  people,  it  therefore  proves  fatal,  or  induces 
paraplegia,  because  the  veins  are  empty,  and  the  blood  scanty, 
thin,  and  watery."  When,  therefore,  the  defluxion  is  copious, 
and  the  season  winter,  it  proves  fatal ;  for  it  chokes  up  the  ex- 
halents  and  coagulates  the  blood  if  the  defluxion  be  to  both 
sides ;  but  if  to  either,  it  merely  induces  paraplegia.  For  the 
blood  being  thin,  cold,  and  scanty,  cannot  prevail  over  the 
phlegm,  but  being  itself  overpowered,  it  is  coagulated,  so  that 
those  parts  in  Avhich  the  blood  is  corrupted,  lose  their  strength. 
The  defluxion  takes  place  rather  on  the  right  side  than  on  the 
left,  because  the  veins  there  are  more  capacious  and  numerous 
than  on  the  left  side,  for  on  the  one  side  they  spring  from  the 
liver,  and  on  the   other  from  the   spleen.      The  defluxion  and 

'  Meaning  persons  about  puberty,  and  until  25  years  of  age.     See  Apb.  v,  7. 
*  The  connexion  between  epilepsy  and  apoplexy  is  indisputable,  and  has  been  often 
adverted  to  in  modern  times.     See  Copland's  Dictionary',  under  Epilepsy,  §§  16,  40, 


852  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

melting  down  take  place  most  especially  in  the  case  of  children 

in  whom  the  head  is  heated  either  by  the  sun  or  by  fire,  or  if 

the  brain  suddeuty  contract  a  rigor,  and  then  the  phlegm  is 

excreted.      For  it  is  melted  down  by  the  heat  and  diffusion  of 

the  brain,  but  it  is  excreted  by  the  congealing  and  contracting 

of  it,  and  thus  a  defluxion  takes  place.      And  in  some  this  is 

the  cause  of  the  disease,  and  in  others,  when  the  south  wind 

quickly  succeeds  to  northern  breezes,  it  suddenly  unbinds  and 

relaxes  the  brain,  which  is  contracted  and  weak,  so  that  there 

is  an  inundation  of  phlegm,  and  thus  the  defluxion  takes  place. 

The  defluxion  also  takes  place  in  consequence  of  fear,  from  any 

hidden  cause,  if  we  are  frightened  at  any  person's  calling  aloud, 

or  while  crying,  when  one  cannot  quickly  recover  one's  breath, 

such  as  often  happens  to  children.      When  any  of  these  things 

occurs,   the   body   immediately    shivers,   the   person  becoming 

speechless   cannot  draw  his  breath,  but  the   breath   {pneiwia) 

stops,  the  brain  is  contracted,  the  blood  stands  still,  and  thus 

the    excretion   and   defluxion   of  the  phlegm  take  place.      In 

children,  these  are  the  causes  of  the  attack  at  first.     But  to  old 

persons  winter  is  most  inimical.     For  Avhen  the  head  and  brain 

have  been  heated  at  a  great  fire,  and  then  the  person  is  brought 

into  cold   and  has  a  rigor,   or  when   from  cold   he   comes  into 

warmth,  and  sits  at  the  fire,  he  is  apt  to  sufter  in  the  same  way, 

and  thus  he  is  seized  in  the  manner   described   above.      And 

there  is  much  danger  of  the  same  thing  occurring,  if  in  spring 

his  head  be  exposed  to  the  sun,  but  less  so  in  summer,  as  the 

changes   arc   not   sudden.     When   a  person    has  passed   the 

twentieth  year  of  his  life,  this  disease  is  not  apt  to  seize  him, 

tmless  it  has  become  habitual  from  childhood,  or  at  least  this 

is  rarely  or  never  the  case.    For  the  veins  are  filled  with  blood, 

and  the  brain  consistent  and  firm,  so  that  it  does  not  run  down 

into  the  veins,  or  if  it  do,  it   does  not  overpower  the  blood, 

which  is  copious  and  hot.      But  when   it   has  gained  strength 

from  one's  childhood,  and  become  habitual,  such  a  person  usually 

sufters  attacks,  and  is  seized  with  them  in  changes  of  the  winds, 

especially  in  south  winds,  and   it  is  difficult  of  removal.      For 

the  brain  becomes  more  humid  than  natural,  and  is  inundated 

with  phlegm,  so  that  the  defluxions  become  more  frequent,  and 

the  phlegm  can  no  longer  be  excreted,  nor  the  brain  be   dried 

up,  but  it  becomes  wet  and  humid.      This  you  may  ascertain 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  853 

in  particular,  from  beasts  of  the  flock  which  are  seized  with 
this  disease,  and  more  especially  goats,  for  they  arc  most  fre- 
quently attacked  with  it.  If  you  will  cut  open  the  head,  you 
will  find  the  brain  humid,  full  of  sweat,  and  having  a  bad  smell.^ 
And  in  this  way  truly  you  may  see  that  it  is  not  god  that 
injures  the  body,  but  disease.  And  so  it  is  with  man.  For 
when  the  disease  has  prevailed  for  a  length  of  time,  it  is  no 
longer  curable,  as  the  brain  is  corroded  by  the  phlegm,  and 
melted,  and  what  is  melted  down  becomes  water,  and  surrounds 
the  brain  externally,  and  overflows  it ;  wherefore  they  are 
more  frequently  and  readily  seized  with  the  disease.  And 
therefore  the  disease  is  protracted,  because  the  influx  is  thin, 
owing  to  its  quantity,  and  is  immediately  overpowered  by  the 
blood  and  heated  all  through.  But  such  persons  as  are  habi- 
tuated to  the  disease,  know  beforehand  when  they  are  about  to 
be  seized,  and  flee  from  men ;  if  their  own  house  be  at  hand, 
they  run  home,  but  if  not,  to  a  deserted  place,  where  as  few 
persons  as  possible  Avill  see  them  falling,  and  they  immediately 
cover  themselves  uj).  This  they  do  from  shame  of  the  affection, 
and  not  from  fear  of  the  divinity,  as  many  suppose.  And  little 
children  at  first  fall  down  wherever  they  may  happen  to  be, 
from  inexperience.  But  when  they  have  been  often  seized, 
and  feel  its  approach  beforehand,  they  flee  to  their  mothers,  or 
to  any  other  person  they  are  acquainted  with,  from  terror  and 
dread  of  the  afiTection,  for  being  still  infants  they  do  not  know 
vet  what  it  is  to  be  ashamed.  And  for  these  reasons,  I  sav, 
they  are  attacked  during  changes  of  the  winds,  and  especially 
south  winds,  then  also  with  north  winds,  and  afterwards  also 
with  the  others.  These  are  the  strongest  winds,  and  the  most 
opposed  to  one  another,  both  as  to  direction  and  power.  For, 
the  north  wind  condenses  the  air,  and  separates  from  it  w'hat- 
ever  is  muddy  and  nebulous,  and  renders  it  clearer  and  brighter, 
and  so  in  like  manner  also,  all  the  winds  which  arise  from  the 
sea  and  other  waters :  for  thev  extract  the  humidity  and  nebu- 
losity  from  all  objects,  and  from  men  themselves,  and  therefore 

'  It  is  well  known  that  this  is  also  the  case  with  sheep,  and  that  they  are  subject 
to  the  disease  called  the  sturdy,  which  is  indisputably  a  sort  of  epilepsy.  Many  shep- 
herds have  told  me  that  they  have  perforated  the  skull  so  as  to  evacuate  the  water 
in  the  brain.  The  operation,  however,  is  not  often  successful.  The  materies  morbi, 
I  Ijelieve,  is  a  hvdatid. 


854  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

it  (the  north  wind)  is  the  most  wholesome  of  the  winds.  But 
the  effects  of  the  south  fire  the  very  reverse,  i  For  in  the  first 
place  it  begins  by  melting  and  diffusing  the  condensed  air,  and 
therefore  it  does  not  blow  strong  at  first,  but  is  gentle  at  the 
commencement,  because  it  is  not  able  at  once  to  overcome  the 
dense  and  compacted  air,  which  yet  in  a  while  it  dissolves.  It 
produces  the  same  effects  upon  the  land,  the  sea,  the  rivers, 
the  fountains,  the  wells,  and  on  every  production  W'hicli  contains 
humidity,  and  this  there  is  in  all  things,  some  more,  some  less. 
For  all  these  feel  the  eftects  of  this  wind,  and  from  clear  they 
become  cloudy;  from  cold,  hot;  from  dry,  moist;  and  whatever 
'iearthen  vessels  are  placed  upon  the  ground,  filled  with  wine  or 
any  other  fluid,  are  affected  with  the  south  wind,  and  undergo 
a  change.  And  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  it  renders 
blunter  in  appearance  than  they  naturally  are.  When,  then, 
it  possesses  such  powers  over  things  so  great  and  strong,  and 
the  body  is  made  to  feel  and  undergo  changes  in  the  changes 
of  the  winds,  it  necessarilv  follows  that  the  brain  should  be 
dissolved  and  overpowered  with  moisture,  and  that  the  veins 
should  become  more  relaxed  by  the  south  winds,  and  that  by 
the  nortli  the  healthiest  portion  of  the  brain  should  become 
contracted,  while  the  most  morbid  and  humid  is  secreted,  and 
overflows  externally,  and  that  catarrhs  should  thus  take  place  in 
the  changes  of  these  winds.  Thus  is  this  disease  formed  and 
prevails  from  those  things  which  enter  into  and  go  out  of  the 
body,  and  it  is  not  more  difficult  to  understand  or  to  cure  than 
tlie  others,  neither  is  it  more  divine  than  other  diseases.  And 
men  ought  to  know  that  from  nothing  else  but  thence  {from  the 
brain  ?)  come  joys,  delights,  laughter  and  sports,  and  sorrows, 
griefs,  despondency,  and  lamentations.  And  by  this,  in  an 
especial  manner,  we  acquire  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  see 
and  liear,  and  know  what  are  foul  and  what  are  fair,  what  are  bad 
and  what  are  good,  Avhat  are  sweet,  and  what  unsavoury;  some  we 
discriminate  by  habit,  and  some  we  perceive  by  their  utility. 
By  this  we  distinguish  objects  of  relish  and  disrelish,  according 

'  The  classical  scholar  will  here  recollect  the  character  of  the  auster  given  by 
Horace  : 

"  frustra  per  autumnum  nocentem 
Corporibiis  mutiiemus  austrum." 

This  wind,  I  snpposc  there  can  be  no  doubt,  was  the  nirocco. 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  855 

to  the  seasons ;  and  the  same  things  do  not  always  please  ns. 
And  by  the  same  organ  we  become  mad  and  delirions,  and  fears 
and  terrors  assail  ns^  some  by  night,  and  some  by  day,  and  dreams 
and  untimely  wanderings,  and  cares  that  are  not  suitable,  and 
ignorance  of  present  circumstances,  desuetude,  and  unskilfulness. 
All  these  things  we  endure  from  the  brain,  when  it  is  not 
healthy,  but  is  more  hot,  more  cold,  more  moist,  or  more  dry 
than  natural,  or  when  it  suffers  any  other  preternatural  and 
unusual  affection.  And  we  become  mad  from  humidity  {of 
the  brain).  For  when  it  is  more  moist  than  natural,  it  is 
necessarily  put  into  motion,  and  the  affection  being  moved,' 
neither  the  sight  nor  hearing  can  be  at  rest,  and  the  tongue 
speaks  in  accordance  with  the  sight  and  hearing.  As  long  as 
the  brain  is  at  rest,  the  man  enjoys  his  reason,  but  the  de- 
pravement  of  the  brain  arises  from  phlegm  and  bile,  either  of 
which  you  may  recognise  in  this  manner  :  Those  who  are  mad 
from  phlegm  are  quiet,  and  do  not  cry  out  nor  make  a  noise; 
but  those  from  bile  are  vociferous,  malignant,  and  will  not  be 
quiet,  but  are  always  doing  something  improper."  If  the  mad- 
ness be  constant,  these  are  the  causes  thereof.  But  if  terrors  and 
fears  assail,  they  are  connected  with  derangement  of  the  brain, 
and  derangement  is  owing  to  its  being  heated.  And  it  is  heated 
by  bile  when  it  is  determined  to  the  brain  along  the  blood- 
vessels running  from  the  trunk ;  and  fear  is  present  until  it 
return  again  to  the  veins  and  trunk,  when  it  ceases.  He  is 
grieved  and  troubled  when  the  brain  is  unseasonably  cooled 
and  contracted  beyond  its  wont.  This  it  suffers  from  phlegm, 
and  from  the  same  affection  the  patient  becomes  oblivious. 
He  calls  out  and  screams  at  night  when  the  brain  is  suddenly 
heated.  The  bilious  endure  this.  But  the  phlegmatic  are  not 
heated,  except  when  much  blood  goes  to  the  brain,  and  creates 
an  ebullition.  ISIucli  blood  passes  along  the  aforesaid  veins. 
But  when  the  man  happens  to  see  a  frightful  dream,  and  is  in 
fear  as  if  awake,  then  his  face  is  in  a  greater  glow,  and  the 

'  If  the  text  be  not  in  fault,  we  must  here  understand  by  "affection"  t)ie  affected 
part,  or  organ ;  that  is  to  say,  the  abstract  is  put  for  the  concrete.  This  is  constantly 
done  by  our  author's  contemporary,  Pindar,  but  one  would  scarcely  expect  so  bold  a 
trope  in  a  prose  writer. 

2  The  connexion  between  epilepsy  and  mania  is  undoubted.  See  Copland's 
Dictionary,  under  Epilepsy. 


856  THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 

eyes  are  red  wlien  the  patient  is  iu  fear.  And  the  under- 
standing meditates  doing  some  mischief,  and  thus  it  is  aftected 
in  sleep.  But  if,  when  awakeued_,  he  returns  to  himself,  and  the 
blood  is  again  distributed  along  the  aforesaid  veins,  it  ceases. 
In  these  ways  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  brain  exercises  the 
greatest  power  in  the  man.  This  is  the  interpreter  to  us 
of  those  things  which  emanate  from  the  air,  when  it  {the  brain) 
happens  to  be  in  a  sound  state.  But  the  air  supplies  sense  to 
it.  And  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  tongue  and  the  feet,  administer 
such  things  as  the  brain  cogitates.  For  inasmuch  as  it  is 
supplied  with  air,  does  it  impart  sense  to  the  body.      It  is  the 

^,^^^^ain  which  is  the  messenger  to  the  understandiug.  For  when 
the  man  draws  the  breath  {jmeuma)  into  himself,  it  passes  first 
to  the  brain,  and  thus  the  air  is  distributed  to  the  rest  of  the 
body,  leaving  in  the  brain  its  acme,   and  whatever  has  sense 

/  and  understanding.  For  if  it  passed  first  to  the  body  and  last 
to  the  brain,  then  having  left  in  the  flesh  and  veins  the  judg- 
ment,' when  it  reached  the  brain  it  would  be  hot,  and  not  at 
all  pure,  but  mixed  with  the  humidity  from  the  fleshy  parts 
and  tlie  blood,  so  as  to  l)e  no  longer  pure.  Wherefore,  I  say, 
that  it  is  the  brain  which  interprets  the  understanding.  But 
the  diaphragm  has  ol)taine7ntsTiaihe  {(j)OivHj)  from  accident  and 
usage,  and  not  from  reality  or  nature,  for  I  know  no  power 
which  it  possesses,  cither  as  to  sense  or  understanding,  except 
that  when  the  man  is  affected  with  unexpected  joy  or  sorrow, 
it  throbs  and  produces  palpitations,  owing  to  its  thinness,  and 
as  having  no  belly  to  receive  anything  good  or  bad  that  may 
present  themselves  to  it,  but  it  is  thrown  into  commotion  by 
both  these,  from  its  natural  weakness.  It  then  perceives  before- 
hand none  of  those  things  which  occur  in  the  body,  but  has 
received  its  name  vaguely  and  without  any  proper  reason,  like 
the  parts  about  the  heart,  which  are  called  auricles,  but  which 
contribute  nothing  towards  hearing.  /  Some  say  that  we  think 
with  the  heart,  and  that  this  is  the  part  which  is  grieved,  and 
experiences  care."      But  it  is  not  so  ;  only  it  contracts  like  the 

'  At«yj'u>(T((,'.  The  term  is  very  obscure  ;  indceil  I  cannot  hut  tliink  the  text  must 
be  corrupt.  If  it  stand,  it  must  be  understood  to  mean  the  peculiar  or  discriminating 
power  or  property  of  the  pneuma. 

^  This  opinion  was  decidedly  maintained  by  Chrysippus,  but  be  flourished  more 
than  200  years  after  our  author.     AVho,  among  the  more  ancient  philosophers  in 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE.  857 

diaphragm,  and  still  more  so  for  the  same  causes.  For  veins 
from  all  parts  of  the  body  run  to  it,  and  it  lias  valves,  so  as  to 
perceive  if  any  pain  or  pleasurable  emotion  befall  the  man.  For 
when  grieved  the  body  necessarily  shudders,  and  is  contracted, 
and  from  excessive  joy  it  is  affected  in  hke  manner.  Wherefore 
the  heart  and  the  diaphragm  are  particularly  sensitive,  they  have 
nothing  to  do,  however,  with  the  operations  of  the  understanding, 
but  of  all  these  the  brain  is  the  cause.  Since  then  the  brain 
as  being  the  primary  seat  of  sense  and  of  the  spirits,  perceives 
Avhatever  occurs  in  the  body,  if  any  change  more  powerful  than 
usual  take  place  in  the  air,  owing  to  the  seasons,  the  brain 
becomes  changed  by  the  state  of  the  air.  For,  on  this  account, 
the  brain  first  perceives,  because,  I  say,  all  the  most  acute, 
most  powerful,  and  most  deadly  diseases,  and  those  which  are 
most  difficult  to  be  understood  by  the  inexperienced,  fall  upon 
the  brain.  And  the  disease  called  the  Sacred  arises  from  causes 
as  the  others,  namely,  those  things  which  enter  and  quit  the 
body,  such  as  cold,  the  sun,  and  the  winds,  which  are  ever 
changing  and  are  never  at  rest.  And  these  things  are  divine, 
so  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  making  a  distinction,  and 
holding  this  disease  to  be  more  divine  than  the  others,  but  all 
are  divine,  and  all  human.  And  each  has  its  own  peculiar 
nature  and  power,  and  none  is  of  an  ambiguous  nature,  or 
irremediable.  And  the  most  of  them  are  curable  by  the  same 
means  as  those  by  Avhicli  they  were  produced.  For  any  other 
thing  is  food  to  one,  and  injurious  to  another.  Thus,  then, 
the  physician  should  understand  and  distinguish  the  season  of 
each,  so  that  at  one  time  he  may  attend  to  the  nourishment 
and  increase,  and  at  another  to  abstraction  and  diminution. 
And  in  this  disease  as  in  all  others,  he  must  strive  not  to  feed 
the  disease,  but  endeavour  to  wear  it  out  by  administering 
whatever  is  most  opposed  to  each  disease,  and  not  that  which 
favours  and  is  allied  to  it.  For  by  that  which  is  allied  to  it, 
it   gains  vigour  and  increase,  but  it  wears  out  and  disappears 

particular  he  alludes  to,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  with  precision.  Plato,  in  imita- 
tion of  Homer,  Euripides,  Tyrtasus,  and  others  of  the  Greek  poets,  held  that  the 
heart  is  the  organ  or  seat  of  the  passions ;  hut  the  brain,  of  the  understanding.  See 
On  the  Republic,  ^yZ«?-?es.  This  philosophical  question  is  discussed  at  great  length 
hy  Galen,  in  the  Second  and  Third  Books  of  his  work.  On  the  Tenets  of  Hippocrates 
and  Plato. 


858 


THE  SACRED  DISEASE. 


under  the  use  of  that  which  is  opposed  to  it.  But  whoever  is 
acquainted  with  such  a  change  in  men,  and  can  render  a  man 
humid  and  dry,  hot  and  cold  by  regimen,  coukl  also  cure  this 
disease,  if  he  recognises  the  proper  season  for  administering 
his  remedies,  without  minding  purifications,  spells,  and  all  other 
illiberal  practices  of  a  like  kind. 


INDEX  TO  THE  TWO  VOLUMES. 


N.B. — The  inimbei's  refer  to  the  pages,  and  as  the  enumeration  of  tlie  pages  mns  on  from 
Vol.  I  to  Vol.  II,  it  is  to  he  kept  in  mind  that  Vol.  I  terminates  at  p.  IGG. 


Abercrombie,  Dr., his  work  on  the  Brain 
referred  to,  345  ;  his  double  character 
as  a  metaphysician  and  physician  in- 
stanced as  a  parallel  to  that  of  Hippo- 
crates, 841. 

Abebnethy,  his  rule  in  regard  to  trepan- 
ning the  skull,  432,  433. 

Abortion,  ancient  modes  of  producing, 
780. 

Abruption,  definition  of  the  term,  487  ;  of 
the  extremity  of  the  humerus  defined 
and  described  by  the  Editor,  501-3; 
briefly  noticed  by  Hippocrates,  550; 
of  the  acromion,  described  and  ex- 
plained, 582,  583. 

AcKERMAN,  a  very  learned  authority  on 
the  authenticity  of  the  diiferent  Hip- 
pocratic  treatises,  35 ;  his  list  of  the 
genuine  works,  35. 

Acromion,  on  the  dislocation  at  the,  665. 

Acute  diseases,  what  were  so  named  by 
Hippocrates,  283. 

Affections,  characters  of  the  Hippocratic 
treatise  on,  85,  86 ;  on  internal,  the 
characters  of,  86,  87 ;  probably  ema- 
nated from  the  Cnidian  school  of  me- 
dicine, 89. 

Affusion,  of  hot  water  on  the  head  useful 
in  all  fevers  but  the  bilious,  768  ;  of 
cold  water  in  tetanus,  740  ;  and  swell- 
ings and  pains  of  the  joints,  702. 

Air,  treatise  on,  probably  not  genuine, 
73,  74  ;  opinions  of  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers regarding  atmospheric,  144, 
145;  held  by  them  to  support  the 
earth,  73. 

Airs,  Waters,  and  Places,  genuineness  of 
this  work,  55  ;  argument  to  and  trans- 
lation of,  179-222. 

Alexander  the  Great,  description  of 
the  fever  which  proved  fatal  to  him, 
313,314. 

Aliment,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on, 
analysed,  116-118. 

Allopathy,  or  the  doctrine  of  the  contra- 
ries, 72,  77. 

Alvine  discharges,  prognostics  founded 
upon,  244,  258. 


Amazons,  the  ancient  inytli  respecting 
them  considered,  188,  189;  Hippo- 
crates neither  affirms  nor  denies  the 
truth  of  it,  620,  621. 

Ambe,  reduction  of  dislocations  by  the, 
573,  574. 

Amputation  of  the  extremities  in  cases 
of  gangrene,  401. 

Analepsis,  or  the  suspending  the  arm  in 
a  sling,  506. 

Analogy  between  the  bones  of  the  upper 
and  lower  extremities,  528,  529. 

Anatomy,  whether  or  not  the  Asclepiadae 
cultivated  human  and  comparative,  7  ; 
Hippocrates  certainly  not  unac- 
quainted with  human, 563 ;  Aristotle, 
his  acquaintance  with  human,  563  ;  re- 
marks of  Beclard  on  the  knowledge 
of,  possessed  by  Hippocrates,  566  ; 
further  proofs  of  Hippocrates'  ac- 
quaintance with,  569,  609. 

Andral  confirms  the  ancient  doctrines 
on  crises,  248  ;  his  observations  on  the 
critical  days,  248. 

Ankle-joint,  on  the  accidents  which  be- 
fall the  bones  of  the,  504-6.  See  under 
Dislocations. 

Anthrax  or  Carbuncle,  a  dangerous  com- 
plication of  fever,  400 ;  observations 
on,  96. 

Aphorisms,  Books  of,  universally  held  to 
be  genuine,  50  ;  English  translations  of, 
52  ;  great  excellence  and  high  reputa- 
tion of  the  work,  685  ;  object  of,  687  ; 
divisions  of  by  ancient  authorities,  688 ; 
argument  to,  686-97  ;  translation  of, 
697-774. 

Apolinose,  description  of  the  operation, 
817,818. 

Apollonius  Citiensis,  his  Commenta- 
ries on  Hippocrates  referred  to,  547, 
570,  588,  589;  his  mistaken  notion 
respecting  dislocation  at  the  hip-joint, 
642. 

Apoplexy,  prognosis  in  cases  of,  713; 
age  most  subject  to,  761. 

Appendix  to  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases, 
306-336. 


860 


INDEX. 


Arantius,  his  Commentary  on  Hippo- 
crates' work  on  Injuries  of  the  Head, 
452-63;  misspelt  Asellius,  451-3. 

Aristophanes,  the  comic  poet,  misre- 
presents meteorology,  191. 

Aristotle,  the  way  in  which  he  pub- 
lished his  works,  24  ;  the  casualties 
which  befel  his  library  after  his  death, 
4 1 ;  date  of  his  death,  42 ;  the  character 
of  his  esoteric  works,  181  ;  his  opinions 
on  the  sul)ject  of  meteorology,  191 ; 
borrows  freely  from  Hippocrates  on 
physiological  subjects,  220. 

Art,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on,  not 
genuine,  78,  79 ;  the  medical  art  pro- 
nounced to  be  long  when  contrasted 
with  the  shortness  of  human  life,  697. 

Articulations,  on  the  genuineness  of  the 
Hippocratic  treatise  bearing  this  title, 
56 ;  argument  to  the  work,  555-07  ; 
translation,  568  ;  some  sections  of  the 
work  perfect  masterpieces  in  surgical 
literature,  557. 

Ascia,  a  peculiar  form  of  bandage,  477, 
478. 

Asclepia,  or  Temples  of  Health,  in  Greece, 
5-8 ;  remedial  measures  practised  in 
them,  5-7;  those  of  Cos,  Cnidos,  and 
Rhodes  particularly  celebrated  in  the 
age  of  Hippocrates,  8. 

Asclcpiada;,  or  Priest-physicians,  account 
of,  5 ;  publicly  consulted  by  States 
during  the  prevalence  of  fatal  ejjide- 
mics,  13;  conclusions  respecting  their 
system  of  practice,  226-8. 

AsELLius,  see  under  Aranth's. 

Asiatics,  characters  of  the,  205-1 1 ;  causes 
of  their  pusillanimity,  210,  211. 

Astragalus,  see  Dislocations  at  the  Ankle- 
joint. 

Astronomy,  see  Meteorology. 

ATHEN'.Eus,his  characters  of  the  different 
kinds  of  waters,  200. 

Athleta;,  important  facts  regarding  the 
regimen  to  which  they  were  subjected, 
698. 

Atrophied  Umbs,  how  to  be  treated,  487. 

AuLrs  Gellius,  his  authority  on  the 
date  of  Hippocrates'  death  unjustly 
overlooked,  10. 

Autumn,  diseases  most  prevalent  in,  720  ; 
generally  reckoned  a  very  unhealthy 
season,  716. 

Axis  in  peritrochio,  and  the  other  me- 
chanical powers,  541. 


Bacon,  Lord,  agreed  with  the  ancient 
philosophers  regarding  the  nature  of 
matter  and  the  elements,  149. 


Bandages,  general  directions  respecting, 
477-81 ;  purposes  to  be  fulfilled  by, 
478;  on  the  forms  called  epidesmis  and 
hypodcsmis,  480,  512  ;  remarks  on  the 
Hippocratic  mode  of  ap])lying  them, 
by  Malgaigne  and  the  Editor,  495  ; 
symptoms  indicative  of  their  being 
properly  applied,  512;  mode  of  ap- 
plying, 477,  481. 

Bath,  on  the  use  of  the,  in  acute  diseases, 
303-5. 

Beclard,  his  description  of  the  parts 
connected  with  the  elbow-joint,  566. 

Bell,  Sir  Charles,  his  description  of 
fracture  of  the  trochlea,  502. 

Belly  or  venter,  ambiguous  use  of  the 
terra,  609. 

Berard,  his  important  observations  on 
partial  dislocation  of  the  jaw-bone,  in 
illustration  of  Hippocr.\tes'  doctrines 
on  this  subject,  593. 

Bile,  prognostics  founded  on  vomitings 
of,  245,  726,  727. 

Births,  seven  months'  and  eight  months', 
the  Hippocratic  treatises  on  them  pro- 
bably not  genuine,  95. 

Bleeding,  rules  for,  in  acute  diseases,  315, 
332 ;  carried  ad  dehquium  animi  in 
fevers,  324  (see  Deliquium);  in  injuries 
of  the  head,  443,  444. 

Bones  of  the  skull,  description  of  the, 445, 
456 ;  their  characters  in  children,  463  ; 
protrusion  of  fractured  bones  in  com- 
j)()und  fractui'cs,  how  to  be  remedied, 
541,  545;  in  the  arm  and  thigh  gene- 
rally fatal,  543,  544. 

Bread,  remarks  on  the  invention  of,  163  ; 
characters  of  the  different  kinds  men- 
tioned by  Hippocrates,  169. 

Broussais,  his  hypothetical  system  at 
variance  with  the  principle's  of  the 
Hippocratic  medicine,  158. 

Buboes,  a  fatal  symptom  in  all  fevers  ex- 
cept the  ephemeral,  732. 

Burning-irons  of  the  ancients,  their  form, 
827. 

Burns,  on  the  treatment  of,  as  laid  down 
by  Hippocrates,  807. 


Caddis,  on  the  use  of,  in  fractures  of  the 
nose,  599,  662. 

C.ELius  AuRELiANUs,  liis  stricturcs  on 
Hippocrates,  311.     Sec  Soranus. 

Calculus,  ancient  theory  regarding  the 
formation  of,  202 ;  relieved  by  diluents, 
202.     See  Stone. 

Canals  or  gutters,  how  used  by  the  an- 
cients in  the  treatment  of  fractures, 
483,  526,  531. 


/ 


INDEX. 


861 


j)i  ncer,  rules  laid  down  by  Hippocrates 

for  the  treatment  of,  758. 

i'antliaris,  its  administration  in  medicine, 
333  ;  the  mylabris  cichorii  or  Fusselini, 
333. 

Carbuncle,  opinions  regarding  the  nature 
of,  97.     See  Antlirax. 

Causus  or  ardent  fever,  on  the  nature  of, 
313,318,  346,302,  402. 

Cautery,  application  of  the,  in  the  vicinity 
of  joints,  215  ;  to  the  shoulder,  parti- 
cularly described,  579,  580;  different 
forms  of,  for  the  cure  of  hemorrhoids, 
827  ;  held  to  be  the  highest  of  the  me- 
dicinal powers,  774. 

Celsus  states  that  Hippocrates  sepa- 
rated medicine  from  philosophy,  5 ; 
Schulze's  ingenious  explanation  of 
the  meaning  of  this  statement,  159 ;  his 
practice  in  injuries  of  the  skull,  438 ; 
further  quoted,  G34,  642  et  pluries. 

Characters,  explanation  of  those  which 
occur  in  the  cases  related  by  Hippo- 
crates, 385-7. 

Cheese,  its  dietetical  qualities,  328. 

Chelius,  his  opinions  referred  to,  558, 
564 ;  his  remarks  on  the  Hippocratic 
modeof  treatingfractureof  thejaw,595. 

Chian  slippers,  used  in  the  cine  of  club- 
foot, 634. 

Cholera,  on  the  nature  and  treatment  of 
dry,  310,  329. 

Cicero,  his  inteqiretation  of  one  of  the 
Aphorisms  of  Hippocrates,  699  ;  his 
eulogium  on  the  cultivation  of  elegant 
literature,  842. 

Clark,  Sir  James,  referred  to  as  an  au- 
thority on  phthisis,  406,  407  ;  confirms 
the  statement  of  Hippocrates  as  to 
the  period  of  life  most  subject  to 
phthisis,  738. 

Clavicle,  see  Fractures. 

Clifton,  the  character  of  his  translation 
of  the  Prognostics,  50. 

Club-foot,  remarks  on  Hippocrates'  de- 
scription of,  559 ;  rules  laid  down  by 
Hippocrates  appreciated  by  Arc.eus, 
560  ;  observations  on,  by  Dr.  Little, 
561 ;  minute  description  of  the  process 
of  treatment  in  children,  632 ;  brief 
statement  of  the  general  methods  of 
treatment,  674. 

Cnidian  sentences,  on  the  probable  na- 
ture of  their  contents,  282,  283  ; 
Cnidian  system  of  medicine  founded  on 
diagnosis,  283. 

CoAR,  his  translation  of  the  Aphorisms 
criticised,  53. 

Cold  applications,  use  of,  in  injmies  of  the 
head,  444. 


Coldness  of  the  extremities,  prognosis 
founded  upon,  242. 

Coma  vigil,  a  description  of,  403. 

Commentators  on  Hippocrates,  a  com- 
plete list  of,  26-8. 

Compresses,  how  to  be  appUed  in  frac- 
tures, 481. 

Conception,  how  produced  in  certain  cir- 
cumstances, 196;  on  the  characters  of 
false,  265  ;  how  to  judge  when  it  will 
readily  take  place,  269. 

Concussion  of  the  brain  induces  loss  of 
speech,  770. 

Condvloma,  on  the  nature  and  treatment 
of,'828,  829. 

Congestion  of  the  brain,  symptoms  of,  as 
described  by  Hippocrates,  316. 

Constitution  of  the  seasons  described  by 
Hippocrates,  340,  346  ;  Const.  I, 
352;  Const.  II,  356;  Const.  Ill,  361 ; 
pestilential,  399. 

Contagion,  no  mention  of,  in  the  works 
of  Hippocrates,  351,  352;  on  the 
contagiousness  of  consumption,  352. 

Continued  fevers,  on  the  nature  of,  355. 

Contusions  of  the  skull,  on  the  nature 
and  treatment  of,  429  ;  the  practice  of 
Mr.  Pott  and  other  modern  authorities 
compared  with  that  of  Hippocrates, 
437  ;  held  by  Hippocrates  to  be  more 
dangerous  than  depressed  fractures, 
462. 

Convulsions,  the  double  nature  of,  758 ; 
apt  to  attack  the  side  of  the  body 
opposite  that  which  is  injured,  464 ; 
childi'en  subject  to,  357. 

Cooper,  Sir  Astley,  his  opinions  re- 
ferred to,  502  et  pluries. 

Cooper,  Mr.  Braxsby,  his  surgical  opi- 
nions compared  with  those  of  Hippo- 
crates, 503  et  pluries. 

CoRAY,  his  character  of  the  style  of 
Hippocrates,  22 ;  his  translation  of 
the  work  '  On  Airs,  &c.'  56  ;  his  divi- 
sions of  it,  181  ;  figure  of  the  Greek 
winds  as  given  by,  186. 

Cotton  or  linen  cloth  used  in  the  form 
of  a  tent  for  the  cure  of  fistula?, 
816. 

Counter-fissure  or  contre-coup,  429, 
430,  449 ;  opinions  of  Mr.  Guthrie 
and  others  regarding,  449,  451. 

Coups  de  soleil,  notices  of,  by  the  ancients, 
193. 

Cranium,  description  of,  bv  Hippocrates, 
445,  446. 

Crasis,  theory  of,  whether  Alcm.eon  or 
Hippocrates  was  the  founder  of  it, 
158;  explanation  of  it  by  Hippocrates, 
174. 


862 


INDEX. 


Crises,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on,  not 
genuine,  125 ;  the  ancient  opinions 
regarding,  confirmed  by  Andral, 
248. 

Critical  days,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on, 
though  not  genuine,  contains  much 
vahiable  matter,  125  ;  prognosis  found- 
ed upon, 251 ;  Hippocrates, according 
to  Galex,  the  first  author  who  treated 
of  them,  252. 

Croup,  wlietlier  the  ancients  have  de- 
scribed tlie  disease,  65. 

CTEsiAS,the  historian  and  physician,  14, 
15  ;  liis  mistaken  notion  regarding  dis- 
locations at  the  hip-joint,  641. 

CuLLEN,  his  hypothetical  system  at 
variance  with  the  principles  of  Hip- 
pocrates, 158. 

Cupping,  on  the  operation  of,  809. 

Custom,  the  eflfects  of,  on  the  body,  297. 

Cyceon,  on  tlie  nature  of,  295. 

Cynanche,  most  compreliensive  descrip- 
tion of,  given  by  Hippocrates,  317. 


Deafness,  whether  a  favorable  or  un- 
favorable symptom  in  fevers,  390. 

Decorum,  Hippocratic  treatise  on,  cer- 
taiidy  not  genuine,  122 ;  importance 
attaclied  to  the  observance  of  by  tlie 
ancient  physicians,  4  75. 

Defluxions,  cause  of,  according  to  Hip- 
pocrates, 173. 

Dejections,  on  the  cbai'actcrs  of,  772. 

Delirium,  its  connexion  with  phthisis, 
354  ;  prognosis  in,  763 ;  sketch  of  de- 
lirium tremens,  323. 

Democritus,  intercourse  between  him 
and  Hippocrates,  16  ;  the  supposed 
author  of  the  work  'On  Herljs,'  119; 
and  'On  Dissection,'  123;  further  re- 
ferred to,  128,  143. 

Demoniacs,  what  diseases  they  were  af- 
fected with,  833,  845. 

Dentition,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on, 
though  not  genuine,  possessed  of  con- 
siderable value,  124 ;  diseases  con- 
nected with,  721. 

Depletion  and  repletion,  the  evil  effects 
of,  described,  169. 

Deposits  or  abscesses  in  diseases,  their 
characters,  249,  250,  254. 

Depressed  fractures,  nature  and  treat- 
ment of,  433-5. 

Desault,  his  explanation  of  the  ancient 
modes  of  reducing  dislocations  referred 
to,  570. 

Dialects,  remarks  on  those  of  the  Greek 
language,  33. 

Diapbysis,  explanation  of  the  term,  522. 


Diarrhoea,  prognostics  founded  on,  26 
a   fatal    symptom    in    phthisis,    73^' 
danger  in  pregnant  women,  744  ;  va 
rious  remarks  on,  754. 

Diastasis  or  separation  of  the  bones  of 
the  skull  at  a  suture,  448-56  ;  general 
definition  of  the  terra,  487,  589. 

Diet  in  health,  character  of  the  treatise  on, 
63  ;  ancient  grades  of,  515  ;  regulations 
respecting,  698-703. 

Dietetics,  how  cultivated  at  first,  164  et 
seq. ;  further  notice  of,  81. 

Dinner,  a  meal  not  generally  partaken  of 
by  the  ancients,  190. 

DiONYsius  OF  Halicarnassus  cited, 
22,  33. 

Diseases,  the  Four  Books  on,  most  pro- 
bably not  genuine,  89  ;  abstract  of  their 
contents,  89-94 ;  probably  emanated 
from  the  Cnidian  School,  94  ;  enume- 
ration of  the  diseases  held  to  be  parti- 
cularly fatal,  89. 

Dislocations,  general  remarks  on  the 
nature  and  treatment  of,  679  ; — at  the 
knee,  disquisition  on  the  nature  of,  by 
the  Editor,  496-500  ;  rarity  of  the  ac- 
cident, 499,  500 ;  interesting  case  of, 
496;  account  of,  by  Hippocrates, 
545, 546,  672  ;  compound,  remarks  on 
the  treatment  of,  636  ;  comparison  be- 
tween those  at  the  elbow aiul  knee, 651 ; 
— at  Chopart's  tarsal joinf,  506,  519; 
— oftlieastra(/ahis,  518,519,  653,  654, 
673,  674  ; — at  tlie  ankle-joint,  522-4, 
673;  treatment  of  compound,  634-6; 
— at  tlie  elbow,  minute  description  of, 
546-50;  subject  resumed,  588-90; 
again  treated  of,  665-7  ;  compound, 
treatment  of,  637  ;  at  the  hip-joint, 
wonderful  completeness  of  the  descrip- 
tion of,  given  by  Hippocrates,  558, 
620 ;  congenital  and  from  d  icase,  620, 
762 ;  four  forms  most  minutely  de- 
scribed, 617,  643;  remarks  on  by 
Apollonius  Citiensis,  642;  in  cattle, 
575;— (7<  the  rrriftfs,  remarks  l)y  the 
Editor  upon,  562  ;  description  of,  by 
Hippocrates,  590,  591,  667;  conge- 
nital, 591-668;  compound,  remarks  of 
the  Editor  upon,  563 ;  treatment  by 
Hippocrates,  636,  674;  —  at  the 
shoulder-joint,  568  et  seq.,  664,  665  ; 
general  remarks  on  the  modes  of  re- 
ducing, 570  ;  these  modes  of  reduction 
described,  570  et  seq. ;  remarks  on  the 
disposition  to,  577  ;  operation  for  cor- 
recting the  disposition  to,  578-81  ; 
congenital,  remarks  on,  581,  583  ; — of 
the  fiif/ers,  591  ;  on  the  reduction  of, 
650,  668  ; — of  the  toes,  treatment  of. 


1 
\ 


J 


INDEX. 


863 


Dislocations  (continued). 

637; — of  tfip  jaw-hone,  592-7,  6G4  ; — 
of  the  vertebrce,  603-15,  676,  679  ; 
divisions  of,  603 ;  reduction  of,  by  a 
macliine,  611,  612;  unsuccessful  ex- 
periment to  reduce,  613  ;  remarks  on 
congenital,  624  ;  remarks  of  M.  Littri; 
upon  spontaneous  dislocation,  97;  of 
the  upper  vertebra,  728,  729 ;  ready 
means  of  reducing,  648,  649;  general 
regimen  after  reduction,  651. 

Dissection,  Ilippocratic  treatise  on,  not 
genuine,  123;  Hippocrates  had  no 
repugnance  to,  609.     See  Anatomy. 

Distortions  of  the  countenance,  prognosis 
founded  upon,  267. 

Divine  diseases,  the  opinions  of  Hippo- 
crates regarding,  216  ;  further  re- 
marks upon,  235,  834. 

Douche,  on  the  use  of,  in  fevers,  281,  304. 

Dreams,  character  of  the  Hippocratic 
work  on,  81,82;  ancient  writers  on, 
and  the  character  of  theirworks,  84, 85. 

Drink,  on  the  administration  of,  in  fevers, 
289. 

Dropsies,  prognosis  founded  upon,  in 
acute  diseases,  241, 259 ;  on  the  nature 
and  varieties  of,  330  ;  ulcers  connected 
■with,  difficult  to  cure,  753 ;  cured  by  a 
spontaneous  discharge  of  water  from 
the  bowels,  754. 

D17  cholera,  on  the  nature  of,  329.  See 
Cholera. 

DupuYTREN,  Baron,  his  work  on  surgical 
operations  quoted,  502,  547,  et  pluries. 

Dysentery,  on  the  prevalence  of  in  spring, 
202  ;  prognosis  founded  upon,  263  ;  on 
the  treatment  of,  325  ;  symptoms  of, 
727;  treatment  of  symptomatic,  641; 
prognosis  in,  752  ;  when  epidemic  ac- 
cording to  Hippocrates,  203. 

Dvsuria,  a  favorable  termination  of  fever, 
'360. 


Ears,  fractures  of,  common  among  the 
ancient  Athletse,  601,  602,  See  fur- 
ther under  Fractures. 

Ecchymosis,  how  to  be  treated,  486. 

Eclectic,  a  misprint  for  Eleatic,  141. 

Ecthymata,  meaning  of  the  term,  not 
well  defined,  404. 

Effeminacy  of  the  Scythians,  different 
opinions  regarding,  187-8. 

Egvptians,  their  resemblance  to  the  Scy- 
thians, 212,  213. 

Elbow,  disquisition  on  the  nature  of  the 
accidents  which  occur  at  the  joint, 
500-4 ;  description  of  the  mode  of 
V)andaging  in  injuries  thereof,  551. 


Eleatic  philosophers,  their  opinions  akin 
to  those  of  Pythagoras,  158. 

Elements,  the  ancient  opinions  regarding 
their  nature,  generally  mismiderstood, 
131  ;  the  real  opinions  of  the  ancient 
philosophers  stated  by  the  Editor,  144 
et  seq. ;  countenanced  by  Lord  Bacon, 
149 — by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  150 — 
bv  Dr.  L.  Oken,  151 — by  Mr.  Harris, 
149,150. 

Empedocles,  his  speculations,  as  applied 
to  medicine,  175. 

Empyema,  the  opinions  of  the  ancient 
authorities  regarding,  91,  246-9;  pro- 
bably often  confounded  with  acute 
phthisis,  246,  247 ;  prescription  for, 
334  ;  treatment  of,  88  ;  a  termination 
of  pleurisy,  738  ;  additional  statements 
respecting,  739,  756 ;  results  when 
treated  with  the  cautery  or  knife,  768. 

Empirics,  Hippocrates  not  to  be  consi- 
dered as  belonging  to  the  sect  of,  18, 
607. 

Epicureans,  their  opinions  with  regard  to 
the  elements,  143. 

Epicurus  took  his  system  of  Physics 
from  Democritus,  143. 

Epidemic,  term,  how  used  by  the  an- 
cients, 329 ;  nature  of  the  Books  of 
Epidemics,  340  ;  argument  to,  339-52; 
translation  of  the  1st  and  3d  Books, 
352-420;  argument  to  3d  Book,  382; 
nature  of  the  epidemic  fevers  described 
by  Hippocrates,  350  ;  Books  1st  and 
3d  generally  admitted  to  be  genuine, 
54  ;  English  translations  by  Floyer 
and  Farr,  54  ;  character  of  the  2d, 
4tb,  5tb,  6th,  and  7th,  95-103  ;  great 
excellence  of  the  whole  work,  104, 

Epidesmis,  see  Bandages. 

Epilepsy,  prognosis  in,  738  ;  an  hereditary 
disease,  847. 

Epinyctis,  a  disease  of  the  skin,  192, 
261. 

Epiphysis,  import  of  the  term,  as  applied 
by  Hippocrates,  504,  522,  660. 

Epistles,  the  Hippocratic,  although  per- 
haps not  genuine,  of  very  high  anti- 
quity, 127  ;  most  probably  turn  upon 
real  events  in  the  Ufe  of  Hippocrates, 
15,  127;  were  probably  composed  by 
the  Sophists  as  exercises  in  composi- 
tion, 127;  analysis  of  them,  126-29. 

Equitation, its  effects  on  the  genital  organs 
differently  represented,  218. 

Ermerins,  Dr.,  his  ingenious  work  on 
the  Prognostics  of  Hippocrates,  69, 
225-31. 

Erotian,  one  of  the  greatest  authorities 
on  the  works  of  Hippocrates,  28, 


864 


INDEX. 


Erysipelas,  case  of  malignant,  377  ;  his- 
tory of  an  epidemical,  399-402 ;  on 
the  use  of  cold  applications  in,  741 ; 
of  the  womb,  745 ;  determinations  of, 
inwardly  or  outwardly,  756  ;  connected 
with  diseased  bone,  704. 

Eunuchs,  not  sul)ject  to  gout,  756. 

Europeans,  their  peculiar  characters,  218 
et  seq. 

Exanthemata,  on  the  nature  of  broad, 
753. 

Excalcitration,  explanation  of  the  term, 
051,  052. 

Excrement,  prognostics  founded  on  the 
characters  of,  243. 

Exfoliation  of  bones,  how  to  be  treated, 
537. 

Extravasation  of  blood,  how  treated  in 
injuries  of  the  head,  430-38. 

Extremities,  analogv  of  the  upper  and 
lower,  528,  529."" 

Eyes,  prognostics  founded  upon  the,  203 ; 
prescription  for  diseases  of  the,  331, 
335  ;  various  remedial  means  in  pains 
of  the,  757. 

Facies  Iliiipocratica,  tl-  >  characters  of  it 
given,  230. 

Faces,  prognostic  characters  of  the,  243. 

Fasting,  its  effects  in  drying  bodies,  771. 

Febris  algida,  on  the  nature  of,  340,  318. 

Feminine  disease,  on  the  nature  of,  187, 
188. 

Fevers,  different  kinds  of,  308,  405  ; 
puer])eral,  interesting  case  of,  373,374 ; 
pestilential,  remarks  on  the  nature  of, 
382;  nocturnal,  nature  of,  309,405; 
various  ajjliorisms  relating  to,  771. 

Fire,  licld  anciently  to  be  a  great  disin- 
fectant, 12  ;  ancient  opinions  on  the 
nature  of,  explained,  145  ;  confoimded 
with  mind  l)y  certain  of  the  authori- 
ties, 140. 

Fistula:,  genuineness  of  the  treatise  bear- 
ing this  title,  09  ;  argument  to,  813; 
translation  of,  810  ;  how  to  be  treated, 
810  ;  in  ano,  how  formed,  819. 

Fleshes,  or  Principles,  the  Ilippocratic 
treatise  on,  not  genuine,  118,  119. 

FLOuaKN.s,  extract  from,  on  the  analogy 
of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  529. 

Fluor  albus,  account  of,  112. 

Foes,  his  merits  as  an  editor  of  the  Works 
of  Hippocrates,  31. 

Fcetus,  the  Ilippocratic  treatise  on  the 
excision  of,  not  genuine,  124 

Fomentations,  on  the  application  of,  to 
the  side  in  pleurisy,  289. 

Foot,  description  of  the  bones  of  the, 
518. 


Fractures,  on  the  genuineness  of  the 
Hippocratic  treatise  bearing  this  title, 
57 ;  Argument  to  the  work,  491-507; 
translation  of,  507-52 ;  of  the  skull, 
di\isions  of,  429  ;  characters  of,  453  ; 
mode  of  treating,  482,  483 ;— o/  the 
arm,  method  of  treating,  507-10,  510, 
517; — of  the  forearm,  treatment  of, 
484,  491,  511  ;—of  the  leg,  525,  526  ; 
— of  the  fibula,  528 ; — of  the  tibia,  528 ; 
— of  the  thiyh,  529-31; — of  the  jaw, 
598;  remarks  of  CnELiusonthe  same, 
598  ;  compound,  532,  539,  081  ;  an 
injudicious  method  of  treating  fractures 
described,  533,  536  ;  method  of  treat- 
ing with  wool,  540  ; — of  the  olecranon, 
account  of,  550 ; — of  the  trochlea  of 
the  humerus,  see  Abruption ; — of  the 
clavicle,  account  of,  584-88; — of  the 
nose,  minutely  descril)ed,  597,000,002; 
conipouml,  001 ; — of  the  ears,  001, 003, 
063 ;  common  among  the  ancient 
athlettC,  002 ; — of  the  vertebrce,  less 
dangerous  than  severe  contusions,  014  ; 
— of  the  ribs,  less  dangerous  than  se- 
vere contusions,  615. 

Free  institiUions  and  the  opposite,  their 
different  effects  on  the  human  mind, 
210,  211. 

Friction,  its  uses  in  surgery,  484. 

Fruits  of  tlic  season,  or  Summer  fruits, 
characters  of,  206. 

Fumigation  of  the  uterus,  in  amenor- 
rboea,  742,  743,  748. 

Gai.kx,  his  account  of  the  Asclepiadaj,  7 ; 
mentions  frequently  the  public  services 
of  11  ii'poc RATES  during  the  ])rcvalence 
of  the  Athenian  plague,  13  ;  Ids  charac- 
ter of  the  style  of  Hippocrates,  21 ; 
his  commentaries  on  Hippocrates, 
27  ;  his  ideas  on  respiration  akin  to 
those  of  CiTViER,  143  ;  his  opinions  re- 
garding the  nature  and  merits  of  the 
work  On  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases, 
276,  279;  further  quoted,  24,  52  et 
pluries. 

Galiancones,  see  Weasel-armed. 

Gangrene,  of  the  extremities  complicated 
with  fever,  401 ;  prognosis  founded  on 
the  symptoms  of,  242 ;  traumatic,  on 
the  treatment  of,  039,  640,  675  ;  liow 
gangrenous  sores  are  to  be  treated,  790. 

Garlic,  the  dietetical  characters  of,  328. 

Glands,  the  Ilippocratic  treatise  on,  very 
interesting,  but  j)robably  not  genuine, 
120;  furtlier  remarks  on  the  subject, 
580. 

Globus  hystericus,  noticed  in  one  of  the 
ilippocratic  treatises,  77. 


INDEX. 


8G; 


I 


Gout,  various  prognostics  in,  2(11.  7o(), 
757. 

(Ireenhill,  Dr.,  his  arrangement  of  tlie 
treatises  in  tlie  Ilippocratic  collection, 
45,  46 ;  his  critical  remarks  on  the 
Aphorisms,  51. 

Grimm,  his  character  as  a  writer  on  the 
genuineness  of  the  Hippocratic  trea- 
tises, 36. 

Grote,  Mr.,  his  opinions  regarding  the 
mythical  genealogies  of  the  ancients, 
189 ;  on  tlie  myths  of  the  Greeks, 
9 ;  on  the  myth  of  the  Amazons, 
189. 

Gruner,  his  great  merits  as  a  writer  on 
the  authenticity  of  the  Hippocratic 
treatises,  32  ;  his  classification  of  them, 
34. 

Gymnastics,  Hippocrates  instructed  in 
the  application  of  them  in  medicine  hy 
Herodicus,  11,  164;  on  their  intro- 
duction into  the  practice  of  medicine, 
11;  cautions  to  he  used  in  founding 
prognostics  on,  258. 


Ilaimoptysis,  connexion  of  witli  phthisis, 
101,354,  764  ;  sometimes  removed  hy 
menstruation,  743. 

IIaller,  his  classification  of  the  Hippo- 
cratic treatises,  32;  unjustly  taxes 
Hippocrates  with  falsely  stating  that 
dysentery  occurs  in  spring,  203 ;  a 
highly  popular  poet,  841. 

Harris,  Mr.,  in  his  Philosophical  Ar- 
rangements, espouses  the  doctrines  of 
the  ancients  on  matter  and  the  ele- 
ments, 149,  150. 

Head,  different  forms  of,  according  to 
Hippocrates,  445,  446. 

Headache,  prognosis  founded  on,  252 ; 
induced  hy  various  causes,  331. 

Heart,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on  the, 
of  much  merit,  hut  probahly  not  ge- 
nuine, 115,  116. 

Heat,  identified  with  mind,  125;  innate, 
ancient  doctrines  regarding,  702  ;  the 
medicinal  effects  of  heat  and  cold,  740, 
741. 

Hebdomads,  Hippocratic  treatise  on,  ex- 
ists only  in  Latin,  119. 

Hedra,  or  indentation  of  the  skull,  on 
the  characters  of,  429-32,  451 ;  expla- 
nation of  the  term,  and  usage  of  it, 
448, 451. 

Heel,  attention  to  be  paid  to  its  position 
in  the  treatment  of  fractures  of  the 
leg,  532. 

Heliodorus  describes  the  diastasis  of 
the  cranial  bones,  448. 


Hellebore,  Hippocratic  treatise  on  the 
administration  of,  not  genuine,  126; 
cases  in  which  it  was  administered, 
327;  its  use  in  tetanus,  544  ;  rules  for 
the  administration  of,  725. 

Hepatitis,  terminating  in  al)scess,  240. 

Hereditary  diseases,  difficult  to  remove, 
259. 

Hernia  cerebri,  obscurely  treated  of  by 
Hippocrates,  461. 

Herodicus,  the  master  of  Hippocrates, 
11,  164  ;  his  dangerous  system  of  re- 
gimen in  acute  diseases,  274. 

Herophilus,  the  earliest  commentator 
on  Hippocrates,  26;  the  first  person 
who  studied  the  characters  of  the 
pulse,  351 ;  referred  to,  772. 

Heurxius,  or  Hoorne,  a  modern  com- 
mentator on  Hippocrates,  quoted 
176,  753  et  alibi. 

Hiccup,  danger  of,  in  dropsv,  758,  762, 
769. 

Hippace,  a  species  of  cheese  used  by  the 
Scythians,  212. 

Hippocrates,  biography  of,  9-16  ;  the 
principles  upon  which  his  system  of 
medical  practice  was  founded,  17-21; 
remarkably  free  from  superstition  and 
quackery,  IS,  19;  a  bold  operator  in 
surgery,  20,  21;  the  genealogy  of,  23; 
further  particidars  regarding  the  family 
of,  23 ;  published  part  of  his  works 
separately  in  his  lifetime,  24,  25  ;  cha- 
racters of  the  style  of,  21,  22;  can- 
didly confesses  his  own  mistakes,  and 
different  opinions  on  his  conduct  in  so 
doing,  99,  613 ;  instance  of  his  re- 
markable talent  for  original  observa- 
tion, 412;  certainly  had  some  acquaint- 
ance with  human  anatomy,  565,  569 
(see  Anatomy) ;  recommends  the  study 
of  incurable  diseases  as  an  assistance 
to  prognosis  and  diagp.osis,  628;  his 
prudent  regard  for  the  safety  of  the 
physician,  640 ;  had  the  reputation  of 
being  a  great  i)hilosopher  as  well  as  a 
great  physician,  841;  said  to  be  in- 
capable either  of  deceiving  or  of  being 
deceived,  423. 

Hii)pocratic  treatises,  various  distribu- 
tions of,  24-48 ;  the  editor's  conclu- 
sions as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  par- 
ticular treatises,  129,  130' 

Homer,  a  line  incorrectly  referred  to, 
576. 

Homoeopathy,  the  principles  of,  to  be 
found  in  the  Hippocratic  works,  77. 

Horace,  plan  upon  which  he  published 
his  works,  24  ;  his  lines  descriptive  of 
the  dog-davs,  361. 

55 


866 


INDEX. 


L 


HosACK,  the  American  physician,  con- 
curs with  Hippocrates  in  praising 
wine  as  an  application  to  ulcers,  794. 

Hot  and  cold,  hypothetical  systems 
founded  on  these  principles,  171;  the 
modes  of  applying  hot  applications  re- 
commended l)v  Hippocrates,  289, 
290. 

Humidity  of  constitution,  on  the  charac- 
ters of,  214,  215. 

Humours,  the  Ilippocratic  treatise  on, 
reviewed,  104,  100;  Galen  holds 
Hippocrates  to  he  the  author  of  the 
Theory  of  the  Humours,  02,  09. 

Humphack,  when  complicated  with 
asthma,  fatal,  700. 

Hunger,  the  dehilitating  effects  of,  707; 
relieved  by  drinking  wine,  708. 

Hydatids  of  the  womb,  account  of,  197. 

Hvdromel,  its  use  in  acute  diseases,  298, 
'299. 

Hydrops  uteri,  description  of,  197. 

Hypochondriac  region,  prognosis  founded 
on  the  ditferent'states  of  the,  239,  240, 
735. 

Hypoglottis,  descrij)tion  of,  92. 

Hypothesis  in  medicine  strongly  con- 
demned l)y  lIipPociiATKS,  161,  171 
et  alibi. 

Hyssoj),  used  anciently  as  an  emetic,  63. 

Hysterics,  prognostics  in,  744. 

latrium,  on  the  nature  of  this  establish- 
ment, 60,  121  ;  rcseml)led  the  siu'gery 
of  modern  physicians  in  tlie  days  of 
Pott,  409  ;  identified  witli  the  suigcry 
by  Galen,  470. 

Ice  and  snow,  the  medicinal  properties 
of,  741,  742. 

Ileus,  on  the  treatment  of,  85 ;  compli- 
cated with  strangury,  fatal  in  seven 
days,  759. 

Inmioderatc  sleep,  and  insomnolency, 
both  bad  symptoms,  705. 

Impotence  of  the  Scytliians,  supposed 
cause  of  the,  218. 

Incarnant  or  Sarcotic  Medicines,  on  the 
nature  of,  793,  803. 

Incisions  in  the  temples  generally  held 
to  be  very  dangerous,  458. 

Influenza,  or  Epidemic  Cough,  descril)ed 
in  the  Hippocratic  treatises,  101. 

Injuries  of  the  head,  on  the  genuineness 
of  the  treatise  bearing  this  title,  58 ; 
argument  to  the  treatise,  423-444  ; 
translation  of  the  same,  445,  406; 
general  view  of  the  subject,  440-2 ; 
dressing  applicable  in  the  treatment 
of,  457  ;  when  complicated  with  disease 
of  the  bone,  460. 


Ink,  the  ancient  different  from  the  mo- 
dern, 460. 

Instruments  of  reduction,  or  Mochlicus, 
genuineness  of  the  treatise  bearing 
this  title,  58. 

Intermittent  fevers,  supposed  to  prove  a 
protection  from  phthisis,  355. 

Intoxication,  dangerous  svmptoms  from, 
738. 

Invalids,  regimen  applicable  to,  703. 

Ischiatic  diseases,  prognosis  founded  on, 
208. 

Italian  ))hysicians  have  been  unjustly 
blamed  for  being  sparing  of  venesection 
in  a  hot  climate,  and  in  warm  weather, 
098. 

Jaundice,  history  of,  complicated  with 
fever,  302,  388,  389;  compared  with  a 
recent  epidemic  prevalent  in  Scotland, 
389 ;  prognosis  founded  upon,  290, 
733  ;  complicated  with  scirrhus  of  the 
liver,  759. 

Jaw,  see  Fractures  and  Dislocations. 

Joints,  general  description  of  the,  649. 


Kant,  the  opinions  of,  on  the  origin  of 
Grecian  j)hilosophy  referred  to,  3  ;  fur- 
ther ([noted  and  noticed,  232,  841. 

Kedniata,  on  the  nature  of  the  disease, 
216,217. 

Kidneys,  diseases  of  the,  87  ;  determi- 
nation to  the,  a  favorable  termination 
in  certain  fevers,  359  ;  diseases  of  the, 
difficult  to  cure  in  old  ])ersons,  753. 

Knee-joint,  description  of  the,  540  ;  ge- 
neral view  of  the  dislocations  at  the, 
496-500,  see  Dislocations. 

Lassitude,  spontaneous,  an  indication  of 
disease,  705. 

Laurie,  Dr.,  his  rule  with  regai'd  to 
trepanning  in  injuries  of  the  head, 
433,  434. 

'Law,'  the  tract  on  the,  hesitatingly  ac- 
knowledged as  genuine,  59  ;  argument 
to,  783  ;  translation  of  the  work,  784. 

Le  Clerc,  his  merits  as  an  authority  on 
the  Hippocratic  treatises,  35. 

Leg,  description  of  the  bones  of  the,  522. 

Lemos,  the  earliest  modern  writer  on  the 
authenticity  of  the  Hippocratic  trea- 
tises, 29. 

Leprosy  and  Lichen,  prognosis  founded 
upon,  269. 

Leucophlegmasia,  description  of,  196. 

Ijientery,  prognosis  founded  on  the  sym- 
ptoms of,  264,  752. 


INDPLX. 


867 


Link  and  Petersen,  the  authors  of  a 
very  ingenious  but  rather  equivocal 
hypothesis  regarding  the  genuineness 
of  the  Ilippocratic  treatises,  38,  39. 

Liquids,  on  tlie  use  of,  in  nic(hcinc,  lOG-0  ; 
Hippocratic  treatise  bearing  tliis  title, 
109. 

LiSTON,  Mr.,  his  opinions  quoted  in  illus- 
tration of  certain  passages  in  the  works 
of  Hippocrates,  496,  501,  et  pluries. 

Lithotomy,  not  practised  by  the  followers 
of  Hippocrates,  780 ;  in  Scotland  used 
to  be  performed  by  non-professional 
men,  778. 

Little,  Dr.,  interesting  remarks  by,  on 
the  account  of  club-foot,  given  by 
Hippocrates,  561. 

LiTTRE,  M.,  his  very  high  merit  as  an 
authority  on  the  genuineness  of  the 
Hippocratic  treatises,  39  ;  style  ditfuse, 
and  sometimes  rather  prolix,  40 ;  his 
positionswith  regard  to  the  Hippocratic 
collection,  41  ;  probably  not  correct  in 
questioning  the  established  character  of 
the  style  of  Hippocrates,  22  ;  doubt- 
ful if  he  makes  out  his  position  as  to 
the  date  at  which  the  Hippocratic 
collection  was  made,  41 ;  his  arrange- 
ment of  the  treatises,  43-5  ;  his  cha- 
racters of  the  treatise  'On  Airs, Waters,' 
&c.,  181  ;  his  remarks  on  empyema 
considered,  246,247;  further  quoted 
160  et  pluries. 

Liver,  results  of  the  treatment  in  abscess 
of  the,  768;  on  collections  of  water 
in,  770. 

LoNGiNus,  his  affecting  description  of 
the  state  of  servitude,  182,  183. 

Louis,  M.,  referred  to  as  an  authority  in 
phthisis,  406-7. 

Macrocephab,  account  of  this  people, 
207,  208. 

Machine  or  instrument  for  the  treatment 
of  a  fractured  leg,  539. 

Mania,  treatment  of,  by  mandragora,  77. 

Manipulation,  importance  of,  to  the  sur- 
geon, 4  76. 

Marsh  effluvia,  whether  Hippocrates 
was  acquainted  with  their  effects  in 
inducing  fevers,  349. 

Matter,  ancient  opinions  regarding  the 
nature  of,  143,  144;  the  nature  of  the 
primary,  explained,  143  et  pluries ; 
striking  instances  of  its  transmutations 
in  the  animal  frame,  147-9;  tl)e  an- 
cient opinions  on  it  confirmed  l)y  Lord 
Bacon  and  other  modern  authorities, 
149. 

Maza,  description  of,  163,  459. 


Mechanical  powers,  on  those  known  to 
Hippocrates,  541. 

Meconium,  different  applications  of  the 
term,  335. 

Medicine,  origin  of  Grecian,  uncertain, 
3;  not  derived  from  the  East  as  was 
once  supposed,  3,  4  ;  cultivated  by  the 
Asclepiada;  and  by  the  philosophers,  5 ; 
remarks  on,  17  ;  the  rise  of,  satisfac- 
torily accounted  for  by  Hippocrates, 
158,  161-4  ;  on  the  authenticity  of 
the  Hippocratic  treatise  bearing  the 
title  of  '  Ancient  Medicine,'  49  ;  trans- 
lation of,  155-78. 

Melancholy,  case  of,  417. 

Medicines,  iron,  and  fire,  the  gradation  of 
their  medicinal  powers,  774. 

Mercuriali,  a  learned  writer  on  Die 
Hippocratic  treatises,  29  ;  his  classifi- 
cation of  them,  30,  31. 

Meteorology  of  the  ancients  nearly  iden- 
tical with  astronomy,  191  ;  opinions 
held  by  Aristophanes  and  Aristotle 
on  the  subject,  191. 

Meteorism,  account  of,  in  diseases,  240. 

Midwifery,  much  cultivated  by  medical 
men  in  early  times,  113. 

Milk,  its  dietetical  and  medicinal  proper- 
ties, 749. 

Mind,  explanation  of  the  term  as  used 
by  the  ancient  philosophers,  837;  a 
Hippocratic  writer  confounds  it  with 
heat.  146. 

Mochlicus,  genuineness  of  the  treatise 
bearing  the  name,  58;  argument  to  the 
work,  657-60;  translation  of,  660-82. 

Modiolus  of  Celsus,  a  circular  saw  like 
the  modern  trephine,  443,  465. 

Moffat,  his  translation  of  the  Prognos- 
tics, 50. 

Morbus  coxarius,  attended  wdth  disloca- 
tion of  the  bone,  625,  762. 

Movement  of  the  hands,  prognosis 
founded  on,  238. 

Mumps.     See  Parotitis. 

Muscle  of  the  arm,  namelythe  biceps,516. 

Nature,  held  by  Hippocrates  to  be  a 
restorative  principle,  19  ;  editor's  re- 
marks on  the  ancient  doctrines  regard- 
ing, 102;  Nature  of  Man,  the  Hip- 
pocratic treatise  bearing  this  title 
probably  not  genuine,  62  ;  Nature  of 
the  Infant,  the  Hippocratic  treatise 
with  this  title  considered,  109  ;  On 
the  Female  Nature,  this  Hippocratic 
treatise  made  up  from  the  work  on 
Female  Complaints,  115;  Nature  of 
the  Bones,  this  Hippocratic  treatise  not 
genuine,  124,  125. 


868 


INDEX. 


Nerves,  distribution  of  the,  by  Erasis- 
TRATUs,  G08 ;  description  of  the  ver- 
tebral,  by  IIipi'ocrates,  G07,  G08. 

Neavton,  Sir  Isaac,  countenances  the 
ancient  opinions  on  the  elements,  150. 

Nightmare  described  by  Hippocrates, 
843. 

Nonan  intermittents,  remarks  on,  369. 

Nose,  on  the  subsidence  of  the,  from 
disease,  G79 ;  on  fractures  thereof. 
See  Fractures. 

Nyctalopia,  the  characters  of,  2G7. 

Oath,  genuineness  of  the  little  tract  with 
this    title,    58;     argument    to,    775; 
translation  of,  779. 
Oken,  Dr.  LoREXZ,  adopts  the  ancient 
arrangement  of  the  elementary  sub- 
stances, 151. 
Olecranon,  remarks  on  the  term  as  ap- 
plied by  HiPi'OCRATES,  6G2  ;  on  frac- 
tures of  the,  550. 
Old  persons,  ipicstions  whether  they  can 
bear   fasting   well    or   ill,    701 ;  their 
general   state   of  health,    712;    their 
catarrhs  not  readily  concocted,  712; 
diseases  to  which  they  are  pocuharly 
subject,  722. 
Omentum,  on  ])rotrusi()n  of  the,  7G2. 
Oneirocritica,  ancient  authorities  on  the, 

8 1,  85.     Sec  Dreams. 
Oi)erator,  emuneration  of  particulars  re- 
lating to  the,  475. 
Oiiblhalmy,  description  of  the  cjiidemical, 
l)y  Hippocrates,  35G;  description  of 
the  puiulcut,  403. 
Organic  structures,  their  effects  in  pro- 
ducing disease,  17G. 
Osteology,  on  Hippocrates'  acquaint- 
ance with,  423  ;  brief  system  of,  GGO-2. 
Oxen  generally  supi)oscd  to  be  liable  to 
dislocations  of  tin-  hip-joint  in  spring. 
575. 
Oxyglyky,  explanation  of  the  term,  521. 
Oxymel.on  the  administration  of,  in  acute 
diseases,  301. 

Pains  of  the  car,  prognosis  founded  on, 
252. 

Pains  of  the  eyes  how  remedied,  7G9. 

Pai.ladius,  a  commentator  on  Hippo- 
crates referred  to,  508,  511,  513, 
514. 

Paracentesis  thoracis,  account  of  the 
ojicration  of,  88. 

Paralysis  held  generally  to  affect  the  side 
oi)positc  that  which  has  sustained  an 
injury,  4G4. 

Paraplegia  the  same  as  apojilcxy,  302. 


Fari^  adopts  Hippocrates*  description 
of  the  forms  of  the  head,  427;  advo- 
cates bleeding  in  injuries  of  the  head, 
on  the  authority  of  Hippocrates, 
443  ;  the  first  who  used  pulleys  in  re- 
ducing dislocations,  570. 
Parotitis,    ancient     description    of,    by 

Hippocrates,  353. 
Pathicioftheancients,  account  of  the,  188. 
Periodeutas,  or  travelling  physicians,  re- 
ference to  the,  785. 
Periods  of  life,  the  diseases  peculiar  to 

each,  720-22. 
Perijiatetics,  their  opinions  with  regard 

to  the  elements,  139. 
Pestle,  ancient  mode  of  reducing  dislo- 
cations by  means  of  the,  512. 
Petronas,  his  strange  regimen  in  fevers, 

285. 
Phasis,  accoimt  of  the  country  and  its 

inhabitants,  209. 
Phlegm,  on  the  collection  of,  about  the 

stomach,  7  70. 
Phrenitis  of  the  ancients  was  a  febrile 
affection,  357,  3G5  ;  history  of  an  acute 
case  of,  411;  other  striking  cases  of, 
418-20. 
Phthisis  treated  of  as  a  febrile  disease, 
by   Hippocrates,    342;    held    to    be 
contagious,    by  Isorates,   352  ;  his- 
tory of,  by  Hippocrates,  353,  405; 
whether  intermittent  fevers  afford  any 
])rotcctiou  from,  355  ;  i)criod  of  life  at 
which  Hippocrates  held  it  to  be  most 
common,  738  ;  Sir  J.  Ci.ark  confirms 
the  opinion  of  Hippocrates  on  this 
subject,   738  ;  various  prognostics  in, 
739. 
Physical  or  Natural  philosophy  of  the 
ancients     nnu'h     misunderstood    and 
misrepresented,  131  ;  reason  for  giving 
an  exposition  of  it,  131. 
Physician,    on    the,     this    Hippocratic 
treatise  generally  rejected  as  spurious, 
121;  duties  of,  distinctly  announced, 
407;   subjects  to  be  known    by  the, 
474. 
Piles  or  Hemorrhoids,  Hippocratic  trea- 
tise  on,    probably   genuine,    139  ;    a 
natural  cure  of  certain  diseases,  753. 
Pituita.     See  Phlegm, 
i'lacenta  pra-via,  the  dangers  attending, 
stated,  114;   retention  of,  described, 
114  ;  how  to  be  remedied,  74G. 
Plasters  for  fiesli  wounds,  795,  79G. 
Plato,  his  mode  of  publishing  his  works, 
25  ;  bis  oi)inion  with  regard  to  divine 
diseases,  71,  21G. 
Pleurisy,  excellent  plan  of  treating,  laid 
down  by  Hippocrates,  280,  290. 


liXDEX. 


8G9 


Paeuma,  Breath,  or  Spirits,  ancient 
opinions  on  the  nature  of,  explained, 
83G-40. 

Pneumonia,  on  the  treatment  of,  325  ; 
question  whether  the  recent  innova- 
tions in  the  treatment  of,  be  im])rove- 
ments,  280,  281. 

PoLYBUS,  the  son-in-law  of  Hippo- 
crates, 23,  41,  61. 

Position  in  bed,  prognostic  founded  upon, 
238 ;  of  a  fractured  limb,  484,  539 ; 
of  a  fractured  arm,  508-10;  the  half- 
bent,  in  fractures  of  the  thigh  disap- 
proved of,  531. 

Precepts,  the  Ilippocratic  treatise  with 
this  name  not  held  as  genuine,  123. 

Preguancv,  prognostics  referring  to,  743- 
749. 

Presentation  of  an  injured  limb,  the  act 
of,  explained,  476,  483. 

Procidentia  ani,  on  the  treatment  of,  820, 
821. 

Prognosis,  nature  of  the  Hippocratic, 
234,  235. 

Prognostics,  book  of,  generally  held  to  be 
genuine,  49 ;  translation  of,  by  Mofpwt, 
character  of,  50  ;  Ijy  Low,  50  ;  l)y  Clif- 
ton, 50  ;  translation  of,  with  argument, 
223-56;  the  work  founded  on  the  Coan 
Prenotions,  22  et  seq. ;  nature  of  the 
Hippocratic  treatise  on,  231-4. 

Prorrhetics,  character  of  the  first  book 
of,  64;  of  the  second  book  of,  67; 
abstract  of  the  latter,  257-70. 

Proteus,  the  ancient  fable  of,  applied  to 
the  First  flatter,  by  Eustathius  and 
Lord  Bacox,  149. 

Ptisan,  on  the  preparation  of,  and  its  uses 
in  medicine,  285-9. 

Publication  of  works,  ancient  mode  of, 
as  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  Horace, 
Martial,  Cicero,  Plato,  Aristotle, 
and  Hippocrates,  24,  25. 

Pulse,  or  Legumina,  their  characters  in 
dietetics,  328. 

Pulse,  the  arterial,  not  attended  to  by 
Hippocrates,  351;  first  studied  by 
Herophilus,  351. 

Pulleys  first  used  in  reducing  fractures,  by 
Pare,  570. 

Purgative  medicines,  the  Hippocratic 
treatise  well  written,  tho\igh  probably 
not  genuine,  126  ;  obsenations  on  the 
ancient  mode  of  prescribing,  290; 
their  debilitating  eftccts,  711,  712  ;  to 
be  avoided  in  hot  weather,  723. 
Piirgings,  general  directions  regarding, 
722,^726  ;  rules  for  the  application  of, 
332,  637,  704,  723  ;  effects  of,  in  preg- 
nancv,  722  ;  induce  thirst,  726. 


Pythagoreans,  their  opinions  with  regard 
to  the  elements,  132-4. 

QuAiN,  Mr.  UiciiARD,  agrees  with  IIii'- 
pocrates  as  to  the  usual  situation  of 
the  head  of  the  femur  in  the  fourth 
form  of  dislocation  at  the  hip-j(jiut, 
559  ;  interesting  case  of  this  accident 
related  by,  625. 

Quartans  supposed  to  free  the  system 
from  the  disposition  to  other  diseases, 
751. 

QuESNAY,  opinions  of,  on  the  contre- 
coup,  451. 

Quinsy,  on  the  formation  and  treatment 
of,  316,  317  ;  cured  by  the  occurrence 
of  internal  swelling,  758,  769. 

Quintan  intermittents,  remarks  on,  369. 

Rales  in  the  chest  described  by  Hippo- 
crates, 91,  103,  325. 

Regimen,  eft'ects  of  changes  in,  327  ; 
departures  from,  dangerous,  327  ;  the 
three  Books  on,  probably  not  gemiine, 
79  ;  nature  of  their  contents,  80,  81 ; 
the  treatise  On  Regimen  in  Acute 
Diseases  generally  admitted  to  l)e  ge- 
nuine, 552 ;  Galen's  strictures  on 
the  system  of  treatment  there  laid 
down,  275. 

Remittent  fevers,  remarks  of  modern 
authorities  on,  362.  See  further  under 
Causes. 

Research,  importance  of  to  professional 
men,  563. 

Resection  of  bones,  observations  on,  564  ; 
practice  of  Hippocrates  and  certain 
modern  authorities,  638,  639. 

Revulsion,  Hippocrates  the  establisher 
of  this  therapeutical  rule  of  practice, 
20,  62. 

RuFFUs  Ephesius,  important  fragment 
of,  published  by  Mai,  382,  383. 

Sabinus,  the  Commentator,  an  absurd 
opinion  of  his  on  a  passage  of  Hippo- 
crates, 390. 

Sacred  disease,  Hippocratic  treatise  on 
the,  probably  genuine,  70,  71 ;  argu- 
ment to,  833,  842;  translation  of,  843, 
to  the  end. 

Satyriasmus,  account  of,  720. 

Sauromatai  or  Sarmata;,  a  description  of 
the,  211. 

Saws,  used  in  trepanning  the  head, 
465. 

Scaliger,  on  the  Oneirocritica  of  the 
ancients,  84 ;  further  referred  to, 
423. 

Scamnum  Hippocratis,  referred  to,  559  ; 
minutely  described,  644.    Sec  Plates. 


870 


INDEX. 


ScHULZE  probably  influenced  by  the  pre- 
jiulices  of  his  age  in  tracing  the  origin 
of  medicine  to  tlie  East,  3  ;  in  judging 
of  the  authenticity  of  tlie  Hip])ocratic 
treatises  generally,  follows  Mercu- 
RiALi  and  Lk  Clerc,  35 ;  his  list  of 
the  Asclepia,  5. 

Scoliosis,  usage  of  the  term  by  Hippo- 
crates, G08. 

Scurvv,  descriptions  of,  bv  ancient  au- 
thors, 19G,  207. 

Scythians,  a  description  of  their  charac- 
ters, 212-18. 

Seasons,  their  influence  on  the  health, 
715,  720. 

Selvages  of  cloth,  used  in  the  treatment 
of  fractures,  482. 

Semeiology,  the  prognostics  a  branch  of, 
232, 

Semi-tertian  fever,  description  of,  by 
Hippocrates,  358. 

Semen,  the  Hi])ii()cratic  treatise  on  the, 
not  genuine,  109;  Aristotle's  theory 
on  the,  110;  generally  held  by  the 
ancients  to  be  the  first  germ  of  the 
fcctus,  208. 

Scptics,  on  the  treatment  of  hemorrhoids 
by,  830. 

Sewers,  t  lie  want  of,  in  ancient  times  aggra- 
vated i)estilential  diseases,  13;  pul)lic, 
first  constructed  by  tlie  Romans,  13. 

Silphium,  when  unseasonably  adminis- 
tered apt  to  ])roduce  Dry  Cholera,  329. 

Slavery,  the  debasing  effects  of,  described 
by  LoxGiNus,  183. 

Sleep,  prognosis  founded  on,  in  diseases, 
242;  ajihovisms  founded  on,  705. 

Smegma,  a  detergent  application,  304. 

Smith,  Dr.  R.  \V.,  his  important  observa- 
tions on  congenital  dislocations,  581, 
591. 

Sneezing,  how  it  arises,  7()0. 

Socrates,  on  his  character  as  a  philo- 
so))hcr,  19,  811;  holds  that  courage  is 
identical  with  knowledge,  185. 

Somnandndism,  described  by  Hippo- 
crates, 843. 

SoRANis,  his  biography  of  Hippo- 
crates, 9. 

Soranus,  the  Methodist,  his  strictures 
on  the  llippocratic  treatise  on  Regitnen 
in  Acute  Diseases,  311. 

Spasm  or  Convulsion,  the  dangers  of,  in 
various  conditions  and  circumstances, 

^  o  ," 
/O/. 

Spatuhi,  on  the  ancient,  598. 
Specillnm,   the   ancient,  resembled   the 

modern  probe,  406. 
Sphacelus  of  the  Brain,  on  the  nature  of, 

06,  204  ;  prognostics  in,  709. 


Spleen,  on  enlargement  of  the,  760. 

Splints,  use  of,  in  the  treatment  of  frac- 
tures, 482;  disquisition  on  the  nature 
of  those  used  by  the  ancients,  513,  514. 

Sprengel,  Kurt,  unfair  to  ScHULZE,in 
not  acknowledging  his  obligation  to 
him,  5  ;  his  merits  as  an  authority  on 
the  Ilijipocratie  treatises,  37  ;  further 
referred  to,  225  et  pluries;  Coxrad, 
his  translation  of  the  Aphorisms  of 
Hippocrates  noticed,  53. 

Spring  reckoned  a  fatal  season  to  con- 
sumptive patients,  407 ;  the  proper 
season  for  bleeding  and  purging,  700, 
770;  diseases  peculiar  to,  719. 

Sputa,  characters  of  the,  in  prognostics, 
245,  200,  772. 

Stoics,  their  doctrines  on  the  elements, 
141-3. 

Stone  or  Calculus,  observations  by  Hip- 
pocrates on  the  formation  of,  200- 
202  ;  comparative  immunity  of  females 
from,  202. 

Strangury,  how  to  be  cured,  709. 

Structures  or  Structural  arrangements, 
their  efi'ects  on  diseases,  176.  Sec 
Organic. 

Sty])tic,  how  prepared,  333. 

Sul)luxations  at  the  knee,  account  of, 
545 ;  of  the  lower  jaw,  593. 

Snccussion  on  a  ladder,  description  of 
the  process,  006. 

S If  11)  AS,  his  biograi)hy  of  Hippocrates, 9. 

Sununer,  diseases  most  i)revalent  in,  720, 

Sujierftetation,  the  llippocratic  treatise 
on,  not  genuine,  114,  115. 

Superventions,  explanation  of  the  term, 
094. 

Surgery,  authenticity  of  the  treatise  on, 
59,  00  ;  argument  to  the  work,  469-74  ; 
translation  of,  471;  the  subjects  con- 
nected with, defined, 4 74.   See latrium. 

Sutures  of  the  skull,  description  of,  by 
Aristotle,  424  ;  by  Celsus,  424  ;  by 
Pliny,  424  ;  by  Ruffus  Ephesius, 
425  ;  by  Galen,  425  ;  great  ditTcrcnce 
of  opinion  respecting  tlie  description 
of  thein  given  by  Hippocrates,  424, 
427  ;  conjectural  opinion  of  the  Editor 
on  this  su])ject,  428,  429. 

Sweats,  prognosis  founded  on,  239,  730; 
further  defined,  705,  774. 

Swelling  on  the  feet,  how  to  be  treated,  808. 

Sydenham,  the  great  modern  authority 
on  epidemics,  339  ;  how  he  proceeded 
ill  the  treatment  of  epidemics,  345  ; 
further  referred  to  on  this  subject,  256  ; 
his  fondness  for  the  administration  of 
ptisans,  281. 

Syrmiiism,  descriiif  ion  of  the  process,  602, 


INDEX. 


871 


Tabes  dorsalis,  account  of,  7G,  92. 

Tagault,  his  treatment  of  gangrenous 
soi'es,  793  ;  his  opinions  with  regai'd  to 
misij  and  chalcitis,  805. 

Tents,  on  the  treatment  of  tistulae  by,  817. 

Tetanus,  on  the  treatment  of,  326  ;  prog- 
nosis in,  738. 

Thermal  waters,  account  of,  197. 

Thirst,  how  to  be  managed,  7-12. 

Thread,  on  the  treatment  of  tistulae  by, 
819  et  seq.     See  Apolinose. 

Thucydides,  remarks  on  his  description 
of  the  Plague  of  Athens,  12,  128,384, 
401 ;  the  characters  of  his  style,  ac- 
cording to  DioNYSius  of  Halicarnas- 
sus,  22. 

Thyniia  or  AYarts  about  the  genital  or- 
gans, 802. 

Trallian,  his  rule  for  the  administra- 
tion of  wine  in  fevers,  309. 

Treatment,  why  generally  omitted  in  the 
reports  of  Cases  contained  in  the  Books 
of  Epidemics,  344,  345. 

Trepanning,  description  of  the  ancient 
mode  of  performing,  442 ;  not  usually 
performed  at  the  sutures,  either  by  the 
ancient  or  modern  authorities  on  sm-- 
gery,  450 ;  a  mode  of  performing  it 
peculiar  to  Hippocrates,  465  ;  prac- 
tised on  the  preventive  principle  by 
Dr.  Laurie,  in  fractures  attended  with 
depression,  434  ;  practised  by  Hippo- 
crates in  cases  attended  with  extra- 
vasation of  blood,  436,  463. 

Trephine,  used  bv  the  ancient  surgeons, 
443,  465. 

Trichiasis,  operation  for  the  cure  of,  333, 
334. 

TzETZES,  his  biography  of  Hippocrates, 
9 ;  his  mvthical  genealogv  of  the  same, 
23. 

Trochlea  of  the  Humerus.  See  Abruption. 

Tubercles,  in  the  urethra,  how  removed, 
770 ;  how  to  judge  whether  they  be  of 
a  local  or  general  nature,  707. 

TwEEDiE,  Dr.,  his  opinions  on  the  ad- 
ministration of  wine  in  fevers  consi- 
dered, 308,  309. 


Ulceration  of  the  throat,  prognosis  found- 
ed upon,  253  ;  of  the  womb,  prognosis 
founded  upon,  265. 

Ulcers,  genuineness  of  the  treatise  bear- 
ing this  title,  67,  68 ;  argument  to  the 
treatise  on,  789  ;  translation  of  the 
treatise,  794  ;  circular,  why  difficult  to 
heal,  797 ;  gangrenous,  how  treated 
by  Tagault,  739  ;  prognosis  founded 
upon,  262. 


Urine,  ancient  doctrines  respecting,  un- 
justly disregarded,  98 ;  |)rognosis  found- 
ed upon,  244,  259  ;  important  observa- 
tion upon,  in  febrile  diseases,  320, 
364  ;  interesting  case  illustrative  of  its 
characters,  379;  seiUnieiits  in,  766; 
albuminous  or  frothy,  766;  comparison 
of  healthy  with  unhealthy,  772 ;  ge- 
neral characters  of,  in  diseases,  735, 
736 ;  further  remarks  on,  404,  405, 
413,  416,  735,  736;  its  ciiaracters  in 
cases  of  delirium,  417  ;  in  other  acute 
diseases,  734. 

Uterine  hemorrhage,  excellent  treatment 
of,  78,  112. 

Uterus,  dropsy  of,  196,  197;  fumigation 
of  the,  in  amenorrhoea  and  other  dis- 
eases, 111,  742. 


Varices,  why  held  by  Hippocrates  a 
natural  cure  of  curvature  of  the  spine, 
603  ;  treatment  of,  by  puncture,  792, 
808. 

Variola,  not  described  by  the  Greek  au- 
thorities, as  has  been  supposed,  385. 

Veins,  the  Hippocratic  treatise  on  the, 
probablvan  excerpt  from  another  work, 
120. 

Venesection,  rules  for,  in  acute  diseases, 
315  ;  Galen's  opinions  as  to  the  cause 
why  no  mention  is  made  of  its  having 
been  performed  in  most  of  the  Cases 
of  Epidemics  related  by  Hippocrates, 
388,  395  ;  remarks  on  the  performance 
of  the  operation,  809 ;  cures  dysuria, 
755. 

Verduc,  his  translation  of  a  passage  of 
Hippocrates,  479  ;  further  cited,  480, 
485,  517  et  pluries. 

Vertebrje,  minute  description  of,  607, 
608 ;  the  great  vertebra  meaning  the 

vertebra  dentata,  604, meaning 

the  tifth  lumbar,  608, the  seventh 

cervical,  609 ;  on  curvature  and  dis- 
placement of,  603  et  seq. 

Vesalius,  his  remarks  with  regard  to 
the  sutures  of  the  skull,  424  ;  further 
reference  to,  427. 

ViDUS  ViDius,  his  opinion  with  regard 
to  the  treatise  on  Ulcers,  68 ;  further 
quoted,  69  et  pluries ;  his  definition  of 
the  hedra,  448  ;  on  the  treatment  of 
wounds,  796. 

Vision,  on  the,  Hippocratic  treatise  with 
this  title  not  genuine,  124. 

Voice,  impairment  of  the, in  phthisis,  402. 

Vomitings,  prognosis  founded  upon,  245  ; 
rules  respecting  the  remedial  use  of, 
723,  724. 


872 


INDEX. 


Water,  ancient  opinions  on  the  nature  of, 
144  ;  on  the  administration  of,  in  acute 
diseases,  302 ;  hot  and  cold,  the  uses 
of,  107,  108  ;  in  surgical  practice,  452. 

Waters,  characters  of  thediiferent  kinds  of, 
195-202;  characters  of  Thermal,  197. 

Watson,  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  misrepre- 
sents the  ancient  doctrines  on  the  ele- 
ments, 1.^1. 

Wax  or  Cerate,  use  of,  in  tlie  ancient 
method  of  treatinsr  fractures,  482, 511. 

Weasel-armed  or  Weasel-elhowod  per- 
sons, 581,  (■>()4.     See  Dislocations. 

Wenzicls,  their  opinions  regarding  tlic 
nature  of  the  ])iUiitan-  gland,  844. 

Winds,  their  different  effects  on  the 
liealth,  716;  figure  of  tlie  Creek,  as 
given  l)y  Coray,  ISO. 

Wine, on  the  administration  of, in  f(>vers, 
298,2!)9;  important  rules  on  this  head 
hy  IlirrocRATKs  and  l)y  a  modern 
authority.  Dr.  Stokks,  ;?0!>;  directions 
to  the  same  effect  l)y  Dr.  Twkkhik, 
."iOH,  30!) ;  hy  TiiAi.LiAN  in  jihrcnilis, 
.'50'.) ;  used  as  a  dressing  to  ulcers,  79  t. 


Women,  on  tlie  Diseases  of,  analysis  of 
this  llippocratic  treatise,  110-113;  on 
Sterile,  tliis  llippocratic  treatise  re- 
viewed, 113;  on  the  Complaints  of 
Yoiuig,  this  llippocratic  treatise  re- 
viewed, 113,  114  ;  how  to  judge  whe- 
ther or  not  they  are  pregnant,  264. 

Wounds  of  imjiortant  parts,  prognosis 
founded  on,  262  ;  of  certain  organs 
mortal,  755. 


Xknophon,  cited  in  reference  to  Cte- 
siAS,  15;  further  fpiotcd  regarding 
medical  authors,  48  ;  quoted  in  refer- 
ence lo  an  opinion  of  Socratks,  181 


Zkxo,  tlie  Elcatic  (mis]U'inted  Eclectic), 
different  from  Zeno  the  Stoic,  111. 

ZuiNOKR,  hiso])iiiion  regarding  the  trea- 
ti^e  on  the  J. aw,  783,  781;  Airllier 
(pioted,  101  ct  pluries. 


I'm:  rM). 


riilNTICI)  nv  C.  AND  J.  AIM.AIill 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES  TO  VOL.  IL 


PLATE  IV. 

Fig.  1.   The  Scamnum  Hippocratis,  or  Beucli  of  Hippocrates, 
as     represented     by     Andreas   a  Cruce       {Officina 
Chirurgica.  Venetiis,  1596). 
2.  The  same,  as  represented  by  M.  Littre, 

A.  A  board,   0   cubits  long,    2    broad,  and    12   inches 

thick  j   not  13,  as  incorrectly  stated  by  M.  Littre. 

B.  The  feet  of  tlie  Axles,  which  are  short, 
cc.  Axle-trees. 

DD.    Grooves  three  inches  deep,  three  In'oad,  separated 
from  one  another  hy  four  inches. 

E.  A  small  post,  or  pillar,    fastened   in   the   middle  of 

the  machine  in  a  quadrangular  hole. 

F.  Pillars  a  foot  long. 

G.  A  cross-beam  laid  on  the  pillars   ff,   which  can  be 

placed  at  difiFerent  heights  by  means  of  holes  in 
the  pillars. 

PLATE  V. 

Fig.  1.  Representation  of  the  mode  of  reducing  dislocation  of 
the  thigh  outwards,  as  given  by  M.  Littre.  {Qiuv. 
d'Hipp.,  tom.  iv,  p.  305.) 

A  mistake  in  the  figure  given  by  M.  Little  is  here  corrected.      It  applies  to 
Articulations,  §  74. 

A.  A  lever  applied  to  the   nates   of  the  luxated   side, 

and    acting   from    without  inwards,   in    order  to 
bring;  the  head  of  the  bone  into  its  cavitv. 

B.  Another  lever,  held  by  an  assistant,  put  into  one  of 

the  gi'oovcs  of  the  machine,  and  intended  to  act 
against  lever  a. 

§ 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES  TO  VOL.  IL 

c.   Groove  in  which  the  end   of  the  lever  a  takes  its 

point  of  support. 
D.   The  hixated  member. 
EE.  Extension  and  counter-extension. 
2.   Representation  of  the  ancient  mode  of  performing  suc- 
cussion,   as  given  by  Yidus  Vidius  in  the  Venetian 
edition  of  Galen's  works.  (CI.  vi,  p.  271.) 

It  applies  to  Articulations,  §  43. 

PLATE  YI. 

Fig.  1.  The  Circular  Band,   named   Rotunda   sincera  aqualis. 
From  the  Yenetian  edition  of  Galen,  (vi,  p.  205.) 
2  and  3.   The  form  of  bandage  named  Ascia  sincera   in- 

ccquuVis.      {Ibid.  p.  20G.) 
!•  and  5.  The  form  of  bandage  named  Sima  sincera  in- 
cequalis.      [Ibid.) 
These  bandages  relate  to  the  work,  On  the  Surgery. 

PLATE  YIL 

Fig.  1.   The  bandage  named  Monoculus. 

2.  The  bandage  named  Rhomhus. 

3.  The  bandage  named  Se/nirhombus. 

These  figures  apply  to  the  work,  On  the  Surgery. 

PLATE  YIIL 

Fig.  L   Elastic  rods  used   as  splints   in   fracture   of  tlie  leg. 
Figure  as  given  by  Littrc.    {(Euv.  d'Hij/pocrat.,  iii, 
p.  519.) 
2.   The  same,   as  given  by  Yidus  A'idius  in  the  Yenetian 

edition  of  Galen. 
These  two  figures  apply  to  the  description  given  in  ^  30  of  Fractures. 

3  and  4.  Apparatus  for  the  cure  of  Club-foot,  as  given  by 
Arca^us.  (Sec  p.  5G0  of  this  work.)  The  Boot, 
probably,  was  used  in  lieu  of  the  Chiaii  sandals  of 
Hippocrates,  p.  634. 


PLATE    IV. 


%%^>^P&^ 


:t 


A 


<■-- 


2- Cub  its 


PLATE    V. 


P  LATE    VI, 


PLATE    VII. 


PLATE    VI  I  I. 


o 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


R 
126 

1849 
V.2 

Biological 


Hippocrates 

The  genuine  works  of 
Hippocrates
