---
title: Th. Stcherbatsky, The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana (Leningrad, 1927) — with a translation of Nāgārjuna's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, chapters I and XXV, and Candrakīrti's commentary
collection: 11-multi-language/translations-en
source: archive.org item Th.Stcherbatsky1927TheConceptionOfBuddhistNirvanaCANDRAKIRTIPRASNNAPADAMADHYAMAKAVRTTICHAPTERIXXV — machine OCR of the printed book (OCR errors kept)
source_url: https://archive.org/details/Th.Stcherbatsky1927TheConceptionOfBuddhistNirvanaCANDRAKIRTIPRASNNAPADAMADHYAMAKAVRTTICHAPTERIXXV
format: English (machine OCR)
license: public domain (published 1927)
translator: Theodore Stcherbatsky
translation_of: 11-multi-language/sanskrit-originals/nagarjuna-mulamadhyamakakarika.txt
date: 1927
---
THE CONCEPTION 

OF 

BUDDHIST NIRVANA 


BY 

Th.^TCHEKBATSKY, Ph. d. 


PROFESSOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LENINGRAD, MEMBER OF THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES 
OF THE USSR 


Suedasien Institut HO 



PUBLISHING OFFICE OF THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE USSR 

LENINGRAD 1927 




Sudosien-lnsfitut 

der University Heidelberg 

<nv*nt« r |,j tf ( un t»r (JO j' 


i 


Published by order of the Academy of Scieaces of the USSR 
March 1927 


Permanent Secretary S. d’Oldenburg. 


j 


Begun in April 1926 — Printed in April 1927 

Tht. jihct. VI -+- 246 CTp. 

JleHHHrpaACKHfi PyfijiHT AT? 19096 — 158/4 neu. j. — Tnpaat 850 
H3AaTeju»CTB0 AKa^eMBH Hayn CCCP 
Pocy*apcTBeHHafl AKaxeMHMecKaa Tmiorpa^Hfl. 9 jihhhh 1?. 

-Hi J l K. Mf 


PEEFAOE. 

• The incentive to this work was given by Sir D. Ross, Director of the 
School of Oriental Studies in London, when I was asked by him to contribute for 
the Bulletin of the School a review of Professor L. de la Vallde Poussin’s book 
upon Nirvana. While considering some of the points there discussed I was led 
to reconsider the position of the Sautrantika School and its supposed «denial» of 
Nirvana. This school then disclosed itself as an intermediate step between Hina- 
yana and Mahayana, and its attitude could not be understood without clearly 
realizing the Central Conception of the latter. I have thus been further induced 
to elicit the Mahayana Conception of a Buddha and his Nirvana. The contrast 
between Hinayana and Mahayana then appeared as an occasional confirmation of 
the views and explanations of technical terms contained in my «Central Conception 
of Buddhism» (published by the Royal Asiatic Society, London 1924). The present 
work can be regarded as a sister volume to it and could have also born the title 
of «The Central Conception of Mahayana». 

I have appended a translation of the principal parts of those works of 
Nagarjuna and Candraklrti which are the foundation stone of Mahayana. 

In the process of this my work I derived great help from many valuable 
suggestions of my friend Prof. M. Tubiansky to whom I here express my grati¬ 
tude. The preparation of the Indexes of proper names and Sanscrit words is due 
to the selfdenying industry of Miss Alexandra Schneider to whom my deepest 
thanks are due. 

In the reading of proofs I have been assisted by my aged mother. Since an 
Englishman has become a rara avis in this country, we both are alone responsible 
for all the imperfections of english style that may be found in this book. 

In the transliteration of Sanscrit words I have abstained from the use of 
diacritics for guttural n since its value is always clear without it. 



PAGE 


CONTENTS. 

Pkeface.... I 

I. Preliminary. 1 

II. Buddhism and Yoga. 2 

III. Mystic intuition (yogi-prat yaks a). 16 

IY. Buddha’s belief in personal immortality. 20 

Y. Was Buddha an agnostic?. 21 

VI. The position of the later schools of the H in ay an a ... 23 

VII. The double character of the absolute. 26 

VIII. The Vaibhasikas. 27 

IX. The Sautrantikas. 29 

X. The Yogacaras. 81 

XI. The Madhyamikas. 35 

XII. The doctrine of causality in Hinayana. 39 

XIII. This doctrine modified in Mahayana. 40 

XIV. The doctrine of Relativity. 42 

XV. The real eternal Buddha cognized in mystic intuition . . 44 

XVI. The new conception of Nirvana. 45 

XVII. Is Relativity itself relative? Condemnation of all logic 

FOR THE COGNITION OF THE ABSOLUTE . 49 

XVIII. Parallel developments in Buddhism and Brahmanism ... 50 

XIX. European parallels .. 51 

XX. The position of Nyaya-Vaisesika. 54 

XXI. Conclusion. 60 

Appendix I. 63 

A TREATISE ON RELATIVITY 
* (Madhyamika-sastra) 

BY NaGARJUNA 

Chapters I and XXV. 

Prefatory. 65 

Dedication. 69 

























IV 


Examination of Causality. 71 

Chapter XXV. 

Examination of Nirvana. 74 

Appendix IV. 79 


THE CLEARWORDED 

(Prasannapada) 

A COMMENT 
UPON 

Nagarjuna’s Treatise on Relativity 
(Madhyamika-vrtti) 

BY 

OandrakTrti. 

Dedication.'. 82 

Chapter I. 

Examination of Causality 


L Preliminary. 83 

II. The meaning of Pratitya-samutpada according to the 

AUTHOR . 85 

III. The meaning of this term in Hinayana .. 86 

IV. The Hinayanist interpretation rejected.. 86 

V. The opinion of Bhavaviveka. 87 

VI. Bhavaviveka’s criticism of Buddhapalita’s comment . . 88 

VII. The definition of the term by Bhavaviveka. 89 

VIII. The principle of Relativity the Law of all pluralistic 

EXISTENCE.*. 90 

IX. Causality denied . 92 

X. Identity of cause and effect denied :. 93 

XI. Bhavaviveka assails the comment of Buddhapalita ... 94 

XII. The first objection of Bhavaviveka answered. 94 

XIII. The second point of Bhavaviveka, viz. that the answer of 

THE SANKHYA IS LEFT UNNOTICED BY BUDDHAPALITA, REJECTED. 96 

XIV. The Madhyamika method explained . 98 


v 


PAGE 


XV. Buddhapalita’s comment vindicated from the standpoint of 

FORMAL LOGIC. 98 

XVI. The answer of the Sankhya virtually repudiated by 

Buddhapalita. 101 

XVII. Some minor points explained. 103 

XVIII. The third stricture of Bhavaviveka answered. The denial 

OF one view does not imply the acceptance of the con- 103 

TRARY ... . 

XIX. Examination of Bhavaviveka’s formal argument against 

the Sankhya. 105 

XX. Bhavaviveka’s argument assailed from the standpoint of 

formal logic. 107 

XXI. Anotner attempt of Bhavaviveka to vindicate his argu¬ 

ment . 109 

XXII. Bhavaviveka also avails himself of the argument that 

FOR THE MoNIST ALL INDIVIDUAL EXISTENCE IS UNREAL ... 112 

XXIII. Another formal error in the syllogism of Bhavaviveka. 116 

XXIV. The Madhyamika repudiates his opponent on principles 

admitted as valid by the same opponent. 117 

XXV. Logical refutation on the basis of facts admitted by only 

ONE PARTY.:. 118 

XXVI. Denial of Causality through a separate substance . . . 120 

XXVII. Combined causality denied. 121 

XXVIII. No pluralistic universe without causation. 121 

XXIX. Causality through the will of God. 122 

XXX. Mahayana and Hinayana contrasted. 123 

XXXI. The direct and indirect meaning of Buddha’s words . . 126 

XXXII. How is the moral law to be vindicated in an unreal 

WORLD?. 127 

XXXIII. The twelve membered causal series refers to the pheno¬ 
menal WORLD. 134 

XXXIV. Controversy about the validity of logic. 135 

XXXV. Controversy with the Buddhist logician continued . . . 140 

XXXVI. Critique of the notion of an absolute particular point- 

instant . 142 

XXXVII. Introspection. 145 

XXXVIII. The discussion about the point-instant resumed. 146 

XX XIX. Is THERE A COGNIZER?. 148 

XL. Vindication of Phenomenal Reality. 149 

XLI. The definition of sense-perception. 156 

XXII. The Hinayana theory of Causation, examined. 164 









































VI 


PA OK 


XL1II. The existence of separate energies denied . 167 

XL1V. Causation is not coordination. 170 

XLY. The cause-condition. 171 

XLVI. The object a condition of mental phenomena. 173 

XLVII. The causa materialis denied. 174 

XLVIII. The special cause also denied. 176 


Chapter XXV. 


Examination of Nirvana 

I. The Hinayanistic Nirvana rejected. 183 

II. The Mahayanistic Nirvana, what?. 186 

III. Nirvana not an Ens. 

IV. Nirvana is not a non-Ens. 193 

V. Nirvana is this world viewed sub specie aeternitatis . 195 

VI. Nirvana is not both Ens and non-Ens together. 198 

VII. Nor is Nirvana a negation of both Ens and non-Ens 

TOGETHER. 201 

VIII. The real Buddha, what? . .'. 203 

IX. Ultimate identity of the Phenomenal and the Absolute . 205 

X. The Antinomies. 205 

XI. Conclusion. 208 

Indices. 

1. Index of Proper Names. 213 

2. Index of Sanscrit works. 215 

3. Index of Sanscrit Words. 216 

4. Index of Tibetan Words . 226 

5. Index of Mongolian Words . 226 

6. Index of Subjects . 226 

7. Index of Technical Terms. 233 


The Coneeption of Buddhist Nirvana. 

I. Preliminary 

A LTHOUGH a hundred years have elapsed since the scientific study of 
Buddhism has been initiated in Europe, we are nevertheless still in 
the dark about the fundamental teachings of this religion and its phi¬ 
losophy. Certainly no other religion lias proved so refractory to clear 
formulation. We are confronted with an intricate terminology about 
whose meaning a variety of interpretation is current and which is often 
declared to be untranslatable or incomprehensible. In despair some scholars 
were led to the conclusion that a religion or a philosophical system in India 
is not what it is in Europe, it is not a clear cut construction of consistent 
speculation. It is always vaguely indefinite, a display of dreamy thoughts about 
whose meaning ;heir authors themselves are not quite sure. 1 In a recent 
work M. de la Vallee Poussin 2 has undertaken to reconsider the question 
about the meaning of the Buddhist ideal of Nirvana, and he warns us from 
the outset that we have not to expect something very illuminating from 
Indian sources. 3 Formerly, he confesses, the idea of Nirvana seemed 
to him vague enough, but recently he has completely changed his opinion 
upon this subject, and thinks that even the hazy speculations which he was 
trying to disentangle are but later additions, that at the beginning Nirvana 

1 The late professor G. Biihler gathered from a long intercourse with Indian pandits in 
their own country a quite different impression. He used to repeat to his pupils when perplexed 
by some difficult texts, «was ein Brahmane gemacht hat, das muss heraus!», for very often it is 
something simple and clear, but expressed in a technical scientific terminology. 

2 Etudes sur l’histoire des Religions, 5. Nirvana par Louis de la Vallee Poussin, 
Paris, 1925. 

3 Op. cit., p. XI—XII. 
























2 


NIRVANA 


meant a simple faith in Soul’s immortality, its blissful survival in a para¬ 
dise, a faith emerging from practices of obscure magic. 

In the following pages we will try to test the arguments by which 
this new interpretation is supported, and append some considerations about 
the vicissitudes of this Buddhist conception of the Absolute and the changes 
which, in our opinion, it underwent during the first thousand years of its 
history. 

II. Buddhism and Yoga 

In the VI -Y century B. C., at the time immediately preceding the 
rise of Buddhism, India was seething with philosophic speculation. A great 
variety of views and systems were springing up and actively propagated 
among the different classes of its population . 1 Materialistic doctrines, deny¬ 
ing every survival of the individual after death and every retribution for 
his moral or immoral deeds were widely spread. The orthodox brahmanical 
community was also divided. A part of it stuck to the old sacrificial religion 
which promised to its votaries the reward of a blissfull existence in a celes¬ 
tial paradise. Another part of it favoured, from an early date, a monistic 
view of the universe, and interpreted the reward of supreme bliss as the 
dissolution of the personality in an impersonal all-embracing Absolute. Later 
on some brahmanical circles developed the idea of an eternal individual 
Soul 2 which after having been bound up in many existences would return 
to its genuine condition of a pure spirit as a reward for accumulated 
merit. 

Between the Materialists who denied retribution and the Eternalists 
who imagined a return to a pure spiritual condition, Buddha took a middle 
course. From the Eternalists he borrowed the doctrine of a gradual accu¬ 
mulation of spiritual merit through a series of progressing existences, but 
he was averse to their doctrine of an eternal spiritual principle. 

As far as we can understand his philosophic position, it seems that he 
was deeply impressed by the contradiction of assuming an eternal, pure, 
spiritual principle which, for incomprehensible reasons, must have been pol¬ 
luted by all the filth of mundane existence in order, later on, to revert to 

1 This period coincides with a period of philosophic activity in China and in Greece, 
cf. P. Masson Oursel, La philosophic compare, p. 56. 

2 Cp. H. Jacobi. Die Ind. Philosophic in Das Licht des Ostens, p. 150 f. 


II. YOGA 


3 


its original purity. He was thus led to a denial of every permanent prin¬ 
ciple. Matter and Mind appeared to him as split in an infinite process of 
evanescent elements ( dharmas ), the only ultimate realities, beside Space 
and Annihilation. The conception of an impersonal world-process was pro¬ 
bably prepared by the idea of an impersonal unique substance of the world, 
as developed in the Upanishads. The analysis of the world into its elements 
of Matter and Mind was probably, to a certain extent, prepared by the 
work of the Sankhya school. The originality of Buddha’s position consisted 
in denying substantiality altogether, and converting the world-process in a 
concerted appearance of discrete evanescent elements. Forsaking the Monism 
of the Upanishads and the Dualism of the Sankhyas, he established a sys¬ 
tem of the most radical Pluralism. That the essence and the starting point 
of Buddhism were speculative appears very clearly, if we give credit to the 
records about the other wandering teachers who were the contemporaries 
of Buddha and often engaged in controversies with him. The questions at 
issue between them were of a speculative nature. Ethical questions, the ex¬ 
planation of retribution, were predominant, but they always were narrowly 
linked together with some system of ontology and some doctrine of a Final 
Release . 1 

If we make an effort wholly to realise the position of a philosopher to 
whom the Universe presented itself as an infinite process of separate ele¬ 
ments of Matter and Mind, appearing and disappearing, without any real 
personalities, nor any permanent substances, and if we bear in mind that 
this philosopher was eagerly seeking for a theoretical basis on which to 
establish morality, we must confess that, for our habits of thought, his 
position was not an easy one. Striving to escape the contradictions of Eter- 
nality, of Monism and of Materialism he was landed in what, from our stand¬ 
point, was a fresh contradiction, the contradiction of a moral law without a 
personality on whom this law would be binding, and of a Salvation without 
altogether the existence of somebody entitled to reach that goal which we, 
more or less generally, understand under Salvation. 

We will better understand the Solution at which Buddha arrived, if 
we take into account a specific Indian habit of mind, its idea of Quiescence 
as the only real bliss which life can afford. The Buddhist Saint {drya) regards 

1 Cp. the information about the wandering teachers collected by B. C. Law, Historical 
Gleanings, ch. II and III (Calcutta, 1922). 


4 


II. YOGA 


5 


NIRVANA 

the life of the worldling as an unhappy existence of constant turmoil. His 
aim is to escape from the movement of phenomenal life into a state of 
absolute Quiescence, a condition in which all emotion and all concrete 
thought is stopped for ever. The means of attaining this Quiescence is pro¬ 
found meditation (yoga), the technique of which was developed in India at 
a very early date. 

The picture of the universe which suggested itself to the mental eye 
of the Buddha, represented thus an infinite number of separate evanescent 
entities in a state of beginningless commotion, but gradually steering to 
-Quiescence and to an absolute annihilation of all life, when all its elements 
have been, one after another, brought to a standstill. This ideal received a 
multitude of designations among whom the name of Nirvana was the most 
appropriate to express annihilation. The term was probably prebuddhistic 
and was formerly applied to the brahmanical ideal of the dissolution of the 
individual in the universal whole (brahma-nirvana)} 

The rewmrd for a virtuous life and a strict observance of all religious 
duties consisted for the orthodox brahmin in a blissful survival in heaven. 
For the brahmanical Monist it consisted in being merged in the impersonal 
absolute. The Buddhist could promise nothing else thau Quiescence of life 
and its Final Annihilation, a result which, taken by itself, was not very 
remote from what was offered by simple materialism. The latter promised 
annihilation after every life. Buddha promised likewise annihilation but 
after a long series of efforts in virtue and concentrated meditation. This 
result could not but strike as strange, not European scholars alone. Although 
the denial of a Soul as a separate substance is quite familiar to them, but 
they were not prepared to find it clearly stated at so early a date, in so re¬ 
mote a country and not in a system of skepticism, but in a religion. Nume¬ 
rous were also the Indian voices which protested against such radical denial 
of personal identity. 

In the Buddhist community itself it provoked opposition which 
grew ever stronger and resulted, 500 years after tjie demise of the Master, 
in what may be called a quite new religion, reposing on a quite different 
philosophic foundation. 

1 Cp. the information collected by E. Senart in Album Kern, p. 104, and J. Dahl- 
man, in Nirvana (Berlin, 1896) and in Die Samkhya-Philosophie (Berlin, 1902). Senart’a charac¬ 
teristic «un simple equivalent de brahma » is right, as will be seen, in regard of the Mahayanistic 
Nirvana only. 


The apparent contradictions of Early Buddhism have been variously 
explained. It was assumed either that Buddha did not care for speculation 
or that he, like many other founders of religion, was incapable of clear 
logical thinking. We are now presented with an attempt to reconstruct a 
kind of Buddhism which had no speculative tendencies at all and to ascribe 
the philosophic part of it to a later date to which the final constitution of 
the Pali Kanon belongs. 

It is thus assumed that there has been a primitive Buddhism, very 
much different, even, as it would seem, quite contrary, to what later on finds 
its expression in the Pali Kanon. Pessimism, nihilism, Soul-denial, psychology 
without a Soul, annihilation as ultimate end, all these features that mark 
out Buddhism among other religions, Indian as well as non-Indian, did not 
exist. 1 It was the Buddhism of Buddha himself which was so radically diffe¬ 
rent from anything that appeared later, in historical times, as Buddhism. 
The consequence of this hypothesis of a simple creed precedeing historical 
Buddhism, is an attempt to interpret the latter in the light of the former. 

But if all, or almost all, the doctrines contained in our oldest docu¬ 
ments are later inventions, what is it then that Buddha has taught and what 
in the III—II century B. C. — for this is probably the date which is assigned 
to the Pali Kanon in its final form — was superseded by another, invented, 
Buddhism? We have a definite answer. It is Yoga (p. 11). This only partly 
solves the difficulty, because if we are asked what Yoga is, we are told that 
one feels uneasy when asked such a question, «rien de plus malaise !» (ibid.). 
Nevertheless, on the next page, we are informed that Yoga is nothing but 
vulgar magic and thaumaturgy coupled with hypnotic practices. This would 
mean that Buddha was not a follower of some philosophic system in the 
genre of Pataiijali’s where the psychology of trance plays a conspicuous 
part for the solution of definite problems, but that he was an ordinary 
magician who certainly did not think of denying the existence of a Soul, 
or of establishing a psychology without a Soul, or of being a pessimist. Not 
only is it asserted that yoga practices existed in India previously to the 
rise of Buddhism—this, of course, is very probable—but it looks as though the 
author were prepared to maintain that Buddhism itself, the genuine Buddhism 
of Buddha, nay that even the Pali Kanon, contains nothing but obscure 

i Op. cit., pp. 17. 27. 32—34, 46, 52, 115—116, 125, 129, 132 etc. 




6 


NIK VAN A 


II. YOGA 


7 


thaumaturgy. 1 How else could one understand the following very explicit 
deliverances? «The yoga out of which Buddhism was produced had no specu¬ 
lative tendencies)) (p. 53), i. e., it was «a technical routine iu itself quite 
foreign to every moral, religious or philosophic view» (p. 12). 2 It was, iu 
a word, magic and thaumaturgy. «In this condition)), i. e., in the condition 
of a yoga without speculative tendencies, «has the Buddhism of the Hinavana 
remained, beginning from the Mahavagga up to Buddhaghosa, viz. it was 
a yoga almost without any alloy» (p. 53). 3 

Here we beg leave to remark that the case of Indian philosophy would 
really be a desperate one if a conception so familiar in it, so fundamental, 
so thoroughly developed in every possible detail, a conception to which a 
whole system is specially devoted were something vague and undefinable. 

Yoga is defined as concentrated thought ( samadhi ) or fixing the attention 
on a single point ( ekdgrata) and doing it persistently (pariah punah cetasi 
nivesanam). It is synonymous with dhyana and samdpatti which mean the 
same. 4 According to a peculiarity of the Sanscrit language all these 

1 A similar tendency is displayed in another recent book, A. B. Keith, Buddhist Philo¬ 
sophy in India and Ceylon (Oxford, 1923). Buddhism is here represented as a product of a {(bar¬ 
barous age» (p. 26), Buddha as a «magician of a trivial and vulgar kind» (p. 29), Buddhist 
philosophical conceptions as lacking «both system and maturity, a fact historically reflected in 
the Negativism of the Mahay ana» (p. 4). 

2 Similar opinions were emitted by H. Beck, «Der ganze Buddhismus ist durch und 

durch nichts als Yoga», (Buddhismus 2 II, p. 11), Ed. Lehman (Buddhismus, p. 49) N. Soderblom 
(La vie future, p. 397 f.), Fr. Heiler (Die Buddhistische Yersenkung, p. 7 et passim). They are 
all more or less mystics. They imagine to have found in Buddhism something congenial with 
their own emotions. Buddhist mysticism is for them hardly distinguishable from Christian devo- , 

tion, (cp. Heiler, op. cit., p. 51 f., p. 61 f., p. 66). The identification of Buddhism and Yoga by \ 

M. de la Y. P. seems to be inspired by quite different feelings, he therefore converts Buddhism 

into magic or sorcery. f 

3 M. de la Vallee Poussin tries to impress on his readers that he finds himself in I 

agreement with M. E. Sen art, as far as I can see, with but little foundation. The origin of [ 

Buddhism was formerly sought in some kind of Upanisbad ideology or some Sankhya ideas. 

M. Senart has shown (R. H. R., t. 42, p. 345) that the coincidences with the yoga of Patanjali 
are much more numerous and striking. Although this work is now proved (by H. Jacobi, see 
J. A. 0. S., 31, 1 ff.) to be much later than M. Senart assumed and, in some points at least, 
had itself been influenced by Buddhism, nevertheless the coincidences pointed out by M. Senart 
are solid facts which nobody would be likely to deny. They can be now supplemented in that 
sense that yoga ideas have found their way into many other Indian systems as well. Senart’s 
main result (ibid. p. 364) I understand to refer to pre-Buddhistic conditions. 

4 The subtle difference between these terms assumed in Y. S. II. 29 and.HI. 2-4, 11, 
rendered by prof. J. H. Woods as a singleness of intent, contemplation and concentrations, as 
well as the definition of Yoga as a the restriction of the fluctuations of the mind-stuff • ibid. 

I. 2 are a peculiarity of that system. Prof. M. Anesaki and prof. J. Takakusu, ERE 


terms can be used in an objective sense (karma-sadhana ), in an instrumen¬ 
tal sense ( karana-sadhana ) or in a locative sense (adhikarana-sadhana) 1 
Yoga and samadhi thus mean either the concentrated thought itself, as a 
psychical condition, or this same thought, as the method through which the 
condition has been created, or as the place where it has been produced. It 
I is usual to apply in the latter sense, as a designation of the mystic worlds, 

where the denizens are eternally merged in trance, the term samdpatti. It 
is applicable to all the eight planes of mystic existence, of whom the denizens 
are, so to say, born mystics. In this sense the term is contrasted with the 
worlds of gross bodies and carnal desire ( kdma-dhatu ) where the denizens 
possess thoughts non-concentrated, disturbed. This is its more general 
acceptation. In a more special sense it is applicable to the four highest 
planes of existence alone, the immaterial worlds ( arupa-dhatu ). It then is 
contrasted with the four lower mystic worlds which are specially called 
the four dhydnas. The word samadhi has also a general and a special 
sense. It can mean the usual faculty of concentrated attention, or it may 
mean cultivated, developed concentration. It then becomes a mystical power 
which can transfer the meditator into higher worlds and change life alto¬ 
gether. Yoga is usually applied iu the latter kind of connotation, but it 
would not be inconsistent with the spirit of the Sanscrit language to use it 
in all the three sences (yujyate etad iti yog ah, yujyate anena iti yogah , yuj- 
yate tasminn iti yogah). 1 A complaint, if any, can be only about the detailed 
and subtle precision with which this notion is analysed, not about its 
vagueness. For supernatural power the term rddhi is used But, of course, 
when concentration is supposed to produce supernatural mystic powers, 
then, by a metaphore, the former may be mentioned instead of the latter. 

s. v. dhyana, assume that samadhi is the result, arhatsbip, and dhyana one of the means. But 
that is against Ab. Kosabh. ad VIII. 1, where samapatti-dhyana a concentration)) is distinguished 
from upapatti-dhyana ((existence in a mystic world*. That samadhi has also a general meaning 
is clear from its position among the citta-mahd-bhumikas where it is defined as citta-ekagratd, 
cf. my Central Conception, p. 100. When concentrated meditation here on earth is contrasted 
with a birth in an imagined higher world of eternal trance the terms samdpatti and upapatti 
are respectively used, the first is explained as sama-apatti—shoms-par-hjvg-pa, cf. below the 
opinion of Srilabha , p. 14. 

1 Much of the confusion wrought by the inadequate translation of the term samkara is 
likewise due to a failure of realising its double character, it either means a force, samskriyate 
anena=sar>iskdra=8am-bhuya-kdri, or it means an element, samskriyate etad=samskrta- 
dharma. 



fc NIRVANA 

The context will always iudicate to the advertised reader what is the meaning 
intended. 

Very far from being vulgar magic and thaumaturgy, the Buddhist 
teaching about Yoga contains the following philosophic construction which, 
in my opinion, the historian of philosophy can neither disregard nor fail to 
appreciate. 

Its fundamental idea consists in the fact that concentrated meditation 
induces a condition of Quiescence. The meditative man is the opposite of 
the active man. Life is then dissected in its active elements (samskdras) with 
a view to be one after the other reduced to final quiescence and extinction. 

A personality ( pudgala ), in which other systems imagine the presence 
of a permanent spiritual principle, a Soul ( dtma ), is in reality a bundle of 
elements or forces (samskdra-samuha) and a stream of thought ( santdna ). It 
contains nothing permanent or substantial, it is ancitma. This means that, 
according to the general idea of radical pluralism, the spiritual part of an 
individual consists of separate elements ( dharma ), just as its physical frame 
consists of atoms. 1 Although separate, these elements are linked together 
by causal laws (, hetu-pratyaya ). Some of them always appear simultaneously, 
they are satellites (sahabhu). Or they follow one another in consecutive 
moments, they are then homogeneous (nisyanda-phala). they consti¬ 
tute chains of moments (ksana-santdna). The law of causation is therefore 
called the law of dependently-together-origination (pratltya-sam-utpada ;). 
The number of psychical elements (arupino dharmdli) at every given 
moment of an individual life is variable. It may be very considerable, 
because undeveloped, dormant faculties are also reckoned as actually pre¬ 
sent. This circumstance has even provoked gibes from the side of Sautran- 
tikas in regard to the impossibility of an actual coexistence of so huge a 
quantity of separate elements at a single moment . 2 However some of them 
are constant, always present at every moment, others appear only under 

1 The theory of separate elements (dharmas) is exposed im detail by prof. 0. Rosenberg, 
Problems of Buddhist philosophy (now translated from the Russian into German by his widow 
(Heidelberg 1924), and also by myself in my Central Conception of Buddhism (London 1923, 
R. A. S.). 

2 Yasomitra, ad Ab. Kosa II. 40, computes that, if in the first moment 27 dharmas are 
present, there will be 4S6 elements in the sixth one, and so on, ity ananta-dravya ( praninah ) 
pratisantana-Sarira-ksane bhavanti. If these elements were resistent stuff, says Yasubandhu, 
there would be not enough room for them in the whole universe. 


II. YOGA !) 

certain conditions. Faculties of ten different"kinds 1 are supposed always to 
be present. They are termed the general faculties (citta-malid-bhumika). 
Among them we find the faculty of concentration, samddhi or yoga. They are 
morally indifferent. To them are added either a certain number of faculties 
morally good, or a certain number of faculties morally bad. But not only 
do the elements which combine in one moment vary in number, they 
can vary also in intensity (utkarsa). In a certain individual, at a certain 
time, a certain element may predominate, while in another individual, or at 
another time in the same individual, another element may reach promi¬ 
nence. 2 

Among the constantly present elements there are two exceedingly 
precious ones which, when given the proper opportunity of full develope- 
ment, become predominant and change the character of the individual and 
his moral value altogether. They are the faculty of appreciative analysis 
(prajiid) and the faculty of concentrating our thoughts upon a siugle point 
to the exclusion of all other disturbing considerations and occurrences, it is 
just samddJii or yoga. These elements may be quite undeveloped and insignifi¬ 
cant. Prajud is then called mati, but it is the same faculty. When fully 
developed it becomes transcendent wisdom {prajud amald). Life in ordi¬ 
nary men is controled by ignorance ( avidyd ) which is the reverse of prajud, 
but not its mere absence. It is a separate element which can be and, in 
every ordinary man really is, present at the same time with his dormant 
faculty of wisdom. But it is not a constant faculty, it can be suppressed 
{ptrahina) and thrown out of the mental stream altogether which then be¬ 
comes purified or saintly ( drya ). 

Now, the moral law or moral progress or moral education of man¬ 
kind is conceived as a struggle within the stream {santdna) between the 
good ( kusala ), the noble faculties of man and his bad (akusala) or defiling 
inclinations. Since the elements are ex hypothesi separate and momentary 
they cannot really influence one another. Nevertheless the presence of de¬ 
filing ignorance and other disturbing qualities makes the whole stream im¬ 
pure. All the elements are then impure, even the central element, bare 

1 Cp. the tables appended to my Central conception, p. 100. 

2 We accordingly say «I remember», «I think», «I wisli», but this does not mean that 
at the moment when I wish I do not think, or that in the moment when I remember I do not 
wish. All mind is regarded as consisting at every moment of an assemblage of mental atoms, 
faculties ( samskara) or elements (dharma). 



10 NIRVANA 

consciousness, or pure sensation ( vijhdna ), becomes affected ( klista , sdsrava). 
A special law of causation ( sarvatraga-hetu ) is imagined to account for the 
fact that the elements of the stream are either all of them pure in the 
Saint, or all impure (klista) in the ordinary man. 1 

It is part of the system, it is also a deep belief in all Buddhist coun¬ 
tries, that the noble and sublime faculties will finally, in the long run, 
triumph. The defiling faculties (Mesa) are divided into two classes, so far 
as one class can be remedied by insight, so to say, by reason, and the 
other by concentrated attention only. The first are called drsti-heya , the 
other bhdvand—heya. 2 It is of course a natural, and even a trivial, fact 
that some of our shortcomings and vices can be eradicated by knowledge, 
and others by concentrated attention alone. But the faculty of concen¬ 
tration, if fully develooed, has a greater force. 3 It then becomes a mystic 
power. It can stop life altogether. In the Path of Salvation it is the last 
and most decisive step. It can also transfer the individual into a higher 
plane of existence He is then reborn or transferred into the realm of 
ethereal ( accha , bhdsvaray bodies, into the sphere of purified matter (rupa- 
dhdtu ), or into the still higher regions of pure spirits (arupa-dhdtu). 

Here we forsake the ground of reality and enter into the worlds of 
the mystic. From this point of view r existence is divided into three different 
spheres. The division is in reality dipartite, into the mystic worlds (sama- 
patti) and into the non-mystic ones, i. e. our gross worlds of carnal desire, 
(kama-dhatu). The latter include the hells, earth and the lower heavens, 
where the gods are living and enjoying themselves in a very human way. 
The position which is assigned to the gods in this sphere is very charac¬ 
teristic for the Bhuddist, as well as for the Jaina, religions. These gods are 
not superior beings in a moral sense. For the sake of moral progress and 
salvation the condition of man is preferable. Speaking technically, the gods 
of the kama-dhatu represent assemblages of elements of all the 18 cate¬ 

1 Ab. Kosa, II. 54, 57; IV. 9; V. 12. 

2 Ibid. I. 40. 

3 When samadhi has reached full development it becomes the predominant element in 
that bundle of elements (samskara- samuha) which make up an individual. The single term 
samadhi may then be used for this element together with its satellites, it then becomes synony¬ 
mous with the individual or his 5 skandhas, cp. Ab. Kosabh. ad VIII. 1. The same applies 
to the developed prajha. 

4 Cp. Ab. Kosabh. ad II. 12. 


II. YOGA 11 

gories (dhat-u). Not a single of them is brought to a standstill by yoga. They 
are full of passions and are superior to man by their power, but not by 
their conduct. 1 The mystic worlds are further divided into tw r o classes, 
those in whom the denizens possess ethereal bodies, and those in which 
they have no physical frame. The faculty of concentration (samadhi, yoga) 
has here attained predominance, it has become the central element, the 
others are then satellites. Imagination has built up above the heavens of 
the carnal gods a series of mystic worlds. They correspond exactly to the 
degrees of trance which are gradually reached, or supposed to be reached, 
by the mystic. The purely spiritual realms ( arupa-dhdtu ) are four. Their 
denizens are merged in contemplation (samdpatti) of some unique idea, 
either the idea of the infinity of space, or of the infinity of thought, or of 
the void, or in a dreamy semi-conscious state. Their condition is nearly cata¬ 
lepsy, a state where consciousness is quite arrested. The worlds of ethereal 
bodies are also four in number, exactly corresponding to the initial four 
degrees of trance (dhydna), and are accordingly designated as the worlds of 
the first, the second, the third and the fourth dhydna. 

Whereas our material frame consists of elements of IS kinds, four of them 
are in abeyance in the worlds of ethereal bodies. The sense-data of smell and taste and the 
corresponding two sets of sensations do not exist. It is because these beings 
do not want any hard food, no food which is taken piecemeal, chewed and swal¬ 
lowed. 2 Their nutrition is spiritual. Here imagination evidently is founded upon 
the fact that the mystic, when deeply engaged in meditation, forgets all about his meals. Therefore 
olfactory and gustatory sense-data lose their raison d’etre. They are by the mystic power of 
yoga extinct altogether. But the physical organ, the nose and the tongue remain, because their 
absence would make the body ugly. All bodies are beautiful, none is mutilated. Their faculties of 
sight and auditition are illimited, they possess divya-caksuh and divya-Srotram , 3 Their tactile 
sensations are the same as the characteristic agreeable feeling of bodily ease and lightness 
( prasrabdhi ) which produces levitation in the mystic. Their movements are therefore extremely 
swift and dexterous. But the faculties of smelling and taste are absent altogether, because their 
food is immaterial. They have no need for clothes, 4 they are born with a light ethereal covering 
that lasts all their very long life through. Neither do they want any dwellings. Every new born 
finds a house provided for him by karma, i. e. by nature. The phenomenon of sex is spiritualised. 
The bodies are without the members of physical procreation. This does not make them mutilated. 
Gross sexual passion does not exist at all. But total indifference does neither eist. The feelings 

1 The higher planes of these carnal gods however are morally purer than the lower 
ones, they gradually approach to the still higher moral standard of the worlds of trance, cp. Ab. 
Kosa, III. 70. 

2 Ab. Kosa, I. 30, III. 39. 

3 They have, as a monk in Mongolia expressed himself in a conversation with me, tele¬ 
scopes and telephones. 

4 Ab. Kosa, III. 70. 




12 


NIRVANA 

are delicate. The birth of a new being is quite free from all pain and filtb. The new born child 
does not come out of the matrix of a female, it is apparitional ( upapaduka ). Those who happen to 
be nearest to the place of his birth are his parents. 1 No government, 2 3 of course, is needed in such 
a community, because there are no crimes, no gross passions. Total absence of passion would 
mean total absence of volitions, and this, according to the Indian conception, would stop life 
altogether, it would be Nirvana. But all feelings have a mild form. The feeling of hatred 
( ; protigha ) is totally absent. Other feelings are veiled indifference (nivrio-avyakrta)? 

The imagination of the man who has drawn this picture, whether it be 
Buddha or another, seems to have been guided by the idea that manual 
work is the curse of humanity. Therefore a state is imagined where there is 
no need for it, because food, clothes and homes are naturally provided. 
The other debasing feature of mankind, the gross sexuality of love, is quite 
absent. Thus from the three incentives of human action on earth, wealth, 
love and duty ( artha-kama-dharma ) the last alone continues its unimpeded 
sway in the mystic’s worlds. However there is no absolute equality between 
the denizens. There are lofty and ordinary characters. The quality of being 
a «worldling» ( prthag-jana) can occasionally appear in these regions. At 
least some of the schools are quarrelling about this question. 4 The details 
of this picture have given rise to a great deal of controversy, and even now 
we can come across Buddhist monks who will, with extraordinary vivacity, 
debate some of the moot points. 

The Abhidharma discusses the question, whether in order to possess all 
the supernatural forces existing in the mystic worlds it is a necessary eondi- 
ion to be born in them or whether it is possible to possess them even while living 
here on earth, in the realm of gross bodies. We find the following answer. 5 

«There are beings living here on earth in the realm of gross bodies ( kama-dhatu ), and 
there are others living in the first, second and higher worlds of ethereal bodies ( prathama- 
dhyanadi). They are all possessors of a body, of a faculty of vision and of corresponding visible 

1 Ibid. III. 71. 

2 Ibid. III. 98. 

3 A full account of the Buddhist heavens and their denizens is given in prof. H. Ivirfel, 
Die Kosmographie der Inder (Bonn, 1920), p. 190 ff, but their connection with the degrees of 
absorption in yoga meditation is mentioned only in regard to the 4 samapattis on p. 198. Cp. also 
B. C. Law, Heaven and Hell (Calcutta, 1925). 

4 The Vatsiputrlyas explained the fact that a person having reached in a higher world 
the condition of a Saint (arya) could sometimes nevertheless fall back into ordinary humanity and 
become again a common worldling, by the circumstance that some element of this common 
woTldliness ( prthagjanatva ) was left dormant in him, it had not been quite eradicated at the 
time when he became a Saint, cp. Ab. Kosabh. I. 40, II. 40. 

5 Condensed from Ab. Kosabh. pp. 88. 14—90. 7 (B. B. XX.), cp. M. de la V. P.’s transl. 
pp. 93. ff. 


II. YOGA 


13 


objects. Is it a necessary rule that body, sight and object should all belong to the same plane of 
existence or are such beings possible whose sight and objects are those of another world than 
their body? We answer, that different combinations of each element are possible. 

If a being is born on earth and he contemplates the surrounding objects with his usual 
sense of vision, all the three elements will belong to the same sphere. But if this very man will 
acquire that mystical power of vision which is characteristic of the first world of trance, then 
the combination will change. The body and the surrounding objects will remain the same as 
before, but the faculty of vision and the corresponding sensations will be those which are cha¬ 
racteristic of the first world of trance. If, in addition to that, he will attain a degree of mystic 
concentration where all objects are changed, then the body remaining on earth, his faculty of 
vision, his visual sensations and his external world will all be those of the mystic. . . . This 
being, still remaining in the plane of gross bodies, may acquire the faculty of vision charac¬ 
teristic of the second and higher worlds. Corresponding combinations will then arise which can 
easily be imagined by the analogy of what has been stated. . . . Further, if a denizen of the 
first mystic world contemplates the surrounding objects with his own faculty of vision, then all the 
elements will belong to his own plane of existence. But if he will look down upon the plane of 
existence below him, then his body, his sight ainJJjis sensations will remain his own, though his 
objects will belong to another plane. The denizen of the first mystic world may acquire the 
sight-power characteristic of the second mystic world, and so on. The corresponding combina¬ 
tions may easily be imagined. 

However there is a limitation. The faculty of vision cannot be that of a lower plane 
than the body, (there can be no ethereal bodies with a gross faculty of vision), but there can be 
a gross body with a mystic power of vision. Ordinary men with an ordinary power of vision 
do not perceive the higher worlds, but the denizens of the higher worlds might perceive what 
is going on in the gross worlds, if they care to. The organ of vision, connected with a certain 
body, can appertain either to its own plane of existence, or to a higher one, it can never descend to 
a lower plane. But the visible objects and visual sensations either belong to the same plane as the 
body, or to a lower one, never to a higher one. The same refers to the faculty of audition. As to 
the faculties of touch, smell and taste, they always belong to the same plane of existence as that 
of their body.» 

These speculations help us to understand the Buddhist denial of personal 
identity. The separate elements combining in a personality may even be such 
as normally belong to different planes of existence. Determined by actual obser¬ 
vation these elements, by an effort of imagination, are transferred to a higher 
plane where they continue to combine under changed circumstances accord¬ 
ing to the same laws of evolution, elan vital or karma , which were settled 
by the analysis of actual facts. The work of philosophy here resembles a 
mathematical computation. Being given a certain change in the axioma of 
existence, e.g., the necessity of food, clothing and homes being in abeyance, 
what will be the consequent changes in all the formulas of personal 
existence? This is also clearly seen out of the following discussion in the 
Abhidharma. 1 

1 Condensed from Ab. Kosa. bh. pp. 52. 2 — 53. 8 (B. B. XX.), cp. M. de la V. P.’s trans¬ 
lation, p. 54 ff. 



14 


NIRVANA 


II. YOGA 


15 


«It has been determined that 18 kinds ( dhatu ) of elements are cooperating in making up 
life in all the three spheres of existence. 1 It is then asked how many cooperate in the worlds 
of gross bodies, how many in the worlds of ethereal bodies, and how many in the spiritual 
worlds. It is answered — 18 in the first, 14 in the second and 3 in the last. All the 18 ele¬ 
ments combine in creating life in the sphere of gross bodies. «They combine» means that 
they are inseparable from it, they constitute this world. In the plane of ethereal bodies, the 
fragrant and savoury stuff, as well as the corresponding sensations ( vijnana ) are excluded. They 
represent physical food (kavali-kara-ahara). But ethereal bodies belong to beings who can live 
without such food, they have no desire for it. The olfactory and gustatory sensations are thus 
absent, because their objects—that physical food which contains the fragrant and savoury 
stuff — do not exist. 

Objection. But in this case neither the resistent stuff would exist in these worlds, since 
it is also (a part) of the nutriment stuff.? 

Answer. That part of it alone exists which is not nutriment. 

Objection. The fragrant and the savoury stuffs are in the same condition, (a part of them 
is not nutriment)? 

Answer. The resistent stuff is necessary as a support for the sense faculties, as a sup¬ 
port for the bodies and as clothes for them. But for the fragrant and savoury stuffs there is no 
necessity, because there is no physical food. Therefore, since the instinct for such food is absent, 
neither do the corresponding stuffs exist, (i. e., they are not produced by karma). The case of the 
resistent stuff is different. 

Opinion of Srflabha. If somebody here (on earth) by concentrated meditation reaches 
extasy, he continues to see colours, to hear sounds and his sense of touch is agreeably affected 
by some special tangible stuff which is produced simultaneously with the production in him of 
a high degree of levitation (prasrabdhi), but odours and tastes are in abeyance. For this rea¬ 
son, when beings are reborn in these worlds of trance, the first three sense data exist, hut smells 
and tastes are absent.» 

It is seen out of this passage that the conditions of life in the sphere 
of ethereal bodies are imagined by transferring personal mystic experiences 
into a separate plane of existence. 

A very interesting discussion then follows about that driving force of 
nature called karma which, in this connection, corresponds to our concep¬ 
tion of evolution, or elan vital. 2 

It produces, according to a regular plan and answering to necessities, all 
the varieties of life in the plane of gross bodies and mutatis mutandis in the 
imagined planes of existance constructed according to mystic experiences. 

1 Cp. the tables in Central Conception, p. 97. 

2 What confusion arises from a wrong translation of the term karma appears clearly 

from M. de la V. P.’s translation of this passage, Ab. Kosa II. 30, p. 56. «Quelle est la cause 
de la naissance d’un organe, sinon un certain acte commande par un d6sir relatif a cet organe». 
This can only mean that there has been, once upon a time, a man who evidently did not possess 

this organ, or did possess no organs at all, but he manifested a desire to possess some and com¬ 

mitted an action in consequence. After that all men, who peacefully existed without any organs 

at all, suddenly acquired them! No wonder that Indian philosophy, when presented in such a 

garb, ceases to be attractive. About Karma in Buddhism cp. 0 Rosenberg, Problems, XVI. 


Such is the theory of Yoga in Hlnayana. It is quite different in Maha- 
yana where the philosophic foundation is different. All the devices which are 
employed for helping the mind to concentrate upon a single point are more 
or less the same in all philosophic systems. There is absolutely nothing 
Buddhistic in them. 1 The psychlogical fact of concentration which is at 
the bottom of them is a very simple one. 2 When carried on systematically 
they induce special mystic states of mind. Patanjali has given their ex¬ 
planation according to the principles of Sankhya philosophy. In Hlnayana 
Buddhism they are explained in a manner fitting the system of radical plu¬ 
ralism, i. e., that theory of separate elements (i dharma ) which has been es¬ 
tablished with a view to their gradual extinction in Nirvana. Very charac¬ 
teristic for Buddhism is the system of heavens or paradises in which, at 
their middle and highest stages, imaginary beings are lodged, who are also 
called gods, but are nothing but born mystics, beings in whom the condition 
of trance is a natural one. This distinguishes Buddhism from all other reli¬ 
gions and philosophical systems. 3 It is also inseparable from the conception 
of the Hlnayanist Nirvana, or the so called Nirvana of the Sravakas. Ac¬ 
cording to the teaching of some schools the highest cataleptic states of 
trance are eternal ( asamskrta ), i. e., the/ 7 do not differ from Nirvana. 4 * * But, 
according to the majority of schools, Nirvana is beyond even that. It is the 
absolute limit of life, the extinction even of this kind of the thinnest ves¬ 
tige of consciousness which is still left in the highest of all imaginable 
worlds of cataleptic trance. 

1 Fr. Heiler, op. cit.p.47, following prof. Rhys Davids, thinks that (brahmanical) Yoga 
is predominantly physical and hypnotic,whereas the Buddhist method of meditation is intellectual 
and moral. I would not venture to endorse this opinion. In this respect the difference, if any, is 
negligible. Heiler evidently overlooks,in his Buddhist fervour, the devotion to God (iivara-prani- 
dhdna ) of the brahmanical Yogi. The process of moral purification of the latter is very vividly 
described by prof. S.’N. Dasgupta, The Study of Patanjali, p. 142 ff.(Calcutt,1920) and his other 
works. 

2 The late prof. 0 Rosenberg has himself practised some yoga-meditatiou in a Zen Mo¬ 
nastery in Japan. He used to compare the agreeable feeling of ease which he then experienced 
to the effect produced by music, especially when executed personally. Attention is then fixed and 
a light feeling of ecstasy makes you forget all troubles of life. The warlike Samurai before go¬ 
ing to war used to go through a course of yoga-exercises in some Zen nonastery, and this had 
the most beneficial influence upon their moral condition,in strengthening their courage and endu¬ 
rance. 

3 It is interesting to note that the gods of Epicurus are also quiescent, inactive and also 
possess aethereal bodies of a special atomic structure. 

4 Cp. Katha-vatthu, VI. 4. The Yogacaras likewise reckon catalepsy among the asam¬ 
skrta elements. 




10 


N III VAX A 


III. YOGI - PRATYAKSA 


17 


III. Mystic intuition (yogi-prat y a ksa) 

Apart from the above described general function of Yoga, there is an¬ 
other special kind of it, the subjective counterpart of the first. It then ap¬ 
pears as the mystic intuition of the true condition of the universe. The Buddhist 
Saint is supposed, in a moment of mystic illumination, suddenly to perceive the 
whole construction, with its gross and mystic worlds, as vividly as if it were a 
direct sense perception. As a psychological process it is equally taught in 
Hinayana and in Mahayana, but its content, the picture which reveals itself 
at this moment, is quite different in both systems. It corresponds to their theo¬ 
retical parts, to the system of pluralism which is taught in Hinayana, and 
to the monist view which is the central conception of Mahayana, as will be 
seen later on. For, although a sudden illumination, it does not come with¬ 
out preparation. The future Saint has gone through a long course of moral 
training and he has carefully studied all the details of that philosophic con¬ 
struction, when in the moment of sudden illumination, what he had before 
tried to understand only theoretically, comes up before him with the vivacity 
of living reality. Beginning with this moment he is a Saint, all his habits 
of thought are changed. He directly views the universe as an infinite con¬ 
tinuity of single moments in gradual evolution towards Final Extinction. In 
Mahayana the Bodhisattva sees directly, or feels inwardly, quite another 
picture, corresponding to the theoretical teaching of that religion. The 
Path towards Salvation is therefore divided in a preliminary path of accu¬ 
mulating merit ( sambhdra-margci ), in a subsequent course of training ( pra- 
yoga-murga) and in the path of illumination (drsti-marga). 1 The latter is 
momentary. It is technically called perception of the Four Truths, such 
perception being the exclusive property of the Saint ( drya ). Therefore they 
are called the four truths of the Saint ( dryasya satydni). They express the 
general view that 1) there is a phenomenal existence (duhkha), 2) its driving 
force (samudaya), 3) there will be final extinction ( nirodha ), and 4) there is 
a path towards it (marga). In this general form the four truths are accepted 

1 Mrs. C. Rhys Davids (Dhamma-sangani transl.,p. 256, n. 2) calls it a « mental awaken¬ 
ing)), «intellectual conversion)), «a certain vantage-point for mind and heart from which the 
Promised Land of Nirvana was caught sight of, and the fact of impermanence first discerned)). 
Under «the fact of impermanence# the theory of the impermanent dharmas must be evidently 
understood. A poetical description of drsti-marga , which is the same as srota-apatti-phala , is 
found in D. N. I. 76 ff. 


by all Indian systems. 1 There is absolutely nothing Buddhistic in them. 
Their meaning changes according to the content which is put into them, ac¬ 
cording to what is understood under phenomenal life (duhkha) 2 and under 
extinction (nirvana). Within the pale of Buddhism these conceptions have, 
at a certain date, undergone a radical change. In early Buddhism they 
correspond to a pluralistic universe, in Mahayana to a monistic one. 3 

In Hinayana the process of illumination is described as a double mo¬ 
ment, it consists iu a moment of feeling and a moment of knowledge. The 
feeling is satisfaction (ksdnti=ruci), after which in the next following 
moment comes intuition, the vision of the elements of existence (dharma- 
jhdna). The intuition refers at first to the surrounding gross world, and 
then, as is always the case, it is transferred to the imagined worlds of trance 
(anvaya-jhdna). Thus in sixteen consecutive moments 4 the intuition of the 
future Saint has run through the whole universe, its real and imaginary 
worlds, and has viewed them in the light of the four stages of their evolution 
towards quiescence. The supreme moment of illumination is the central 
point of the teaching about the Path to Salvation. An enormous literature, 
especially in Mahayana, is devoted to this conception of mystic intuition. 5 

When in later times the study of Abhidharma has been superseded by 
the study of logic and epistemology, the mystic perception of the Saint has 
retained its place among the different categories of direct cognition which 
were then established. Direct cognition was then defined as containing no 
synthetic thought (kalpanapodha). It was pure sensation which could ap¬ 
prehend an indefinite moment of sensation only. The four truths, i. e. 
ontology, were at first studied and ascertained by sound logic (pramdnena 
viniscita) and then suddenly perceived-as vividly as a grain of corn on the 

1 About the «four truths® iu Nyaya-Vaisegika see below p. 55. 

2 It is samskara-duhkhatd or parinama-duhkhatd the counterpart of asamskrta=nirodha, 
cp. Ab. Kosabh. VI. 3. This kind of duhkha is much nearer to onr ordinary conception of joy, 
than of suffering. 

3 In Nyaya-Vaise§ika the yogi perceives at that moment of illumination the atoms and 
all categories directly, cp. Prasastp., p. 187. 7. 

4 About the 16 moments cp. Ab. Kosa, YI. 18, 25 ff. and M. de la Y. P. in his edition of 
Madhy. vj, p. 479 n. 4. 

5 The text book for the study of this part ofMahayana is theAbhisamayalankaraofMaitreya- 
Asanga, of which 21 Indian commentaries alone existed besides a huge indigenous Tibetan litera¬ 
ture. Among the sect of the «yellow caps® the chief commentary studied is the Lam-rim-chen-po 
by the great Tson-kha-pa, partly translated into Russian by G. Tsibikoff. 


2 



18 


NIRVANA 


HI. YOGI - PRATYAKSA 


19 


palm of the hand. 1 The number of moments was then reduced to three. In the 
Madhyamika system, where logic was denied altogether, the preparation 
consisted in a course of negative dialectic, after which the intuition of the 
transcendental truth springs up as an inward conviction ( pratyatma-vedya ) 2 
In both the philosophic systems which are represented in Buddhism — the 
pluralism of the Hlnayana and the monism of Mahay ana — there is a 
course of preparation and meditation and a moment of sudden illumi¬ 
nation. 3 

If we now try to answer the question about the age and the history 
of this Buddhist doctrine of Yoga, we must, first of all, wholly appreciate 
the fact that it is an inseparable, inherent part of the pluralistic universe of 
separate elements ( dharma ) gradually evolving towards extinction. 4 The 
possibility is not excluded, as we have stated elsewhere, 5 that the germ 
of this theory is older than Buddha himself. In any case there is no 
historically authenticated Buddhism without this theory, without the mystic 
worlds and, its inherent part, the philosophic explanation of Yoga. All 
yoga practices which had not this philosophic and moral aim, all sorcery 
and thaumaturgy, the brahmanical sacrifices not excepted, were strongly con¬ 
demned by the Buddha. They were considered as one of the cardinal sins. 6 
The details of the conditions in the worlds of the mystic and the degrees of 
mystic concentration have always given opportunities to much scholastic 

1 Cp. Nyaya-bindu and tika, p. 11 (B. B. VII). 

2 Madhy.vr, p. 493. 11. 

3 According to H. Bergson (De l’intution philosophique) every great philosopher has once 
had a vision of the Universe to which he then remains faithful the rest of his life in a series of 
attempts to formulate it ever clearer and clearer. This will then be the drsti-marga of that philo¬ 
sopher. In the life of Kant it will be the time when after years of literary activity and medita¬ 
tion the central conception of the Critique of Pure Reason revealed itself to him and he then 
wrote, «das Jahr 69 gab rnir grosses LichtU. The rest of his life was indeed spent in repeated 
attempts at a clear formulation of that vision. The preceding study and meditation were, so to 
say, his sambhara- and prayoga-marga. 

4 It has been supposed that the four dhyanas are of an earlier date than the four sama- 
jpattis, cp. Heiler, op. cit. p. 43 f. The conception of ethereal existences in the Rupa-dhatu as 
consisting of 14 dhatus only, because they did not want any physical food is evidently a rationa¬ 
lisation of the myth about the descent of man from one of the Buddhist mystic worlds where 
the denizens fed on samadhi, cp. D. N.III. 84 ff. The full theory probably existed already at the 
time of the formation of the Pali Kanon. 

5 Central Conception, p. 65 ff. 

6 Cp. the article on Buddhist magic in ERE where mysticism, magic and popular su¬ 
perstition are not sufficiently distinguished. In the Brahmajalasutta, D. N. I. 9 ff., we have a long, 
list of superstitions and magical practices, all strongly condemned. 


controversy between the schools. We can safely assert that within the pale 
of Hlnayana Buddhism there is no place for trivial sorcery. 1 

The psychology of trance is indeed a characteristic feature of many 
Indian systems, not Buddhism alone. It appears almost inevitably in that 
part of every Indian system which is called «the Path» ( marga) in which 
the means of a transition out of the phenomenal world into the Absolute are 
considered. With the exception of the orthodox Mimamsakas and the 
materialists, every system in this part, but not in others, contains a certain 
amount of mysticism. The Jains had their teaching about Yoga. Even the 
realistic and theistic Nayayikas, when feeling it difficult to explain the tran¬ 
sition into the Absolute, i. e., from samsara into nirvana, have recourse 
not to God, but to Yoga. 2 However, just as the European mind is not alto¬ 
gether and always free from mysticism, so is the Indian mind not at all 
necessarily subject to it. Not to speak about numerous materialistic doctrines, 
the orthodox Mimamsakas themselves held about Yoga an opinion which 
probably represents just what all of us, so far we are not mystics, think 
about it, viz. that Yoga is sheer imagination, just as any other ordinary 
fantasticism. 3 Considering that the Mimamsakas are the oldest philosophical 
system in India whose roots go down into the Yedic age, we at once can 
measure the exact value of the ((historical method» which finds it highly 
improbable that in India, at the time of Buddha, nothing but vulgar magic 
and thaumaturgy could exist. 

It is the common lot of every philosophy or religion to reach a point 
where further explanation becomes impossible. A higher and mystical prin¬ 
ciple is then invoked, because the usual methods have failed to give satis¬ 
faction. With Descartes and Leibnitz it is God, with many Indian systems 
it is Yoga as a mystical power. An appeal to this power plays a considerable 
part in Buddhism, but not otherwise. 

1 If every supernatural world or power, imagined by the mystic is represented as magic, 
then of course Hinayana will be full of magic, but Christianity, especially that which believes in 
miracles, will neither escape a similar reproach. The rddhis and abhijUas should therefore be 
more properly characterised as mystical imagined powers, with the proviso that «of the reality 
or unreality of the mystic’s world we know nothing# (B. Russel, External World, 1922, p. 20). 
Very interesting are the explanations, and a certain vindication, of the Buddhist supernatural 
cognitions and powers by Fr. Heiler, op. cit., p. 33 f. 

2 About the place Yoga occupies in the system of Nyaya-Vaisesika see below, p. 55 ff. 

3 Cf. Slokavart., on pratyaksasutra, 32. 


2 * 



20 


NIRVANA 


V. WAS BUDDHA AN AGNOSTIC 


21 


IV. Buddha’s belief in personal immortality 

Additional arguments in favour of an unpliilosophic primitive Buddhism 
are derived from 1) the occurrence in the Pali Kanon of the word «immortal» 
among the epithets of Nirvana, 2) the interpretation of two passages where 
Buddha is reported to have given no answer at all when questioned about 
Nirvana, 3) the occurrence in later literature of the term reality (vastu) in 
connection with Nirvana. 

A short examination of the value of these additional arguments will 
not he out of place. 

The practical, as well as the theoretical, part of Buddhism converge 
towards the idea of an extinction of all the active forces of life in the Abs( - 
lute. This Absolute, Nirvana, accordingly receives in emotional passages 
an overwhelming mass of epitheta ornantia among which the term «place 
of immortality» occurs several times. But what is this immortality? Is it 
the immortality of Vedic times? The blissful existence among the forefathers 
in heaven? 1 Or is this hypothetical immortality something like the paradise 
of Amitabha? Or something like the paradise of later Vishnuism? Not the 
slightest indication! Because indeed the word occurs only as an epithet of 
Nirvana — annihilation. There is no deficiency, as we have seen, of para¬ 
dises in the Buddhist outlook. But Nirvana is beyond all imaginable spheres, 
it is the absolute limit. The words «immortal place» simply mean changeless, 
lifeless and deathless, condition, for it is explained as meaning a place where 
there is neither birth (i. e. rebirth) nor death (i. e. repeated death). 2 * * 
People enter paradise by being reborn in it, they disappear for ever in 
Nirvana by being extinct. 

1 M. d e 1 a V. P. evidently thinks that all religious development starts with an idea 
of a surviving immortal Soul, a theory that has been exploded as far as Indian religions are 
concerned. Dr. Poul Tuxen in the Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabemes Selskab, Hist.-phil. 
Meddelelser, II, 4, Forestillingen om Sjaelen i Rigveda, has proved that such an idea is quite 
absent from the Rigveda. In the oldest Upanishads the surviving homunculus is represented as 
a congeries of 5 elements which dissolve at death and then a new combination of them springs 
into being. It is not impossible to see in them the forerunners of the Buddhist 5 skandhas. 
The idea of a Soul, in our acceptation of the term, appears in the metrical Upanishads and is 
contemporaneous with the rise of Sankhya and Jainism, probably also with some kind of pre- 
Buddhaic Buddhism, cf. H. Jacobi, Gottesidee, p. 7 ff. and my Central Conception, p. 65 ff. 

2 The epithet «place of immortality» is also used in connection with Nirvana in brah- 

manical systems which adopt a lifeless Nirvana, cf. Vatsyayana, (ed. Vizian.) p. 30. It means 

a place where there is no death, it does not mean a place where there is eternal life. It is like- 


V. Was Buddha an agnostic? 

Another additional argument is drawn out of a new interpretation of 
very well known passages in the Kanon where Buddha is reported to have 
answered a series of metaphysical questions by sheer silence. It is literally 
an argument a silentio. Considering these questions more closely, we see 
that they are metaphysical questions, such as: is the world beginningless or 
has it a beginning, is it finite or infinite, what is the condition of the Saint 
after death, this last question meaning, what is the nature of the Absolute. 
When these questions were addressed to Buddha on a certain occasion by 
a certain interlocutor, it has once happened that either no answer at all 
was forthcoming, or it was declared that the questions were futile. Scholars, 
Indian and European, ancient and modern, did not find much difficulty in 
harmonizing this occasional «agnosticism)) with the main lines of the 
teachings of the Pali Kanon. Some scholars went all the length of comparing 
these reserved questions with a series of topics declared insoluble in modem 
critical philosophy. There is indeed some similarity. 1 

However M. de la Vallee Poussin explains Buddha’s silence by his 
incapacity in the philosophical field. He did not know what to answer! 2 
He was prepared to answer the question of the existence of an eternal Soul 
in the affirmative, if his interlocutor preferred so, if not, he did not mind 
denying it (p. 119). This is confirmed by a reference to Kumaralabha 
who is quoted by Vasubandu in the course of a very long discussion 
about the cardinal tenet of all Buddhists, the «personalists» (pudgalavadins) 
not excluded, i. e. the non-existence of a substantial Soul. This tenet is 
here masterly discussed with perfect clearness and every possible detail. 8 
Buddha denies an eternal Soul as against the Eternalists, but maintains 
moral responsibility as against the Materialist. Both extremes are 
declared to be follies against which the doctrine of Buddha is directed. 

wise called a place where there is no birth, vnajayati, najiyati , na miyati ti amatam ti vuccati » 
(Comm. Khuddaka, p. 180). Just as birth always means rebirth, death means reiterated death, 
cf. Oldenberg, Buddha 2 , p. 46. 

1 They are questions which « human reason in its natural progress must necessarily encoun- 
ter», (Kant, critique of Pure Reason, transl. by Max Muller, p. 340). Cp. 0. Franke, Kant u. 
die altindische Philosophie, in «Zur Erinnerang an Emanuel Kant» (Halle, 1904), p. 137—8. 

2 The same explanation is given by B. Keith, op. cit., p. 63. 

3 Translated by M. de la V. P. in the last volume of his Abhidharmakosa, pp. 128 ff. 
and by me in the Bulletin de l’Acad6mie des Sciences de Russie, 1919, pp. 823 ff 


22 


NIRVANA 


VI. THE POSITION OF THE LATER SCHOOLS OF THE HINA YANA 


23 


He has sought and found a «midd!e path» which evades the dangers of both 
extremes. How then could such a categorical denial and emphatic protest 
against two extremes be turned into a connivence in them? This is as much 
a riddle as the conversion of the Pali Kanon into a manual of thaumaturgy. 
It would be interesting to know when did Buddha «teach to some persons 
the existence of Self» (p. 119), i. e., a full blown atmavada or satkay- 
odrsti ? 

In many systems, ancient and modern, eastern and western, the reality 
in itself, the pith of reality, is declared to be something incognisable. It is 
therefore quite natural to find in the sutra literature, where the style of 
popular discourses is adopted, the device of impressing upon the audience 
the mystic character of the Absolute by silence. The Mahayana sutras do 
not tarry in characterising it as «unspeakable», «unknowable», «unde- 
finable» etc. A long discussion about the essence of the absolute is given in 
the Vimalakirti-sutra. The question is tackled from different sides, and 
when Yinnalakirti is at length asked to summarise, he remains silent. 
Whereupon Bodhisattva Manjusri exclaims, «Well done! Well done! non¬ 
duality is truly above words U. 1 

Nor is this feature limited to Buddhist literature. The Vedantins 
resorted to the same device when wishing to bring home the transcendental 
character of their advaita-brahma. Sankara reports a case when the 
question about the essence of brahma was reiterated three times, without 
eliciting any answer. 2 At last, when it was asked, «Why don’t you answer?» 
the reply was, «I do answer (sc. by silence), but you do not understand me». 
Is it permissible to draw the conclusion that Vimalakirti and those 
men to whom SankaracSrya refers had themselves no reasoned opinion 
about the Absolute or that they were quite indifferent and prepared to 
answer, just as the questioner prefered, in the affirmative or in the 
negative? 3 

1 Cf. Suzuki, Mahayana, p. IOC—107. 

2 Ad V. S., III. 2, 17. 

3 Vasubandhu (Ab. Kosa, V. 22) reports that it was a rule of dialectics at the time 
of Buddha to answer by silence those questions which were wrongly formulated, e.g.,all questions 
regarding the properties of a non-existing thing. Prof. H. 01 den berg rightly remarks on an 
other occasion, Upanishaden p. 133, «Die eigenste Sprache dieser Mystik, wie aller Mystik, ist 
Schweigen ». 


VI. The position of the later schools of the HInayana 

M. de la Vallee Poussin insists that in order to escape obscurity we 
must construct an outline («un schema d'ensemblev) of the history of 
Buddhism, that this outline must harmonize with the general conception we 
have about the history of ancient India, 1 and that questions of detail become 
at once settled, if they find their place in this historical outline (p. XX). 
This schema seems to be the following one. There was in the beginning a 
simple faith in Soul and immortality and a primitive teaching of an indefinite 
character, mainly of obscure magic. After that a mixed period supervened 
when this simple creed was contaminated with confused ideology, and 
this allows us to ask the question whether Buddhism at that period was 
not a gnosis. At last Buddhism received a superstructure of inane schola¬ 
sticism and we have a scholastic period in Buddhism, just as we had one in 
mediaeval Europe. 

Primitive faith, a period of gnosticism and a period of scholasticism,— 
we at once see wherefrom the scheme is borrowed. It is an attempt to 
construct the history of Buddhism on parallel lines with the history of 
the Western Church. 

What the primitive faith and the supposed agnosticism represent we 
have already seen. 

Now what is scholasticism? It is either 1) philosophy in the service of 
religion or 2) excessive subtlety and artificiality in philosophical constru¬ 
ctions. Buddhism Early or Kanonic is contrasted with Buddhism later or 
scholastic (p. 46). 2 This leads to the supposition that the school, e. g., of the 
Vaibhasikas represented in its teaching something substantially different from 
the early kanonical schools. But, as a matter of fact, the Vaibhasikas are 
only the continuators of one of the oldest schools, the Sarvastivadins. They 
derive their name from the title of a huge commentary upon the kanonical 
works of this school and follow in philosophy generally the same lines as did 

1 This general conception of the history of India is apparently mentioned as implying the 
opinion of the author about the social milieu (p. 10) in which nothing but obscure magic could 
possibly originate, an opinion fully shared by prof. B. Keith. It would be interesting to know 
the opinion of both these authors about the milieu in which the grammar of Panini, this one of 
the greatest productions of the human mind, originated! 

2 But on p. 128 M. de la VallSe Poussin mentions the «nihilist scholasticisms as the 
scholasticism of the Kanon. 


24 


NIRVANA 


VI. THE POSITION OF THE LATER SCHOOLS OF THE HINAYANA 


25 


the original school. Quite different is the position of the second school, the 
Sautrantikas. It is really a new school, a precursor or contemporary of that 
momentuous change which splits the history of Buddhism into two quite distinct 
periods. It is therefore preferable to keep to the broad lines of the old division 
of Buddhism into early or Hlnayana, and later or Mahayana, and to admit 
the existence of a transitional school in the Sautrantikas. 1 

We readily admit that there was a considerable growth of scholasticism 
in Early Buddhism, but it is scholasticism in the second sense. Since the 
simple faith in immortality never existed, it is impossible to speak of its 
being blurred or contaminated by scholasticism. Early Buddhism started 
from a sound philosophical idea of a pluralistic universe, it denied substance 
and established lists of ultimate realities ( dharmas ). Some of these elements 
are highly artificial constructions. Early Buddhists and their continuators 
the Vaibhasikas have paid a heavy tribute to that innate tendency of the 
human mind to infer difference of things from a difference of words. The 
Sautrantikas most decidedly opposed this tendency, they sharply distinguished 
nominal realities (prajnaptisat ) from ultimate data. They accordingly merci¬ 
lessly cut down the lists of elements adopted in the schools of Early Buddhism 
and by the Vaibhasikas. They thus reduced them exclusively to a list compri¬ 
sing seme - data and the primitive data of Mind. It is therefore quite wrong 
to throw them into the same bag with the Vaibhasikas. They are, if anything, 
antischolastic. Their role may be usefully compared with that of Occam’s 
Razor in European philosophy. They even can be more properly called a 
critical school, a name which their continuators, the Yogacara-Sautrantika 
school fully deserves. But these already belong to the Mahayana. If we 
roughly assign the beginning of Mahayana to the I century A. D. and the 
decline of Hlnayana in the North to the V century, we shall have about five 
hundred years when both these tendencies kept the field. The Sautrantikas 
apparently began by taking an intermediate position 2 3 between the extreme 

1 Another transitional school between Hlnayana and Mahayana is the so called satya- 

siddhi school of Harivarman known only from Chinese sourses, cp. Yamakami Sogen, Sys¬ 
tems of Buddist Thonght, p. 172 ff. (Calcutta 1912), 0. Rosenberg, Problems p. 274. 

3 This Vasubandhu himself hints, cf. my Soul Theory, p. 852 and M. de la Vallee 
Poussin’s transl. IX p. 273. Vasubandhu who himself favoured this school, as well as his 
pupil and continuator Dignaga, are already Mahayanists and have partly adopted Vijnanavada 
views. They call themselves Vijnanavadins although in the cardinal point of absolute reality they 
partly adhere to the Sautrantika view (cf. Nyayablndutlkatipp. ed. B. B. p. 19). 


Mahayanists and the «school men». When the battle that raged during 
500 years was inclining to its end, they coalesced with the Mahayanists 
who had won the battle and formed with them the hybrid school of Yogacara- 
Sautrantika. Among the ultimate realities of the earlier lists which were 
declared by the new movement, i. e., by both the Mahayanists and the 
Sautrantikas, to be nominal we find Nirvana ( nirodha ). 

It was known long ago that the Vaibhasika and the Sautrantika 
schools were engaged in a dispute regarding the nature of Nirvana. The 
first maintained that it was something real ( vastu ), the second objected that 
it was nothing real by itself, that it was merely the cessation of all personal 
life. The exact meaning of this issue could, of course, be fully appreciated 
only if the complicated arguments of both contending schools would have 
been known. Our information about the Vaibhasikas is much more ample 
now, and we can represent in detail the argumentation which led to the 
tenet of Nirvana as a reality. About the other school, the Sautrantikas, 
our information is still indirect. The works of the early Sautrantikas, 
Ivumaralabha, Srilabha, Mahabhadanta, Vasumitra and others are 
still inaccessible. Vasubandhu can be taken as the exponent of the latest 
phase of this school, when it was about to coalesce with the Mahayanists. 
However enough is known to allow a definite conclusion about their supposed 
«denial» of Nirvana and the meaning of their answer to the Vaibhasikas. 

M. de la Vallde Poussin thinks that his hypothesis about a pre-Ka- 
nonic Buddhism, consisting of a simple faith in Immortality and Yoga 
practices, as well as his interpretation of the passages where Buddha is 
reported to have answered some metaphysical questions by silence — that 
both these hypotheses are fully borne out by the position which the later 
schools take regarding Nirvana (p. 132). When it is called a «reality» {vastu) 
he declares it to be a confirmation of the existence (some500 years ago) of 
that simple faith in Immortality which, by a similar method, he has discovered 
in Early Buddhism. We find in his book (pp. 136—148) many interesting 
details about the battle that raged between the two schools in the V century 
A. D., but unfortunately the meaning of the controversy has entirely escaped 
his attention, since it is exactly the reverse of what he assumes it to be. The 
Vaibhasikas did not maintain that Nirvana was a kind of paradise, but that 
the annihilation of all life {nirodha), the essence of Nirvana, was a reality 
{nirodha-satya, vastu), i. e., a materialistic lifeless reality. The Sautrantikas, 



26 


NIRVANA 


VIII. THE VAIBHASIKAS 


27 


on the other hand, admit the existence of Buddha’s Cosmical Body (dharma- 
kciya), i. e., they adhere to the Mahayana conception which consists in iden¬ 
tifying Nirvana with the living world itself. Therefore, just as the Mahaya- 
nists, they deny the reality of Nirvana as a separate element which transcends 
the living world. It is a denial of the reality of that materialistic kind of 
annihilation which was favoured by the Vaibhasikas. 

VII. The double character of the absolute 

With regard to Nirvana or the Absolute, Indian philosophy, just as, in a 
broader sense, the philosophy of all mankind, is divided between two diametri¬ 
cally opposed solutions. The absolute end is either eternal death, or it is eternal 
life. 1 2 The first is materialism, the second some kind of idealism. Both theo¬ 
ries are represented in India, in Buddhism as well as in Brahmanism. The theory 
of eternal death is represented on the Buddhist side by Early Buddhism and the 
Vaibhasikas, on the Brahmanical side, as will be seen later on, by the early 
Nyaya-Vaisesika. The theory of eternal life is represented on the Buddhist 
side by the Mahayana and its precursors, on the Brahmanical side by the Ve¬ 
danta, Sankhya, Yoga and the later Nayayikas. Nirvana is a reality (dharma, 
vastu) in the sense of a materialistic, lifeless ( yasmin sati cetaso vimoksah == 
= acetanahy reality in the majority of the schools of Early Buddhism and in 
the Vaibhasika school. They are also atheists and treat their Buddha as 
essentially human. 3 * Such reality is denied by all those schools which adhere 
to the conception of a divine Buddha, i. e., by the Mahayanists and their 
precursors in the Hinayana. The conception of Buddha’s Cosmical Body 
(i dharma-kdya ) is shared by all the schools of Mahayana and by the interme¬ 
diate school of the Sautrantikas. According to the modern Mongol’s way of 
expressing it, in Hinayana the Supreme Buddha ( burhan-bagshi ) has no body, 
in the Mahayana and with the Sautrantikas he has a Body, and a better one 
(than before becoming Buddha), a glorious, all-embracing Body. 

1 I find in modern popular works attaining to biology the conception of a lifeless Nirvana 
and the term itself applied to describe that condition of the Universe which will obtain when 
all energies will be exhausted (entropy). There is assumed a biological a Lusttrieb» and a 
«Todestrieb», the first would correspond to heyopadeya-hanopadana, the second to sarvam 
heyam or sarvam duhlcham, cp. Sigm. Freud, Jenseits des Lustprincips (Vienna 1925), pp. 52, 80. 

2 Cp. Madhy. vr., p. 525. 9, cp. transl. in the Appendix. 

3 This, of course, does not mean that exceptional, supernatural powers were not ascribed 

to him., but he belonged to the manusya-loka. 


As regards the reality or ideality of Nirvana the relative position of 
the contending schools may be roughly represented in the following sche¬ 
matic way. 

Vaibhasika and early schools — both samsara and nirvana real. 

Madhyamika—both samsara and nirvana unreal (sc. separately unreal). 

Sautrantika — samsara real, nirvana unreal (sc. separately unreal). 

Yogacara or Vijhanavada — samsara unreal, nirvana real. 

The meaning of this schema will emerge from the arguments advanced 
by each of the schools. 

VIII. The Vaibhasikas 

As mentioned above, they are the continuators of the early school of 
the Sarvastivadins and may be here treated as the representatives of Early 
Buddhism in general. Their tenets which concern us at this place are the 
following ones. Existence is of a double kind, either transient and pheno¬ 
menal, or eternal and absolute. Both parts are then analyzed into their ele¬ 
ments, classified as elements of Matter, Mind and Forces for the pheno¬ 
menal part, and as Space and Nirvana for the eternal one. The elements of 
phenomenal life are divided into past, present and future, and are all con¬ 
ceived as realities, the past and the future ones are as real as the present 
ones. This leads to the construction of two sets of elements, the one repre¬ 
senting their everlasting nature (i dharma-svabhava ), the other their mo¬ 
mentary manifestation in actual life ( dharma-laksana ). 1 It is clear that 
this theory brings the Sarvastivadin very near to the Sankhya system which 
assumes an eternal matter and its momentary manifestations. Therefore stu¬ 
dents are specially warned not to confound both doctrines, and not to over¬ 
look their difference. 8 When all manifestations are stopped, all forces extinct, 
remains the lifeless residue. It is impersonal, eternal death, and it is a sepa¬ 
rate element, a reality, the reality of the elements in their lifeless condition. 
This reality is very similar to the reality of the Sankhya’s undifferentiated 

1 This theory of the double set of elements is very clearly analysed by 0. Rosenberg in 
his Problems, cf. IX and XVIII. Had M. de la V.-P. devoted to this book all the attention it 
deserves he never would have maintained that the Nirvana of the Vaibhasikas is a paradise. 
Judging by his sweeping and unfair remark on p. XXI he has entirely misunderstood this 
remarkable book. 

2 Cf. Ab. Kosa, V. 25, and my Central Conception, p. 89. 

3 When pressed to give details about this lifeless condition of dharma-svabhava the Vaibha¬ 
sikas confess their ignorance, ibid. p. 75 and 90. 



28 


KIR VAN A 


IX. THE SAUTRANTIKAS 


29 


matter ( prakrti ), it is eternal, absolute death K The Sankhyas were dualists, 
and admitted besides eternal Matter eternal Souls, but the latter, as is w r ell 
known, the Buddhists very energetically denied. Candrakirti refers to the 
Vaibhasika view in the following way. «If nirvana is a reality perse (bhava), 
it cannot be a simple extinction. Of course, it has been declared that cons¬ 
ciousness is extinct ( vimoksa ) in nirvana, just as a light becomes extinct (when 
fuel is exhausted), but for us extinct life is not an entity (bhava) !» To this 
(the Vaibhasika) answers. «You must not understand nirvana to be the 
extinction of passion (and of life), but you must say that the entity (dharma) 
called nirvana is the thing in which passion (and life) are extinct. The 
extinction of light is a mere example, and it must be interpreted as pointing 
to that (inanimate) thing which remains when consciousness is extinct)). 2 

We need not insist that the school was atheistic and genuinely denied 
the reality of a substantial Soul, whereas the Mahasamghikas, Vatsiputriyas, 
Sautrantikas and Mahayanists denied it one way and admitted it in another. 
The state of Nirvana, as imagined by the Vaibhasikas, affords some points 
of similarity with that state of the Universe which modern science imagines 
will exist when all energies will be worked out, they will exist, siuee energy 
itself (sc. dharma - svabhava) is eternal, but they will not work. A condi¬ 
tion in which all energies (samskaras) are extinct cannot be spiritual. 3 Of 
course simple materialism goes under the name of uccheda - vada , against 
which Buddha is reported to have made an emphatic protest. But simple 
materialism in India, as elsewhere, is nirvana at every death ( dehocchedo mok- 
sah)* without retribution for one’s deeds in future life. The complicated system 
of worlds imagined by Buddha, through which the elements composing indi¬ 
vidual existences are gradually, one after the other, reduced to a state of 
quiescence and extinction, until in final nirvana all are extinct — is nothing 
but the realisation of the moral law. The worlds are «produced» by karma , 
which corresponds to a conception of evolution going on under the influence 

1 Or something quite undefinable, nihsatlasattam nihsadasad nirasad avyaktam alingam 
pradhanam, Vyasa ad Y. S. II. 19. 

2 Yasmm sati cctaso vimokso (= nirodho) bhavati, ibid. 525. 9., cp. translation in the 

Append. , 

3 European mystics, of course, put all the variety of the Indian speculations about Nir¬ 
vana into the same bag and declare that, although negative for our reason, it is emotionally very 
positive indeed,«dem GefQhl nach ein Positivum st&rkster Form», cf. Heiler, op. cit. p. 41, follow¬ 
ing R. Otto, Das Heilige. 

4 Sarvadars., p. 3 (B. Ind.). 


of an accumulation of moral merit. 1 Simple materialism leaves no room for 
the working of this law. But neither does, according to Buddha, an eternal 
spiritual principle leave room for it. The moral law conduces through a very 
long process of evolution the living world into a state of final quiescence 
where there is no life, but something lifeless, inanimate. 2 In this sense the 
Vaibhasika outlook resembles the materialism of modern science. 3 

IX. The SAUTRANTIKAS 

This school, as mentioned above, had quite different tendencies. They 
denied that the past and future elements really existed in the same sense as 
the present ones did. They took a much more natural view. The past is what 
did exist, and the future is what will exist after not having existed. They 
consequently rejected the double set of elements, the eternal essence and the 
manifestations, and admitted the reality of these manifestations alone. Nirvana 
was the absolute end of the manifestations, the end of passion and life ( klesa - 
janmanor ksayah ), without any positive counterpart. It is decidedly insisted 
upon the fact that nirvana means only the end of the process of life, without 
any lifeless substance {dharma) as the residue or the substratum in which life 
has been extinguished. Nirvana thus loses its materialistic character. The 
denial of the Sautrantikas is not a denial of Nirvana in general, not a denial 
of an idealistic absolute. There is no Buddhism possible without Nirvana, since 
without Nirvana means without a Buddha. But the Sautrantikas denied the 
materialistic Nirvana, just as all the Mahayanists did. 

The original works of the SautrSntika school, as mentioned above, are 
not yet accessible. The school probably contained a great variety of philo¬ 
sophical constructions. The later Sautrantikas coalesced with the Maha- 

1 Cp. O. Rosenberg, Problems, XVI. 

2 All the references adduced by M. de la V. P. from Sanghabhadra and Ab. Kosa 
II, 55 only assert that nirvana, according to the Vaibhagikas, was a vastu , but not that 
it was living or spiritual. 

3 Prof. M. Anesaki, Nichiren (Cambridge, 1916), p. 137 ff. evidently alludes to the Vai- 
bhagikas when asserting that Buddhism includes a materialistic school, or a school which its 
opponents characterized as materialistic. As a curiosity it may be added that when the educa¬ 
tional authorities of the newly founded republic of Buriats in Transbaikalia started an antireli- 
gious propaganda, they first of all assailed the doctrine of transmigration in its popular form and 
insisted on the fact that modern science favours a materialistic view of the universe. The Buddhist 
monks, who are Mahayanists, retorted in a pamphlet in which they developed the view that mate¬ 
rialism is not unknown to them, since the Vaibhagikas maintained that after Nirvana every life 
ceases for ever. 





30 


NIRVANA 


X. THE YOGACARAS 


31 


w 


yanists and formed the hybrid schools of the Sautrantika - Yogacaras and 
Madhyamika - Sautrantikas. 1 This fact alone proves that in the vital que¬ 
stion of Nirvana and Buddha they closely adhered to later Buddhism and 
can be characterised as a transitional school. From Tibetan sources 2 we know 
that they admitted the doctrine of dharmakaya , i. e., of a divine Buddha, 
and this solves the question, because this dogma is the common characte¬ 
ristic of all the schools of the Mahayana. They differed from the latter in that 
they admitted the reality of the phenomenal world which with them included 
only sense data, consiousness and volition. The momentary flashes to which 
these entities were reduced were nevertheless conceived as real, not illusions, 
and their total extinction in Nirvana was maintained. They neither admitted 
the monistic spiritual principle (alaya-vijnana) of the idealistic Maka- 
yanists, nor the principle of relativity (sunya-vdda) of the Madhyamikas. 
What their line of argument was we know from the work of Yasumitra 
upon the early schools. 3 The author was himself a Sautrantika and closes 
his work with an enumeration of their principle tenets, such tenets that 
were shared by all the adherents of the school. We find here (under 3) 
their tenet that there are two kinds of elements ( skandha ). Besides those 
which are subject to total extinction at the time of Nirvana, there is a subtle 
consciousness which survives after Nirvana and of which the former are but 
a manifestation. 4 We have here the germ of the alaya-vijnana of the Yoga¬ 
caras. If later on the Sautrantikas objected to this tenet, they probably did 
it only because, in the Yogacara system, it involved the illusory character 
of the external world, whereas the Sautrantikas sticked to its reality. 
Most probably they were in this point only the continuators of the Maha- 
samghikas, i. e., they adhered to that tendency which at an early date mani¬ 
fested itself among the schools of the Hinayana and represented a protest 
against the treatment of Buddha as essentially human and against the 
theory of his total disappearance in a materialistic Nirvana. Since every 
school of the Mahayana interpreted Dharmakaya according to their own 

1 Wassilief, Buddhism, pp. 321 ff. 

2 Ibid. p. 286. 

3 Samaya-bheda-uparacana-cakra, trsl. for the first time by Wassilief in his Buddhism. 
A new english translation with copious and very instructive notes by J. Masuda appeared in 
Asia Major, II, 1, pp. 1—78 (Leipzig, 1925). 

4 This is also known from tibetan sources, cf. Wassilief op. cit., p. 273. 


ideas in philosophy, the Sautrantikas likewise interpreted it as a personifi¬ 
cation of their subtle consciousness. 1 

X. The yogacaras 

This was an idealistic school founded by Aryasanga in the IV-V 
century B. C. 

Idealistic views (vijnana-vcida) have appeared in the history of Budd¬ 
hist philosophy several times and at different places. We have, first of all, 
kanonical works like the LankSvatara-sutra and others, which are wri¬ 
tten in imitation of the Upanishads, in a style intentionally averse to preci¬ 
sion. 2 And then we have the three systems of Asvaghosa, Aryasanga 
and Dignaga. As Makayanists they are all monists and believers in the 
Cosmical Body of the Buddha. But in the process of realisation of this uni¬ 
que substanse they all admit the existence of one initial or store conscious¬ 
ness ( alaya-vijnana ) in addition to that indefinite 3 consciousness (citta = 
manas = vijnana) which was admitted in the Hinayana, and they all deny 

1 It thus appears that prof. H. Kern, Manual, p. 123, was right in maintaining that 
« among the old sects the Mahasamgbikas entertained views agreeing with the Mahayana». It is 
also clear that the Yatslputrlyas (Vajjiputtalcas) established their pudgalatada with no other aim 
than that of supporting the doctrine of a supernatural, surviving Buddha from the philosophical 
side. Indirectly this proves bow philosophic the genuine primitive Buddhism must have been. 
The very character of the argument of the Yatslputrlyas in favour of the pudgala is suggestive. 
It was neither a dharma — this they could not maintain, so fresh was its categorical denial by 
the Master in memory — but neither was it something different from a dharma. It was already 
inexpressible at that time. Had not the denial of the dtma been so categorical, the Yatsiputriya 
would have certainly invented another, not so twisted an argument in support of their belief in 
a supernatural Buddha. Cf. Ab. Kosa, IX, and my Soul Theory, p. 830. 

2 In the Lankavatara, p. 182—6 (ed. Tokyo 1924) more than 20 different opinions about 
Nirvana are mentioned. The first evidently alludes to the opinion of the Hinayanists and the last 
looks like the opinion of the Yogacaras. All are rejected on the score that Nirvana is undefinable. 
It is the Madhyamika view. But the majority of the solutions there mentioned evidently never 
existed, and those that existed are so formulated that it is difficult to recognise them. It is a 
fanciful literary composition. Aryadeva’s comment, transl. by G. Tucci, T’oung Pao XXY, 
p. 16 ff., looks like a forgery by some incompetent pandit. The Tibetan Bstan-hgyur, as already 
noticed by Wassilief, is also full of forged tracts ascribed to Asvaghosa, Nagarjuna and Aryadeva. 
The last solution, p. 184, 1. 15 ff., which in the sutra is evidently mentioned pour la bonne bouche 
is not to be discovered at all in the enumeration of the comment. It has not escaped the perspi¬ 
cacity of E. Burnouf, Introduction 2 p. 462, that this last solution, although seemingly rejected, 
was the one favoured by the author. I find no mention of E. Burnouf’s translation and com¬ 
ment in the article of G. Tucci. 

3 That vijhana-skandha is nothing else than nirvikalpakam jndnam and samjha-skandha 
nothing else than savikalpakam jilanam, as stated in my Central Conception, p. 18—19, is now 
corroborated by Udayana, Parisuddhi, p. 213—214 (B. I.). 



* 


32 nirvana 

the reality of the external world. They thus reduce all the elements ( dharmas ) 
of Hinayana to modes of one single conscious principle. Asvagosa’s system 1 
is in all essential points the same as the Madhyamika’s, but it accepts the 
theory of an «All conserving Mind» ( alaya-vijnana ), as a stage in the evo¬ 
lution of «Suchness» (tathatd) in which consciousness is awakened)). 2 

The Yogacara school is divided into the ancient one, or the followers of 
Aryasanga, and the new one, or the followers of Dignaga. The first 3 esta¬ 
blished their idealistic views on a new interpretation of the old Abhidharma. 
Aryasanga himself composed a Mahayanistic Abhidharma, 4 where the number 
of elements (dharma) is increased from 75 to 100. The alaya-vijnana is 
here a new element, a store house, a real granary, where the seeds ( bija ) 
of all future ideas and the traces of all past deeds are stored up. However 
it is not the Absolute. It belongs to the phenomenal part of existence be¬ 
cause all the results ( vipdka ) 5 of Karma are there stored up. This store-con¬ 
sciousness in this system occupies a position analogous to the Primitive 
Matter ( pradhana ) 6 of the Sankya school. All individual objects and ideas 
are regarded as its modifications ( parindma ) by the Sankhya. The Yoga¬ 
caras likewise regard all separate ideas as modifications of their store-con¬ 
sciousness. This represents a disguised return from the theory of a stream 
of thought to the doctrine of a substantial Soul. 7 In the stream of thought 
every preceding moment of consciousness is the cause of the next following 
one. This relation, called samanantara-pratyaya ) is now replaced by the re¬ 
lation of the store consciousness ( dlaya ) to its modifications (parindma). 8 

But in the Sankhya system both the Primitive Matter and its modifi 
cations were realities. The Yogacaras regarded both as unreal. From their 

1 Whether this Asvaghoga, a Mahayanist, is the same as the author of Buddhacarita has 
been doubted. About his system cp. Suzuki, Discourse on the awakening of the faith (Chicago, 
1900), and Yamakami Sogen, Systems of Buddhist Thought, p. 252 ff. (Calcutta, 1912). 

2 Suzuki, Op. cit., p. 151. 

3 A clear exposition of Aryasanga’s system isto be found in the Trimsika of Yasu- 
bhandhu with acomment by Sthiramati, ed. bySylvainLevi (Paris, 1925). Cp. Yamakami 
Sogen op. cit. 210 ff. Cp. B. Keitb, Buddhist Phil., p. 242 ff. where all the literature is indi¬ 
cated. A still earlier(third)ideali8tc scholl of that name is mentioned,cf. B a c h a t e B„H,apaHaTa p. 7 6. 

4 Abhidharma-samuccaya, Bstan-hgyur, Mdo, vol. 32. 

5 Cp. Trimsika, p. 18. 21. 

6 Ibid. p. 86. 9. 

7 Cp. my Central Conception, p. 35. 

* Trimsika, p. 34. 5 ff. This is Sthriramati’s view about dlaya. Other views were en¬ 

tertained by Nanda, Dignaga and Dharmapala, cp. Scbiefner, Taranatha, p. 301. 


X. THE YOGACARAS 33 

predecessors, the Madhyamikas, they adopted the theory of the relativity and 
consequent unreality (. sunyatd=nihsvabhdvatd) of all individual existence, 1 
of all plurality, with that difference that they introduced different degrees 
of this unreality. First of all, individual ideas were unreal because they 
were logical constructions (parikalpita) without any adequate reality corres¬ 
ponding to them in the external world. This was called their essential un¬ 
reality (laksana-nilisvabhdvatd) . 2 They were nevertheless contigently real 
(paratantra) in that sense that they obeyed to causal laws ( pratitya-samut- 
pada) ? \ This was called their causal unreality or relativity (utpatti-nihsva- 
bhdvatd). They were, at last, unreal individually as far as they were mer¬ 
ged in the unique reality ( parinispanna ) of the Absolute (tathatd = dhar- 
matd). This was called their absolute unreality (paramdrtha-nihsvabha- 
vatd) 4 as individual entities. It was the same as their reality in the Abso¬ 
lute, their reality, so to say, sub specie aeternitatis. The Absolute thus be¬ 
came immanent to the phenomenal world, it was neither different, nor un- 
different (ndnya ndnanya) . 5 As an assemblage of individual ideas it was 
different, but viewed as an organic whole it became identical. It was a spi¬ 
ritual Absolute ( citta-dharmatd ), 6 pure consciousness, undifferentiated into 
subject and object ( grahya-grdhaka-rahita ). 7 It is the essence of Reality 
(dharma-dhdtu) and it is therefore identified with the Cosmical Body 
(dhama-kaya) of the Buddha. 8 All the numerous synonyms which are used to 
characterise this conception in other schools can be applied to it. 9 The 
yogi in his mystic intuition is supposed to possess a direct cognition of this 
undifferentiated pure consciousness (advaya-laksanam vijnapti-matram). 10 

In the closing chapter of his Abhidharmakosa Vasubandhu mentions 
the Mahayanist view that all separate elements, the dharmas of the Hina¬ 
yana, have no ultimate reality. 11 At that time he rejects this view, but later 

1 Ibid. p. 41. 2, 

2 Ibid. p. 41. 14. 

3 Ibid. p. 41.18, cp. p. 16. lQ.vijnanam pratitya-samutpannatvdd dravyato'sti. 

4 Ibid. p. 41. 23-24. 

5 Ibid. p. 40. 6. 

6 Ibid. p. 42. 16. 

7 Ibid. p. 40. 4. 

8 Ibid. p. 43. 25. 

0 Ibid. p. 41. 26. 

10 Ibid. p. 42. 20. 

11 Cp. the transl. of M. de la Y. P., IX, p. 273, and my Soul Theory, p. 858. 

? 


34 


NIRVANA 


on, near to the close of his long life, he changes his stand point, and ac¬ 
cepts the idealistic theory of his elder brother x4sanga. Asanga himself 
seems also to have, at a certain period of his life, fluctuated between the 
two main lines in which Mahayana was split. 1 But at the end of their career 
both brothers definitely settled in the conviction, that the universe was a 
logical construction, 2 that all its separate elements were relative, not real 
in themselves, but that they possessed another reality, the parinispanna, a 
reality in the Absolute, they were real when regarded sub specie aeterni- 
tatis. The theory of Salvation, of this transition from samsara into nirvana, 
out of the phenomenal world into the Absolute — this greatest puzzle 
of the Indian mind — underwent a complete change as a consequence of the 
change in the ontological view. In Hinayana where, as we have seen, both 
samsara and nirvana were considered as realities, the mystic power of yoga 
was called upon to achieve the transition out of the one into the other. 
Actual experience in transic meditation suggested to the Buddhist philo¬ 
sophers that yoga was capable of arresting some functions of the senses and 
of the intellect. And since the world was analysed in bits of senses and 
sense data, it seemed only logical to admit that yoga could achieve the task 
of arresting the life of the Universe for ever. 

The great change produced by the Mahayana consisted in the view 
that the Absolute was immanent to the World. There was consequently no 
need of converting the elements of the phenomenal world into eternal ele¬ 
ments, the samskrta-dharmas into asamskrta-dharmas , the samsara into 
nirvana. The change consisted in the change of aspect. The mystic power of 
yoga was now invoked not in order to produce a real change in the consti¬ 
tution of the Universe, but in order to replace the wrong views of unso¬ 
phisticated humanity by an intuition of what was the absolutely real. To 
the yogi the world appeared in a quite different aspect, he viewed 
every separate object as unreal separately, but real sub specie aeternitatis. 
For him the elements (dharmas) of the Universe needed no conversion into 
eternal ones, they were themselves eternally «quiescent». 

1 According to the Tibetans, among the 5 works of Maitrey a-Asanga some are written 
from the Yogacara standpoint, some from Madhyamika-svatantrika, and one from the Madhyamika- 
prasangika view. 

2 Trimsika, XVII, sarvam vijnaptimdtralam , and Sthiramati remarks, p.35, thatsor- 
vam includes both the phenomenal world and the Absolute, sarvam iti traidhatukam asam - 
skrtam ca. 


XI. THE MADHYAMIKAS 35 

The Hinayanistic conception of separate elements ( dharma ) which were 
active in phenomenal life and quiescent (santa) or extinct ( niruddha ) 
in Nirvana was, according to the Yogacaras, contrary to reason. 
If they were real they could not disappear totally. They were, accordingly, 
declared to have been always quiescent, quiescent or extinct from the outset 
(adi-santa). 1 To regard them as active, in the transcendental sense, is an illusion. 
In that sense, it can be asserted, that nirvana is real and samsara unreal. 

In the system of Dignaga the old Abbidharma is forsaken altogether and 
replaced by logic and epistemology. Dignaga started with the reform of the 
Brahmanical logic (nyaya) and adapted it to Buddhist ideas. His analysis of 
cognition resulted in the conception of an extreme concrete and individual 
(svalaksana), the root, or, so to say, the differential of cognition, a point-instant 
(ksana) in which existence and cognition, object and subject, coalesce. 2 The 
conception of this idealistic school regarding Nirvana may be gathered from 
the closing words of Dharmakirti in his ((Examination of Solipsism». 3 The 
question is asked how is the omniscience of Buddhas to be understood, of 
the Buddhas which are the personification of pure consciousness undifferentia¬ 
ted into subject and object, and it is answered that «the penetration of the 
Buddhas into every existing object is something inconceivable, it is in every 
respect beyond what we may express in speach or cognise in concepts)). 

XI. The Madhyamikas 

This system of philosophy and dialectics is the foundation of the Ma¬ 
hayana religion. Although other systems — the realism of the Sarvastivadins 
and the idealism of the Yogacaras — are also studied in the monastic schools 
of the countries where this religion flourishes, nevertheless the Madhyamika 
system is generally regarded as the true background of the religious feelings 

1 CL Mahayana-sutralaipkara, ed. Sylvain Levi (Paris, 1907), XI, 51, trsl. ibid. 
(Paris, 1911)—«ils (les dharmas) sont originellement en Paix et en 6tat de Pari-Nirvana». 
Cf. St. Schayer, Die ErlOsungslehren der Yogacaras nach dem Sutralamkara des Asanga, 
Z. far Indologie, II, 1, p.99 ff.Tbe idea that all elements are originally quiescent ($anta=nivrtta) 
sc. eternally extinct, an idea leading to the theory of everything being real sub specie aeterni- 
talis is likewise expressed by Nagarjuna, Madhy. s.,VII. 16— pratitya yad yad bhavaii tat tac 
chantam svabhavatah. 

2 A very interesting and rather subtle discussion between Candrakirti and Dignaga 
about the point-instant in which existence and cognition are supposed to coalesce is found in 
M. vr., p. 59 ff., transl. in the Appendix. Cp. my Buddhist Logic and Epistemology, cb. VII. 

3 Samtanantarasiddhi, edited by me in the B. B, and translated into Russian in the 
Series IlaMHTHHKH HHAHHCKOH <PHJI0C0<t>HH. I. 


y 




36 


NIK VAX A 


XI. THE MADHYAMIKAS 


37 


of its votaries. For it must be allowed that the Mahayana is a truly new 
religion, so radically different from Early Buddhism that it exhibits as many 
points of contact with later Brahmanical religions as with ts own predecessor. 
Prof. 0. Rosenberg calls it a separate«church» and compares its position with 
Roman Catholicism versus Protestantism. 1 The difference is even more radi¬ 
cal, since the new religion was obliged to produce a new Kanon of Scriptures. 

It never has been fully realised what a radical revolution had trans¬ 
formed the Buddhist church when the new spirit which however was for a 
long time lurking in it arrived at full eclosion in the first centuries A. D. 
When we see an atheistic, soul-denying philosophic teaching of a path to 
personal Final Deliverance, consisting in an absolute extinction of life, and 
a simple worship of the memory of its human founder, —- when we see it 
superseded by a magnificent High Church with a Supreme God, surrounded 
by a numerous pantheon and a host of Saints, a religion highly devotional, 
highly ceremonious and clerical, with an ideal of Universal Salvation of all 
living creatures, a Salvation by the divine grace of Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas, a Salvation not in annihilation, but in eternal life, — we are fully 
justified in maintaining that the history of religious has scarcely witnessed 
such a break between new and old 2 within the pale of what nevertheless 
continues to claim common descent from the same religious founder. 3 

1 0. Rosenberg, Probleme der B. Philosophie, XIX. 

2 Very characteristic is also the fact that Buddhist art of the ancient period represented 
Buddha by an empty place or a symbol which later on is replaced by a divine figure of the 
Apollo type. Notwithstanding prof. A. Griinwedel’s contrary view (Buddhistische Kunst, 1 st ed., 
p. 68) the only explanation seems to be that the total disappearance of Buddha in Nirvana was 
thus given pictorial expression. 

3 The two churches coexisted peacefully in the same monasteries, because the Buddhists 
very wisely always made allowance for human nature which sometimes feels inclination towards 
a simple rationalistic Low Church and sometimes is attracted towards a devotional and magni¬ 
ficent High Church. They divided humanity in families ( gotra) of which some by nature belonged 
to the low-church family (hinayana=hinddhimukti) and others to the high-church family. 
We must imagine the process by which some originally Hinayanistic monasteries gradually 
turned Mahayanistic as a process of aggrandisement. The educational Buddhist monasteries, 
which are comparable to mediaeval universities, were aggrandised by the addition of a new 
college which received its own temple and body of monks studying a new special litteratnre 

and conducting a special worship. In present days we can witness in Transbaikalia the addition 

to monasteries, which can afford it, of Kalacakra-colleges with a special temple, a special body 
of monks, a special literature and a special worship. The different types of Buddhist mona¬ 

steries are described by B. Baradiin in a very instructive work now published at Verchne- 
Oudinsk, «0 dy^HHCKMx MOHacTbipax MoHro.iHH n Tn6eTa», (it was accessible to me in MSS. 

during my visit to that town in 1925). 


Yet the philosophical system which is the foundation of this new reli¬ 
gion is usually represented as the extreme expression and the logical conse¬ 
quence of that pessimism and skepticism by which Early Buddhism is suppo¬ 
sed to have been inspired. It is characterised as ((complete and pure nihilism)), 
as «the legitimate logical outcome of the principles underlying ancient Bud¬ 
dhism)). 1 It is accused of teaching that «all our ideas are based upon 
a non-entity or upon the void». 2 It is represented as a ((negativism which 
radically empties existence up to the last consequences of negation)), 3 
a doctrine whose conception of reality was one of «absolute nothingness)). 4 
The Madhyamikas are called the most radical Nihilists that ever existed. 5 
When compared with Vedanta, it has been asserted that negation has a po¬ 
sitive counterpart in that system, whereas there is none in the Madhyamika. 
Negation in the latter is represented as its ((exclusive ultimate end (Selbst- 
zweck)». 6 

The opponents of Mahayana in India describe it much in the same 
manner. Thus Kumarila accuses the Madhyamikas not only of denying the 
existence of external objects, but of denying the reality of our ideas as well. 7 

1 H. Kern, Manual, p. 126; A. Barth, Quarante aus, I. p. 108: M. de la Vallee 
Poussin, Bouddhisme, p. 186. 

2 H. Jacobi, A. 0. J., XXXI, p. 1. 

3 M. Walleser, Die B. Phil., II, p. Ill; Der altere Vedanta, p. 44. 

4 B. Keith, op. cit., pp. 237, 239, 247, 261 etc. Prof. B. Keith’s exposition contains 
(p. 239) what, in my opinion, is the right view, viz. that Nagarjuna’s real object was to show 
that the intellect «condems itself as inadequate just as it finds hopeless antinomies in the world 
of experience^). As prof. B. Keith very well knows, Nagarjuna is not the only philosopher who 
adhered to such a line of arguing, very celebrated men have done that. Why then should Nagar¬ 
juna’s main conception be «difficult and obscure» (ibid.)? He also hits the right mark when he 
points to a primitive, non-differentiated reality, identified with Buddha’s Cosmical Body ( dharma- 
■kaya), as the central conception of Mahayana. He even finds (ibid. p. 255) much more reality and 
activity in this conception than in the absolute of the Vedanta with which it is so strikingly 
similar. How are these views to harmonize with the conflicting opinions of the same author — 
e. g., p. 261 where it is asserted that for Nagarjuna the world was «absolute nothingness*), that 
it was a utterly unreal*—I am at a loss to explain. Or does prof. B. Keith suppose that Nagar¬ 
juna did not admit the doctrine of Dharmakaya, or that, having admitted it, he did not fully 
realise its consequences, or that «the positive side of the Mahayana» (p. 257), is a later develop¬ 
ment out of its negative side? 

5 I. Wach, Mahayana, p. 58. 

6 M. Walleser, Der altere Vedanta, p. 42. «Selbstzweck» is explicitly denied byNaga- 
rj u n a, XXIV, 7 and many other places. 

7 Slokavartika, Niralambanavada, 14. In fact the Madhyamikas denied the validity of 
the pramauas and maintained that external and internal were correlative terms which are 
meaningless beyond this correlation, see below, p. 42. 



38 


NIRVANA 


I 


XII. THE DOCTRINE OF CAUSALITY IN THE HINAYANA 


39 


Vacaspatimisra is full of respect towards Buddhist logicians, but for the 
Madhyamikas he has only remarks of extreme contempt, he calls them 
fools 1 and accuses them of reducing cognition to nothing. 2 Sankara accuses 
them of disregarding all logic and refuses to enter in a controversy with 
them. The position of Sankara is interesting because, at heart, he is in full 
agreement with the Madhyamikas, at least in the main lines, since both main¬ 
tain the reality of the One-without-a-Second, and the mirage of the mani¬ 
fold. But Sankara, as an ardent hater of Buddhism, would never confess that. 
He therefore treats the Madhyamika with great contempt, but not on the 
score of a «denial of the existence of our ideas», or of maintaining «absolute 
nothingness)), but on the charge that the Madhyamika denies the possibility 
of cognising the absolute by logical methods ( pramana ). Vacaspatimisra 
in the Bhamati rightly interprets this point as referring to the opinion of 
the Madhyamikas that logic is incapable to solve the question about what 
existence or non-existence really are. This opinion Sankara himself, as is 
well known, shares. He does not accept the authority of logic as a means of 
cognising the Absolute, but he deems it a privilege of the Vedantin to fare 
without logic, since he has Revelation to fall back upon. From all his oppo¬ 
nents he requires strict logical methods. 3 It must be added that the Japanese 

1 devdnam-priya , cf. Tatp.tika, p. 341.23, 469.9. 

2 Ibid, ad N. S., 1Y. 1.18, sarva-Sunyatve khydtur alhdvdt khydter abhavah. Vacaspati 
knows that they deny abhdva just as much, and in the same sense, as they deny bhdva, cf. Bha¬ 
mati ad V. S., II. 2. 32, na ca nistattvataiva tattcam bhdvdnam , tatha sati hi tattvabhavah sydt , 
so’pi ca vicaram na sahata ity uktam bhavadbhih. He also knows that to transform every thing 
into abKava is tantamount to endow non-reality with reality, to have a vigrahavan abhavah 
ibid. 389,22. But this does not prevent him from repeating popular accusations. 

3 Cf. Deussen, System des Vedanta, p. 99; Sankara ad V. S., II. 2. 38. The Madhya¬ 
mika denies the validity of logic, i. e. of discursive conceptual thought, to establish ultimate 
truth. On the charge that in doing so he himself resorts to some logic, he replies that the logic of 
common life is sufficient for showing that all systems contradict one another and that our funda¬ 
mental conceptions do not resist scrutiny, cf. Vacaspati, Tatparya-tika, p. 249 — avicdrita- 
siddhaih pramanair itaresdm pramanyam pratisidhyate. This is exactly the standpoint which is 
developed with such infinite subtlety and ingenuity by Srihar§ a in his Khan<jana-khanfia-khadya 
where he openly confesses that there is but little difference between Buddhism and Vedanta, 
a circumstance which Sankara carefully conceals. But in later works, e. g., Vedanta-paribhaga, 
or Nyayamakaranda, different pramanas are established as proofs for the existence of brahman. 
When commenting upon V. S., II. 2. 28, Sankara, in combating Buddhist idealism, resorts 
to arguments of which he himself does not believe a word, since they are arguments which the 
most genuine realist would use. He thus argues not sva-matena, but paramatam aSritya , a method 
very much in vogue among Indian pandits. Deussen’s interpretation of this point, op. cit. p. 260, 
as intended to vindicate vyavahara-satya is a misunderstanding, since the Buddhists never denied 


scholars, Suzuki, Anesaki, Yamakami Sogen and others who have a direct 
knowledge of what Mahayana is have never comraited the mistake of re¬ 
garding its philosophy as nihilism or pure negativism. 

We will now shortly refer to the main lines of the philosophy of the 
Hinayana in order better to show the radical change produced by the spirit 
of Mahayana and thus to elicit the real aim of its philosophy. 

XII. The doctrine of causality in the hinayana 

In a previous work 1 we have characterized Early Buddhism (Hina¬ 
yana) as a system of metaphysics which contained an analysis of existence 
into its component elements, and established a certain number of ultimate 
data ( dharma ). Every combination of these data was then declared to repre¬ 
sent a nominal, not an ultimate, reality. A substantial Soul was thus trans¬ 
formed into a stream of continuously flowing discreet moments of sensation 
or pure consciousness ( vijnana ), accompanied by moments of feeling, of idea¬ 
tion, volition (i vedana-samjnd-samskara ) etc. Matter ( rupa ) was conceived on 
the same pattern, as a flow of momentary flashes without any continuant 
stuff, but characterised by impenetrability, and representing the senses 
{ayatana 1—5) and sense-data (ayatana 7 —11). The world was thus trans¬ 
formed into a cinema. The categories of substance, quality and motion — 
for momentary flashes could possess no motion — were denied, but the reality 
of sense data and of the elements of mind, was admitted. All these ele¬ 
mentary data were conceived as obeying causal laws. But the conception 
of causality was adapted to the character of these entities which could 
neither move nor change, but could only appear and disappear. Causation was 
called dependently-coordinated-origination (jpratUya-sam-utpdda ), or depen¬ 
dent existence. The meaning of it was that every momentary entity sprang 
into existence, or flashed up, in coordination with other moments. Its formula 
was «if there is this, there appears that». 2 Causality was thus assumed 

the vyavahdru or samvrtti. Against M. Walleser’s, Der altere Vedanta p. 43, opinion that the 
objectivity of our ideas themselves is meant, it must be pointed out that the Buddhists did not 
deny the jilandkdra, and Sankara clearly states that external objects, not ideas, are meant — 
tasmdd artha-jridnayor bhedah. 

1 The Central Conception of Buddhism. 

2 The same formula in the Pali Kanon (Majjh. II. 32, Samy. II. 28 etc.), in the Ab. Kosa, 
III. 18 and 28 and Madhy. vr., p. 10. In the latter instance — asmin sati idam bhavati , hrasve 
dirgham yaihd sati, the formula clearly refers to coordination, not to causation. 




40 


NIRVANA 


XIII. THIS DOCTRINE MODIFIED IN MAHAYANA 


41 


to exist between moments only, the appearance of every moment being 
coordinated with the appearance of a number of other moments. Strictly 
speaking it was no causality at all, no question of one thing producing the 
other. There could be neither a causa materialise since there was no con¬ 
tinuant substance, nor could there be any causa efficiens, since one 
momentary entity, disappearing as it did at once, could not influence any 
other entity. So the formula was supplemented by another one «not from 
itself ( causa materialis ), not from something foreign (causa efficients), nor 
a combination of both does an entity spring up», x «it is coordinated, it is 
not really produced)). 2 Apart from these momentary entities 3 the system 
admitted eternal unchanging elements, Space and Nirvana, the latter repre¬ 
senting some indefinite essence ( dharma-svabhdva ), of these forces which were 
active in phenomenal life, but are now extinct and converted into eternal death. 
Thus both the phenomenal world and this kind of an absolute, both samsara 
and nirvana , were conceived as realities, somehow' interconnected, linked 
together in a whole (sarvam)* but in an ideal whole, having, as a combi¬ 
nation of elements, only nominal existence. 

XIII. This doctrine modified in Mahayana 

Now, the Madhyamika system started with an entirely different con¬ 
ception of reality. Real was what possessed a reality of its own (sva-bhdva), 
what was not produced by causes ( akrtaka = asamskrta), what was not de¬ 
pendent upon anything else (paratra nirapeksa ). 5 In Hinayana the elements, 
although interpendent (samskrta — pratUyasamutpanna), were real (vastu). 

1 Sarny. II. 113 and Madhy. Kar. I. 1, XII. 1. 

2 Madhy. vr.. p. 7— tat tat prdpya yad utpannam notpannam tat. svdbhdvatah-, ibid, 
p. 375,6 — paramarthaio Hyantdnutpadatvdt sarvadharmdydm. 

3 If I am not very much mistaken, this view of causality, viz. that, there is, properly 
speaking, no real causality, that this notion should he cancelled altogether and replaced hy 
a law of coordination between point-instants, is not quite a stranger to modern science and philo¬ 
sophy, cf. B. Russel, On the Notion of Cause, in Mysticism and Logic, p. 194. The Buddhist 
conception of causality would thus be something similar to the conception of a function in mat¬ 
hematics, « funktionelle Abhangigkeit», such a view of causality as was entertained in Europe hy 
D’Alembert, Comte, Claude Bernard, Avenarius, E. Mach and others, cp. the references 
inEisler, Handworterbuch der Philosophic, p. 338. We hope to devote before long a special 
article to this question. 

4 Cp. Central Conception, p. 6 and below p. 54, n. 5. 

5 Madhy. Kar. XV, 2. In the sequel the references with roman figures will refer to 
chapter and karika of Nagarjuna’s Madhyamika sastra, and the references in Arabic figures to 
Candrakirti’s comment, ed. B. B. IV. 


In Mahayana all elements, because interdependent, were unreal (sunya = 
= svabhava-sunya ). 1 In Hinayana every whole (rasi=avayavin) is regarded 
as a nominal existence ( prajnaptisat ) and only the parts or ultimate elements 
(dharma) are real (vastu). In Mahayana all parts or elements are unreal (sunya), 
and only the whole, i. e., the Whole of the wholes (dharmata=dharma-kaya), 
is real. The definition of reality (tattva) in Mahayana is the following one — 
«uncognisable from without, quiescent, undifferentiated in words, unreali- 
sable in concepts, non-plural — this is the essence of reality)). 2 A dependent 
existence is no real existence, just as borrowed money is no real wealth. 3 
The theory that all real existence can last only for one moment, since 
two moments implied already a synthesis, was abandoned, and the con¬ 
ception of a momentary entity ( ksana ), so characteristic for other schools 
of Buddhist thought, was given up, 4 as unwarranted ( asiddha ), not capable 
of resisting critique. 5 In Hinayana the individual ( pudgala ), the Self (dtma) 
was resolved in its component elements (skandha - ayatana - dhdtavah = 
— anatma), there were no real personalities (pudgala - nairdtmya), but a 
congeries of flashing forces (samskdra-samiiha). In Mahayana we have, on the 
contrary, a denial of real elements (dharma-nairdtmya), and an assertion of 
the whole, in the sense of the absolute Whole (dharma-kaya). & In Hinayana, 
in a word, we have a radical Pluralism, converted in Mahayana in as radical 
a Monism. 

1 It is clear that we have here that conception of a substance as something independently 
existing which is well known to the students of European philosophy, cp. Spinoza’s definition 
of substance as a quod in se est et per se condpitur». This conception resulted either in estab¬ 
lishing the theory of a harmonia generaliter stabilita in order to explain the interdependence 
of the monads, or to the view that there is only one unique substance. The latter view is 
taken in Mahayana, the former in Hinayana, where the harmony between the monads is 
established by karma as a special iorce(sa>nskdra,), the force xaregoy-^v, the Tipukov xtvouv. 

2 Ibid. XVIII. 9. 

3 Ibid. p. 263.3 — kdlika-dydcitakam. 

4 Ibid. p. 173.9, 545.18, 147.4. 

5 Ibid. p. 547.1. 

6 Although the Hlnayanist presses to the utmost the reality of the ultimate elements 
(dharmas) alone, nevertheless the importance of the whole is foreshadowed in the conception of 
sarvam (cp. below p. 54), as well as in the conception of a general Causality. Under the name of 
kdrana-hetu a kind of causality is asserted through which every moment of reality is conditioned 
by nothing short of the state of the whole Universe. This is expressed in the following way, 
(Ab. Kosa, II. 50), svato’nye ( sarve dharmah) karana-hetuh, i. e., an element (or a moment) cannot 
be its own cause, but all the other elements, i. e., the whole Universe, are in some, direct or 
indirect, causal relation with it. Since the three times ( adhvan ), i. e., all the future and all th 



42 


NIRVANA 


XIV. RELATIVITY 


45 


XIV. The doctrine of Relativity 

In Mahayana we are thus faced by a new interpretation of the old 
Buddhist principle of the dependency- coordinated -existence of the elements 
(dharmanam pratltya-sam-utpada). It is now being declared that whatso¬ 
ever is dependent or relative cannot be considered as an ultimate reality, and 
this feature is then pressed to its last extreme. In Hinayana existence was 
bifurcated in conditioned and unconditioned (samskrta and asamskrta), both 
being realities. Neither of them is now considered as ultimately real, and 
both are brought under the higher unity of Relativity. The central conception 
in Early Buddhism is the idea of a plurality of ultimate elements ( dharmas ). 
The central conception of Mahayana is their relativity (iSunyata ). The 
Buddhists themselves contended that the idea of ultimate elements ( skandha - 
dyatana - dhatavah ), of their interdependence (pratitya - samutpada) and of 
the «Four Truths of the Saint» are admitted in both Hinayana and Mahayana. 
But in the first they are referred to the reality of separate elements, and in 
the second they are interpreted as meaning their relativity, or non-reality . 1 
Since we use the term «relative» to describe the fact that a thing can be 
identified only by mentioning its relations to something else, and becomes 
meaningless without these relations, implying at the same time that the 
thing in question is unreal, we safely, for want of a better solution, can 
translate the word sunya by relative or contingent, and the term sunyatd 
by relativity or contingency . 2 This is in any case better than to translate it 

past moments are included in the conception oall the elements», sarve dharmah, it is clear that 
although the world appeared in, Hinayana as validly analyzable into bits, the idea of it as a 
logical continuum was foreshadowed. In Mahayana it became definitely asserted. 

1 The germ of the idea that the elements of existence, because interdependent, are not 
real can be found in some passages of the Pali Kanon. This Candrakirti himself admits (Madhy. 
avat. p. 22. 15 ff. B. B. IX). But it does not in the least interfere with the fact that Hinayana 
is a system of radical pluralism, all dharmas, and even Nirvana, are vattu, whereas Mahayanism 
is a monistic system ( advaya , nisprapahca). It is quite impossible to maintain that Hinayana is 
an advaita-system. But if the Madhyamika system is characterised as negativism, and everything 
negative is thrown into the same bag, then it is not difficult to discover in Majjh. N. I. 1 a full 
blown prajna-paramita, and to maintain that «es ist ein Irrtum anzunehmen, im alten Buddhismus 
sei etwas anderes als Negativismus gelehrt worden», as prof. B. Otto Franke has done, cp. 
Ernst Kuhn Memorial Volume, p. 332 ff. (Miinchen 1916). It is also difficult to say what the 
contention of M. de la V. P. that athere is a great deal of Madhyamika philosophy in the Pali 
Kanon» (ERE VIII, p. 334) exactly means. 

2 The notion of Relativity is thus taken in a generalised sense, just as Aristotle himself 
uses it in the Metaphysics, where he treats Ad altquid, not as one among the distinct categories, 


by «voi(l» which signification the term has in common life, but not as a 
technical term in philosophy. That the term sunya is in Mahayana a synonym 
of dependent existence (pratitya - samutpada) and means not something void, 
but something «devoid» of independent reality (svabhdva-sunya), with the 
implication that nothing short of the whole possesses independent reality, 
and with the further implication that the whole forbids every formulation 
by concept or speech (nisprapanca), since they can only bifurcate ( vikalpa) 
reality and never directly seize it — this is attested by an overwhelming 
mass of evidence in all the Mahayana literature . 1 That this term never meant 
a mathematical void or simple non - existence is most emphatically insisted 
upon. Those who suppose that sunya means void are declared to have mi¬ 
sunderstood the term, they have not understood the purpose for which the 
term has been introduced. 2 «We are Relativists, we are not Negativists!» insists 
Candrakirti . 3 The text book of the Madhyamika school opens by something 
like a hymn in honour of Dependent Origination, or Relativity. It can be 
rendered thus: 

The perfect Buddha, the foremost of all Teachers I salute! 

He has proclaimed the principle of Relativity, 

The principle that nothing (in the Universe) can disappear, 

Nor can (anything new) appear, 

Nothing has an end, 

Nor is there anything eternal, 

Nothing is identical (with itself), 

Nor is there anything differentiated, 

Nothing moves, neither hither, nor thither. 

It is (Nirvana), the blissful Quiescence 
Of every (possible) Plurality . 4 

but as implicated with all the categories (cp. G. Grote, Aristotle ed. Bain2. p. 88) and although 
he does not maintain that the relative is unreal, but he declares it to be Ens in the lowest degree 
(ibid. p. 85). The question whether Ens is itself relative he leaves unsolved. 

1 Ibid. 491,1 — niravaSesa-prapanca-ujmSamartham Sunyatd upadisyate: XXlV,is— yah 
pratitya-samatpddcih Sunyatdm 1am pracaksmahe; p. 503,12 — yo'yam pratitya-samutpado 
hetupratyayan apeksya rupa-vijhdnddinam pradur-bhavah sa svabhavena anutpadah... sd 
Sunyatd; p. 504,3 — yah jrrutyaya-adhinu sa Sunya ukto; 403,l — aSunyam... apratitya-samut- 
pannam: p. 591,6 — iha sarva-bhavanam pratitya-samutpannatvdc chunyatvam sakalena Sastrena 
pratipdditam, etc. etc. 

2 Ibid. XXIV.7, p. 490n — na cdpi Sunyatdydm yat prayojanam tad vijandsi. 

3 Ibid. 368.7. 

4 M. vr., p. 11. 13. 



44 


NIRVANA 


XV. The real eternal Buddha cognised in mystic intuition 

Applying this method to the Hinayanist conception of an extinct 
Buddha, representing nevertheless an eternal lifeless substance (svabhava 
or dharma ), Nagarjuna flatly denies the reality of the latter, notwith¬ 
standing all the reverential feelings which the idea must have evoked. 
Buddha is conceived in the Hinayana as the ultimate goal of the 
world’s progress, realised in a continuous stream of existences (bhavo- 
samtati ). 1 He can really exist so far this progress really exists, but an 
independent existence of both is impossible, because, being interde¬ 
pendent, they are correlative and hence not absolutely real. Just as a 
man suffering from an eye - decease perceives a double moon 2 in the sky, 
just so does the inveterate ignorance of mankind dychotomise every reality. 
Only ignorance 2 can imagine that the Hinayanistic Buddha has any real 
existence of his own . 3 Never did the Buddhas declare that either they 
themselves or their elements really did exist . 4 But, of course, it is not for 
the unsophisticated simple man that the Hinayanistic Buddha is devoid of 
any existence. Not being able to withstand the lion’s roar of Relativity , 5 the 
Hinayanist, the man of a poorly religious enthusiasm , 6 runs away, like an 
antelope, into the dark forest of Realism. But the Mahayanist’s denial does 
not mean that every hope of salvation must be given up , 7 because that 
Buddha who is above every possible determination ( nisprapanca ) is not 
denied . 8 The Mahayanist, when maintaining that the Buddha, as conceived 
in Hinayana, is not absolutely real ( nihsvabhava ), if he wishes to state the 
whole-truth ( aviparitdrtha ), 9 must confess that he cannot even assert so 
much. Strictly >peaking he can assert neither that the Buddha is relational, 
nor non-relational, nor both at once, nor neither . 10 Such characteristics are 
also conventional (prajnapti ). They are imputed characteristics (dropito 
vyavaharah ). 11 The real Buddha must be perceived directly by intuition. The 
reserved questions, the impossibility to answer whether the world is finite 

1 Ibid. p. 432 ff. 2 Ibid. p. 432.10. 

3 The Hinayanistic Buddha is not real, he has no svabhava, cp. XXII. 2, 4, 16, but the 

Mabayanistic one has a svabhava. The synonym of dharma-Kaya is svabhdva-Kdya. 

4 Ibid. p. 443.2, cf. XXV. 84 . 5 Ibid. 442.13. 

6 Svadhimukti-daridra , ibid. p. 443.1. 7 Ibid. p. 442.8. 

8 Ibid. p. 443.il. 9 Ibid. p. 443.13. 

10 Ibid. p. XXII.il. ii Ibid. p. 444.4. 


45 



XVI. THE mahayanist nirvana 

or infinite, and whether the Buddha survives after Nirvana are referred 
just to this impossibility of whatsoever determination . 1 It you insist that 
there is a Buddha, you needs must concede that after Nirvana there is 
none . 2 But if you realise the relativity of the conception, never will the 
question about his existence occur to you. Buddha is merged quiescent in 
nature and beyond every possible determination . 3 Those who proceed to 
dychotomise him as eternal or non-eternal, existent or non-existent, relative 
or non-relative, omniscient or non-omniscient, are all misled by words . 4 
They have no direct intuition (na pasyanti) of the absolute Buddha . 5 Just 
as a man who is blind from birth cannot see the sun , 6 just so are men in 
the throes of conventional conceptions, they do not perceive the Buddha 
directly, but wish to detail (prapancayanti) him conceptually. Only by them 
can He not be seen directly (< aparoksa-vartin ). 7 Buddha must be regarded as the 
cosmical order ( dharmatah ), his Body is the Cosmos ( dharmatd ). The essence 
of the Cosmos is incognisable, it is impossible to know what it is con¬ 
ceptually . 8 The reality of Buddha is the reality of the Universe, and as far 
as the Buddha has no separate reality (; nihsvabhava), neither the Universe 
has any, apart from him. All the elements of existence, when sifted through 
the principle of Relativity, become resplendent . 9 All the millions of existences 
(bhutakoti) must be regarded as the Body of the Buddha manifested in them. 
This is Relativity, the climax of wisdom (prajndpdramitd) 

XVI. The new conception of Nirvana 

Space and that kind of eternal death which was termed Nirvana were 
entered in the list of ultimate realities by the schools of Early Buddhism 
and the Yaibhasikas, on the score that they possessed a character (dharma), 
a reality (vastu), an individuality (svalaksana), an existence ( bhava ) of 
their own (sva-bhdva), since they fitted into the current definition of reality 

1 Ibid. p. XXII.12. 2 Ibid. p. XXII.u. 

3 Ibid. p. 448.1. 4 Ibid. p. XXII.15. 

5 Ibid. p. 448.10. 6 Ibid. p. 448.10. 

7 Ibid. p. 448.9. Such a definition of sense perception, pratyaksam aparoksam (sc. artha 
not jfidna) is opposed by Candrakirti to the definition of Dignaga pratyaksam kalpanapodham , 
cp. M. vr. p. 71. 10. It has been later accepted by the Vedantins (cp. Vedantaparibhasa) and 
others; brahma the Absolute, is then declared to be cognised by sense-perception by pratyaksa. 

g Ibid. p. 448,14-15. 

9 Prakrti-prabhdsvarah sarvadharmah prajndpdramitd-parisuddhyd, ibid. 444,9. 

'0 Tathdgata-kdyo bhutu-koti-prabhdvito drastavyo yad uta prajndpdramitd, A§tas., 94.14. 



46 


47 


NIRVANA 

(sva-bhava-dharanad dharmah). They were cancelled by the Sautrantika 
on the consideration that they did not possess any such separate reality. 
They also were cancelled by the Madhyamikas in consequence of the new 
definition of reality ( anapeksah svabhavah). This new weapon proved much 
more efficacious than the Occam Razor of the Sautrantika, especially as it 
was wielded by the Madhyamika with unflinching resolve. His conception 
of Relativity (sunyata) covered everything, all the conditional as well as the 
eternal elements of the Y aibhasika list. Indeed the idea of an absolute becomes 
meaningless, if there is nothing to set against it . 1 It then loses every indivi¬ 
duality or reality ( sva-bhdva ). And vice versa the phenomenal ceases to be phe¬ 
nomenal if there is nothing non-phenomenal with which it is contrasted. 
With the new interpretation of the principle of Relativity ( pratitya-samut- 
pada = sunya) the Hinayanic Absolute becomes just as relative as all 
other ultimates of this system. 

Very far reaching consequences had inevitably arisen from this newly 
adopted principle. The whole edifice of Early Buddhism was undermined 
and smashed. The Nirvana of the Hlnayanists, their Buddha, their onto¬ 
logy and moral philosophy, their conceptions of reality and causation were 
abandoned, together with the idea of the ultimate reality of the senses and 
sense data (rupa), of the mind (< dtta-caitta ), and of all their elements of 
Matter, Mind and Forces. «Nowhere and never» says Candraklrti, «have 
Buddhas preached the reality of the soul or of these Hlnayanistic elements ». 2 
All the constructions so laboriously built up by the schools of Early Bud¬ 
dhism had to be relinquished with the only exception of the principle of 
dependently-coordinated-existence ( pratitya-sam-utpada) in its new inter¬ 
pretation as Relativity (simyata). The textbook of the school devotes a 
chapter to every conspicuous item of the constructions of Early Buddhism, 
and destroys it by the same weapon, for whatsoever is relative is false, 
transient and illusory. 

The fortunes of MahaySna were greatly assisted by the wonderful 
style in which Nagarjuna couched his celebrated aphorisms. Notwithstand¬ 
ing the somewhat monotonous method by which he applies to all the con¬ 
ceptions of Hinayana the same destructive dialectics, he never ceases to be 

1 Ibid VII. 33. 

2 Ibid. p. 443.2. 


XVI. THE MAHAYANIST NIRVANA 

interesting, bold, baffling, sometimes seemingly arrogant. And this method 
of endless repetition of the same idea, although in different connections, 
impresses the student with the overwhelming, all-embracing importance of 
the principle of Relativity. In their Tibetan garb, owing to the mono¬ 
syllabic cutting precision of this wonderful language, the aphorisms become, 
if possible, still more eloquent than in the original, and are, up to the 
present day, studied in the .monastic schools, and repeated by the monks 
with rapturous admiration. Something like terror is inspired by this insist¬ 
ing and obstinate denial of all, even the most revered and cherished notions 
of the Hlnayanist. «What are we to do», exclaims Aryadeva, the next 
best expounder of the doctrine, «nothing at all exists !)) 1 « Even the name of 
the doctrine inspires terror !)) 2 

However it is only the Hlnayanist and all pluralists in general that 
need to be afraid of Nagarjuna’s dialectics . 3 He does not assail, but extols 
the idea of the Cosmical Body of Buddha. He extols the principle of 
Relativity, and destroys through it every Plurality, only in order to clear 
up the ground and establish on it the unique, undefinable ( anirvacanlya ) 
Essence of Being, the One-without-a-Second. According to the principle 
of monistic philosophy, consistently applied, all other entities have only a 
second hand, contigent reality, they are borrowed cash. 

This unique reality, although declared to be uncharacterisable (anir- 
vacaniya ), has been variously characterised as the «element of the elements)) 
(dharmdndm dharmata or dharma-dhdtu), as their relativity (sunyata), as 
«thisness» (i idamtd ), as their «relation to thisness» (idampratyayatd), as 
«suchness» (tathata), as the «suchness of existences (bhuta-tathata), as the 
matrix of the Lord (i tathdgata-garbha ), and lastly as the «Cosmical 'Body of 
the Lord », as Buddha’s Dharmakaya 4 . In this last attribution the Unique Es¬ 
sence of the universe becomes personified and worshiped under the names of 
Vairocana, Amitabha, the goddess Tara and others, as a Supreme God. Bud- 

1 P. L. Vaidya, Catuhsataka (Paris, 1923), Kar. 184. 

2 Ibid. Kar. 289. 

3 Prof. H. Kern, Manual p. 127, seems also to have been terror-stricken, he exclaims 
with what sounds like genuine solicitude, «there is no birth, there is no Nirvana! etc.» and 
makes responsible for this disaster «the principles underlying ancient Buddhism ». 

4 The terms prajnd-pdramitd and abhisamaya, when used in an objective sense ( karma- 
sadhana), mean the same. The Yogacaras would add as synonymous citta-dharmata , vijnapti- 
matrata, parinispannata , cp. Trimsika, p. 42. 


f 


48 


NIRVANA 


XVII. CONDEMNATION OF LOGIC 


49 


dhism becomes at once pantheistic and theistic or, as prof. M. Anesaki 
prefers to put it, Cosmotheistic . 1 

Buddha and Nirvana are different names for the same thing. But 
Nagarjuna treats the same thing under four or five different headings, his 
object being to show that whatever be the verbal designation (prapanca — 
vdk ), 2 from whatever side the problem of the absolute be tackled, the 
result is the same. If the phenomenal world is not real, neither can it 
have a real end . 4 To suppose that the phenomenal world really existed 
before Nirvana, in order to be changed so as not to exist after Nirvana, is 
an illusion which must be given up the sooner the better . 5 Whether we 
take the Vaibhasika view and maintain that Nirvana is something real 
(dharma) in which consciousness and life are extinct for ever , 6 or if we, with 
the Sautrantika, admit that it is the simple cessation of the world process , 7 
in both cases something real is assumed to exist before Nirvana and to dis¬ 
appear afterwards. This makes Nirvana not only relative, but a product of 
causes (samskrta ). 8 In full accordance with the idea of a monistic universe 
it is now asserted that there is not a shade of difference between the Abso¬ 
lute and the Phenomenal, between nirvana and samsara . 9 The universe 
viewed as a whole is the Absolute, viewed as a process it is the Phenomenal. 
Nagarjuna declares , 10 

«ya djavamjavibhdva updddya pratitya vd 
so ’pratUydnupaddya nirvdnam upadisyatev. 

This may be rendered thus—«having regard to causes or conditions 
(constituting all phenomena, we call this world) a phenomenal world. This 
same world, when causes and conditions are disregarded, (i. e., the world as 
a whole, specie aeternitatis) is called the Absolute.» 


1 In a very interesting book prof. M. Anesaki, Buddhist Art in its relation to Buddhist 
Ideals. (Boston and New York, 1915) shows how the perfection of that Japanese art which has 
evoked the admiration of the world is due to the influence of Mahayana ideals, to this genuine 
feeling of communion with the eternal, all-pervading principle of life, the Dharmakaya, realised 
by the artist in mystic intuition in every flower, every plant and every living creature he was 
painting. Is it not strange that the philosophy which establishes these ideals has been so 
utterly misunderstood by European scholarship ? 


2 M. vr. 373. 9. 

4 Ibid. XXV. 1. 

8 Ibid. p. 225. 10. 

8 Ibid. XXV. 5, 13. 


3 Ibid. p. 175. 

5 Ibid. p. 522. 6. 

7 Kleia-janmanor abhavah, ibid. p. 527.7. 
9 Ibid. XXV. 20. 


Ibid. XXV. 9 


XVII. Is RELATIVITV ITSELF RELATIVE? CONDEMNATION OF ALL LOGIC 
FOR THE COGNITION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

But the principle of Relativity (sunyata) did not prove an entirely 
safe foundation for the New Buddhism. A danger lurked in it which was 
likely to bring the whole construction in jeopardy. Just as the Absolute 
of Early Buddhism could not escape from the fate of being declared rela¬ 
tive, just so was Relativity itself relative , 1 it clearly depended upon its 
opposite, the non-relative, and without this contrast it was likely to lose 
every meaning. Nagarjuna did not shrink before this danger and faced it 
with the same audacious spirit as he was wont to do. This principle, the 
pivot of the system, is called upon in order to destroy all theories and 
to replace them, as we have seen above, by direct mystic intuition, 
not in order to replace it by a new theory. As a theory it is just as bad 
as the old ones, it is even much worse. «If something non-relative», says 
Nagarjuna , 2 «did really exist, we would then likewise admit the existence 
of the relative, but there is absolutely nothing non-relative, how then can 
we admit the existence of the relative (or the truth of Relativity). »- 
«Relativity)), explains Candrakirti, «is here the common characteristic of 
ail the elements (dharma) of existence. That is our view. But since 
there is no element which would be non-relative, Relativity itself, for want 
of those objects with which it could be contrasted, (becomes as inane as a 
mirage), as a garland of flowers in the skv». Does this mean that Rela¬ 
tivity should be rejected? No, «because the Buddhas have taught that to 
realise the relativity of all artificial conceptions is the only way to get rid 
of them. But if people then begin to cling to this very concept of Rela¬ 
tivity, they must be called irreclaimable )). 3 «It is», explains Candrakirti , 4 
«as if somebody said, „I have nothing to sell you,“ and would receive the 
answer, „ All right, just sell me this your absence of goods for sale!“» We 


1 I find the question whether Relativity is itself relative mentioned by B. Russel (A B C 
of Relativity, p. 14) and declined with the remark that it is absurd. Nevertheless the question 
exists and cannot be dismissed on such grounds, the more so by an author from whom we learn 
that «whosoever wishes to become a philosopher must learn not to be frightened by absurdities®. 
(The Problems of Philosophy, London 1921, p. 31). 

2 Ibid. XIII. 7. 

3 Ibid. XIII. S. 

4 Ibid. p. 247.6 


4 




50 


NIRVANA 


XIX. EUROPEAN PARALLELS 


51 


r 


read in the Ratnakuta , 1 «I declare that those are rotten, and many 
times rotten who, having conceived relativity, cling to it (as a new theory). 

.It is much better to cling to the false idea of a really existing 

personality (pudgala), notwithstanding it is a blunder of Himalayan dimen¬ 
sions, than to cling to this doctrine of relativity which (in this case would 
be) a doctrine of the void (abliava). . . It is as if a doctor 2 administered 
a powerful remedy which would remove all the ailments of the patient, but 
could not afterwards be expelled from the abdomen. Do you think that 
the patient would be really cured? No, he would suffer even much more 
than he did suffer before!» 

The characterisation of reality as Relativity is resorted to in extremis 
for want of any other expedient. It is a verbal characterisation, it takes 
into account the necessities of speech (sabclam upadaya prajnaptih). z The 
Sautrantika made use of the conception of a nominal entity (prajnaptisat), 
as has been mentioned above, when combating the artificial con¬ 
structions of Early Buddhism. This conception was extended by the 
Mahayanists so as to cover all the elements without exception. Sense data, 
consciousness, feeling, volition were declared by the Sautrautikas ultimate 
realities. But Nagarjuna did not spare them. They became all relative 
and nominal, and relativity itself was but a nominal «middle path» of 
approaching reality. Middle path meant in Early Buddhism steering 
between materialism (ucchedavada) and the doctrine of an eternal Soul 
(sasvatavada). Its positive content was the doctrine of separate elements 
(dharma). In Mahayana this term changes its meaning and becomes syno¬ 
nymous with Relativity (sunyatd). Relativity is the Middle Path . 4 

XIX. Parallel developments in Buddhism and Brahmanism 

That the evolution from Hmayana to Mahayana ran parallel with the move¬ 
ment which in other Indian religions at the same epoch led to the establishing 
of their pantheons and their supreme deities of Siva and Vishnu, is quite obvi¬ 
ous. The brahmanical religions were ,likewise founded on a background of 
pantheism, on radical monism with the Saivists, and a somewhat mitigated 

1 Ibid. p. 248.7 

2 Ibid. p. 248.11. 

3 Ibid. XXIV. 18, XXII.ll, p.215.1, 286 1. 

4 Ibid. XXIV. 18. Therefore. Madhyamika-sastra must be translated « A Treatise on Re¬ 
lativity.)) 


one with the Vishnuites. Both tendencies represented old traditions, based 
on explicit, though contradictory, utterances of the Upanishads. That the 
Mahayana is indebted to some Aupanisada influence is most probable. 
That Gaudapada and Sankara have been, in their turn, influenced by the 
dialectic of Nagarjuna can hardly be denied. But it is at present impos¬ 
sible to elicit something definite about the strength of these influences, 
their time and their place. A Mahayanistic tendency seems to have mani¬ 
fested itself very early in the Buddhist schools. Part of the community was 
not satisfied to see in Buddha an essentially human nature, and felt restive 
before the idea of his total disparition in Nirvana. Some centuries later 
this tendency reaches full eclosion and a great man, Nagarjuna, gives lustre 
and popularity to a new Church. Its philosophy made volte-face from 
Pluralism to Monism. 

XIX. European parallels 

To assign to Nagarjuna his place among the great philosophers of hu¬ 
manity is not so much the task of the Indianist, as of the general historian 
of philosophy. But until the texts are made accessible in translations 
intelligible to him we cannot expect him to guide us . 1 The Indianist finds 
himself obliged tentatively to do it himself in comparing the ideas he comes 
across in India with what may be found similar in the vast field of European 
philosophy. In characterizing an Indian philosopher as «nihilistw, rationalist, 
pantheist or realist some comparison is already involved. If A. Barth, 
E. Senart and others have protested against premature and misleading 
comparisons it is only because they were inclined to find between the Indian 
philosopher and his European associate more points of divergence than of 
similarity, but to find divergence means already to compare. To characterise 
Nagarjuna as a «nihilist» means to make a misleading comparison, since his 
condemnation of logic is only one part, and not the principal one, of his 
philosophy. In order to understand a philosopher there is no better method 
than the one proposed and so brilliantly applied by H. Bergson, i.e., to 
dissect him in different parts which by themselves will not be the philo- 

1 The two translations by prof. M. Walleser, DieMittlere Lehre,(Heihelberg 1911 and 
1912) are extremely useful for the study of the texts, they would have been still more useful if 
comparative indices were added to them. But being litteral we doubt whether they could 
convey any definite impression in the mind of a philosopher. 


4’ 



if 2 


NIRVANA 


XIX. EUROPEAN PARALLELS 


53 


sopher in question, but which summarized will help us to understand him . 1 

Upon the Indian side we must first of all point to the almost absolute 
identity with Vedanta, as a probable consequence of his indebtedness 
to Aupanishada tradition. If prof. B. Keith and prof. M. Walleser 
suppose that Nagarjuna stops at negation, or denies even the empirical 
reality of this world, it is only because his real aim, the positive counter¬ 
part of his negativism, the identity of dharmakaya and brahma , has 
escaped their attention. It follows from this identity that all the points of 
contact which prof. Deussen has really found, or imagined to have found, 
between Schopenhauer and Vedanta, will equally apply to Nagarjuna. This 
philosophy was most decidedly opposed to rationalism, to those systems, 
modern or ancient, Indian or European, which asserted the capacity of 
human reason to cognise things as they really are. He even presses 
this incapacity to the utmost and challenges the claims of logic with 
greater emphasis than any philosopher ever has done. Other remarkable 
parallelisms may be pointed out wich refer to the step taken by Nagarjuna 
from Pluralism to Monism. Whether the systems operated with the concep¬ 
tion of an independent substance and assumed the existence of separate, 
though harmonising, monads, or assumed a perpetual stream of passing 
events, the next step is to imagine one all-embracing indivisible substance. 
This, as we have seen, is the position of Mabayana versus Hinayana. It has 
been parallelled in Greece by the position of Parmenides versus Heraclitus. 
The step was repeated in modern German philosophy. Prof. H. Jacobi has 
already suggested 2 a comparison between Zeno of Eleia and Nagarjuna. ’We 
may add that the similarity was not limited to their dialectics. Zeno, as is 
now known, devised the celebrated «sophisms» in order to prove the impos¬ 
sibility of motion, and in support of Parmenides's conception of the world as 
one motionless whole . 3 

Very remarkable are then the coincidences between Nagarjuna’s nega¬ 
tivism and the condemnation by Mr. Bradley of almost every conception of 
the every day world: things and qualities,, relations, space and time, 
chauge, causation, motion, the Self. From the Indian standpoint Bradley 
can be characterised as a genuine Madhyamika. But above all these 
% 

1 De l’intuition philosophique, Revue de Metaph., 1911. 

2 A. 0. J. XXXI. 1, p. 1. 

3 Cp. Bertrand Russel, External World, p. 167 if. 


parallelisms we may perhaps find a still greater family likeness between 
the dialectical method of Hegel and Nagarjuna’s dialectics. Hegel 
in his Phanomenologie des Geistes 1 challenges common sense to point out 
some object which is certainly known for what, in our experience, it is, 
and solves the question by stating that all we really know of the object is 
its «thisness», all its remaining content is relation. This is the exact 
meaning of the tathatd , or of «suchness», of the Mahayanist, and Relativity, 
as we have seen, is the exact meaning of the term sunyata. We further 
see the full application of the method which maintains that we can truly 
define an object only by taking explicit account of other objects, with whom 
it is contrasted, that debarring this contrast the object becomes «devoid» of 
any content, and that both the opposites coalesce in some higher unity which 
embraces them both. The facts are knowable only as interrelated, and the 
universal law of Relativity is all that is properly meant by reality. Both 
philosophers assure us that Negativity {sunyata.) is the Soul of the Universe,«Ne • 
gativit&t ist die Seele der Welt». Reducing the world of fact to a realm of 
universal relativity this implies that every thing cognisable is false, tran¬ 
sient aud illusory, but that the constitution of the real world depends upon 
this very fact. Even sensations and sense data (rupa ) 2 which first appeared 
as ultimate realities, we then gradually discover to stand in relations without 
which they prove to be meaningless. Relativity, or negativity, is really 
the Soul of the Universe. 

Some more points of similarity will be easily detected between Nagar¬ 
juna and every monistic philosophy, the more so between him and those 
philosophers who, like Nicolaus Cusanus, G. Bruno and others, insist upon the 
negative method of cognising the Absolute. It will hardly be denied that the 
Mahayanist conception of Buddha’s Cosmical Body as the unique substance 
is very similar to Spinozas conception of God as the only substance, Deus 
sive substantia, Deus sive natura. Although Spinoza’s intuitus of everything 
particular sub specie aeternitaiis is supposed to be a rational capacity of 
the intellect and Nagarjuna’s intuition is mystic, nevertheless both lead to 
the same result. 

These several points of similarity should, as a matter of course, be taken 
for what they are worth. For one thing, they might preclude the characte- 

1 For the English phrasing of Hegel’s principles I am indebted to Baldwin’s dictionary. 

2 Ibid. IV. 1. 


54 


55 


nirvana 

ristic of a «nihilist» to be applied to Nagarjuna. The chief divergence bet¬ 
ween him and his European colleagues in Monism is that he did not believe 
in logic, at least for the ultimate aim of cognising what reality in itself is. 
Hegel and Bradley seem to believe in the efficiency of their logic. It did not 
occur to them that if applied to their own results their logic would sublate 
itself. Nagarjuna was fully aware of this fact. Therefore abandoning logic 
altogether he betook himself to direct mystic intuition of the Absolute, the 
One-without-a-Second. This step, or jump, from a condemned logic to direct 
intuition, has been made by many philosophers and in our days it has a very 
eloquent exponent in the person of M. H. Bergson. 

XX. The position of nyaya-vaisesika 

The estrangement which befell many scholars at the idea of annihila¬ 
tion as the ultimate goal of a religion would perhaps never have been so 
strong if it had been known that Buddhism was by no means the only Indian 
system which had arrived at such conclusions. Besides a series of systems 
of a decidedly materialistic tinge, the orthodox Nyaya-Vaisesika system 
adhered to the conception of an absolutely lifeless Nirvana. 1 This annihila¬ 
tion of all life is here called Final Deliferance ( moksa ) or Absolute End 
(apavarga) and is characterized as a kind of «superbliss» (: ni1isreyasa )». 2 
«Is it possible)), asks Vatsyayana, «that an enlightened man should favour 
a Final Release in which there is neither bliss nor consciousness))? And he 
answers by another question — «Is it possible that an enlightened man 
should not favour the idea of a Final Release where all turmoil of life is 
stopped for ever and where there is no consciousness about it!». «This Release)), 
he says, «is tranquility where everything is given up, everything has ceased 
to exist, and therefore a great deal of depression, horrors and sin are 
extinct». 3 Jayanta exclaims likewise, «is it possible that reasonable men 
should make efforts in order to reduce themselves to a stone-like (inanimate) 
condition?)) and gives the same reply. 4 

All Indian philosophical systems professed to be doctrines of Salvation. 
They therefore start from the conception of a whole ( sarvam ) 5 which is then 

1 Cf. S. N. Dasgupta’s History of Indian Philosophy, p. 362 ff. 

2 Nyayasutra, I, 1, 2 and 22. 

8 Nyayabhasya, p. 9 (Vizian.). 

4 Nyayamanjarl, p. 509 (Vizian.). 

5 That sarvam , in its technical sense, does not include nirvana, as M. delaVallee 
Poussin asserts, op. cit. p. 139, is quite wrong. Sarvam means sarvam jheyam which is but an 


XX. NYAYA-VAISESIKA 

split in two halves, Phenomenal life and the Absolute (samsdra and nirvana). 
The phenomenal part is further divided into an analysis of its actual condi¬ 
tion ( duhkha ), its driving forces ( duhkha-samudaya ) and their gradual 
extinction ( mdrga ). When this extinction (nirodha) is reached, life merges 
into the Absolute about whose essence a variety of constructions exist. These 
four topics, — the four « noble truths », as the term has been very inadequately 
translated and represented as a fundamental principle of Buddhism, — contain, 
in reality, no doctrine at all. 1 It is only a scheme for philosophical con¬ 
structions and is accepted as such by all Indian systems without exception. 
They cover, indeed, the Indian conception of philosophy. Uddyotakara says, 
«these are the four topics which are investigated by every philosopher in 
every system of metaphysics)). 2 Accordingly every philosophical system must 
contain an analysis of the elements of life, a doctrine about its driving 
forces, a doctrine of the Absolute and a doctrine about the method to be 
followed in order to escape out of phenomenal life and become merged in 
the Absolute. Phenomenal life receives in the Nyaya-Vaisesika system the 
designation of duhkha , just as in Buddhism. It is very inadequate to translate 
this term by suffering, misery, pain etc., since it covers such items as ina¬ 
nimate matter, the five objects of sense, colours, sounds, tastes and tactile 
phenomena. 3 These are not the objects to which the term suffering can be 

other name for the 12 ayatanas (corresponding to the 12 prameyas of Nyayasutra I, 1, 9), nirvana 
is included in ayatana JV? 12 ( dhammd ), cf. my Central Conception, appendix II, p.106, the elements 
E. 2—3. This is also clear from Samyutta IV, 15 where sabba is used in its technical sense, 
sabba-vaggo, sabbam vo bhikkhave desissami. The passage in Majjhima I, 3 contains no statement 
about this topic at all. The classification of the elements into 12 ayatanas and into 16 dhatus 
includes nirvana, the one into skandhas (VI th classification) does not. Cp. also Triipsika, p. 36, 
sarvam iti traidhatukam asamskrtam ca. 

1 This clearly appears from the fact that the «truths* are explicitly admitted in the 
Sankhya, Yoga, Nyaya and Vaise§ika systems and implicitly in all the others. Within the pale 
of Buddhism they cover two opposite theories, the dharma — pudgala-nairatmya theory of the 
Hinayana and the Sunyatd = dharma-nairatmya theory of Mahayana, cf. above p. 41. They are 
a classification of the elements in four stages as viewed by the saint, the arya, cf. Madh. vptti, 
p. 127, arydndm eva tat satyam, and Ab. Kosa, VI, 2, and the tables appended to my Central 
Conception. The editors of the P. T. S. Pali Diet, think that arya has a a racial* meaning, arya- 
pudgala would then mean, not the same as anasrava-dharmdh or marga-satya, but something 
like «a noble gentleman*; but T. W. Rhys Davids rightly translates it «Arhat» in D. N., i, 37, 
cf. Dialogues, I, 51. 

2 Nyayavart, ed. B. I., p. 13, etani catvary arthapaddni sarvasv adhyatmavidyasu 
sarvacaryair varnyanta iti. 

3 Vatsyayana says that duhkha means janma (ad N. S., 1.1. 22) and Vacaspati explains, 
duhkhaSabdena sarve Sarirddaya ucyante, and warns against confounding it with suffering, 
mukhyam era duhkham iti bhramo ma bhut; the same is pressed by Jayanta, na ca mukhyam 


57 


56 NIRVANA 

safely applied in our language, if we are to escape confusion. Bliss itself is 
entered into the classification of existence ( duhkha ), as one of its 21 items. 
And this is quite natural because there is no eternal bliss neither in early Bud¬ 
dhism nor in Nyaya-Vaisesika, if the «super-bliss» of disappearing into an 
eternal senseless condition be excepted. The classification into 21 items is but a 
slight modification of the Buddhist classification into 16 component parts 
of existence (dhatu ). 1 The reason why this term has been chosen as a desi¬ 
gnation of phenomenal life is that philosophy seeks a way out of it. Philo¬ 
sophy is the science of the Absolute, of Nirvana. For every philosopher all 
phenomenal life is something that must be shunned, it is heya. The analysis 
of existence into its elements, as has been stated above, is undertaken in 
order to determine the means by which all the forces of life must gradually, 
one after the other, be brought to a standstill. 

It is likewise a general feature of all Indian systems that they assume 
the existence of a central force which keeps life going in this world, nay in 
all the imaginable worlds. This general force (karma) is resolved into the 
special ones, termed illusion, desire and aversion. They produce germs of 
future actions and until they are neutralized by corresponding methods, they 
will always produce a continuation of life. Illusion is neutralized by philo¬ 
sophic insight, but the decisive and final step which stops empirical life for 
ever and transfers the individual into the Absolute is achieved by Yoga, i. e„ 
bv that mystical power which is produced by absorption in intense con¬ 
centrated meditation. These conceptions represent a characteristic Indian 
habit of thought. We meet them everywhere. Their origin is certainly not to be 
sought for in the Yoga system of Patanjali which has been proved to be a 
very late production, about 800 years later than the origin of Buddhism. 
Their most primitive and crude form appears in the Jaina system. The defi¬ 
cit duhkham bddhandsvabhdvam aramrsyate. kim tu tatsddhanam tadanusaktam ca sarvatn era. 
(Nyayamanjari, Viziau., p. 507). Cf. Ab. Koga, VI, 3, and Madhy. vrtti, p. 127, ihahi 
pahcopadana-skandha, duhkham ity ucyate. Exactly the same definition in Sam yutta N., Ill, 47. 
It is a technical term, the equivalent of the first afya-satya and of the sdsrava-dharmdh; 
a suffering » is duhkha-vedand, a quite different thing, it has an other place in the system under 
vedana-skandha. To confound them is a mistake, just as to confound rupa-ayatana with rupa- 
skandha (the latter includes 10 dyatanas ), or the 3 dhdtus with the 18 dhdtus , or the 6 indriyas 
with the 22 indriyas , or the 75 dharmas with the 64 dharmdh, etc. Cf. M. C. Rhys Davids, 
B. Psych., p. 83. 

1 Another classification of every thing cognizable into 12 prameyas, cf. Nyayasutra, 
I. 1. 9, corresponds, to a certain extent, to the Buddhist classification into 12 dyatanas. 


XX. NYAYA-VAISESIKA 

ling elements of illusion, desire, aversion etc. are here represented as a kind 
of subtle matter which through the pores of the skin flows into the body and 
fills it up like absorbed medicine or like a bag is filled with sand. 1 By taking 
vows, by ascetic and meditative practices the entrance into the body is shut 
up, the inflow ceases, and the individual becomes purified. In all other 
systems this process is spiritualized, and instead of an «inflow» of defiling 
matter we have an «influence » (dsrava) of defiling psychical elements which 
is being stopped by insight and meditation. All elements of existence are in 
the Buddhist system, as mentioned above, divided in such that can be extin¬ 
guished by philosophic knowledge, and such that can be extinguished by mysti¬ 
cal absorption only. The first class includes wrong views, under which item the 
naive realism of ordinary men is understood. Desire, passion and even the physi¬ 
cal elements of matter can be extinguished for ever only by the force of absorp¬ 
tion. 2 Although the Nyaya-Vaisesika system favours a naively realistic view of 
the universe, it has no other means of reaching Nirvana than the mystical power 
of Yoga. «The details about this matter», says Vatsyayana, «will be found 
in special yoga manuals». 3 Any question about the efficency of this method 
is answered by stating that the power of yoga is illimited. The Nyaya sutras 
mention a characteristic objection from some skeptic mind. 4 A man, says he, 
may be intensely absorbed in meditation, so as to forget everything which 
exists about him. He may retire into a lonely place, a forest, a cave, a sandy 
beach, and there practice meditation until every perception of the external 

1 Cf. Tattvarthadhiyamasutra, VI. 2 ft'., VIII. 2 (transl. by H. Jacobi, Z. D. M. G., LX). 
Cf. also the detailed and very clear exposition of the complicated Jaina theory in H. v. Glase- 
napp, Der Jainismus (Berlin, 1925), p. 158 f. The passions are imagined as a kind of tar by 
which the influent matter is glued with the Soul, ibid. VI. 5. 

2 Samudaya-satya (= heya-hetuh) consists in Nyaya just as in Buddhism of avidyd-tsrne. 
cf. Nvayaviirt, p. 4, 1. 13. It is specified that these elements are also included in duhkha 
(i. e. in the upddanaskandhas) — tad dhctus ca duhkham uktam , ibid. Their respective antidotes 
(i. e. marga) consist on both sides of prajha and samadhi, cf. Vais, sutra, V. 17—18. Prajha is 
characterised as dharma-praviveka (cf. Vatsyayna ad IV. 2, 41) which corresponds to the Buddhist 
dharma-pravicaya (Abh. Kosa, I, 2). 

3 Nyayabhagya ad IV, 2, 46. Although the prasankhyana is analogous to prati-sankhya- 
nirodha of the Buddhists, its procedure is different. By the illimited mystic power of Yoga innu¬ 
merable «magic bodies», nirmana-kaya, must be created at once, to atone in them for endless 
former deeds and thus to reach Final Extinction. Cf. Tatparyatika, p. 6. This prof. B. Keith, 
Indian Logic and Atomism, p. 260, calls «vulgar thaumaturgy». According to such phrasing 
Dr. H. Beck, who interpets even the knowledge of duhkha-satya as a vision of ethereal bodies 
(Buddhismus 2 , II, p. 89 f.), would be called a magician. Usually these men are called mystics. 

4 IV, 2, 39—44. 



58 NIRVANA 

world has ceased. Nevertheless when external phenomena of exceptional 
force, as e. g., a thunderstorm, overcome him, he will awake out of the most 
intense meditation. Why could not the same happen to him in the moment 
he is about to attain Final Release, if this is to be attained by such medi- 
tation? The objection is answered by pointing to the mystical power of trance 
which stops all energies of life for ever. After that no living bodies, no 
feelings and no cognitions can exist 

We thus see that an appeal to the mystical power of yoga is a common 
feature of many Indian philosophical systems. It is needed to fill up the place 
of the four main subjects which are another general feature of the Indian 
systems. The originality of each system lies in its ontology, its theory of 
cognition, its conception of the Absolute, and the details of its construction 
of a path leading to Final Release. The Nyaya-Vaisesika system assumes 
a limited number of substances with their changing qualities. The Soul of 
the individual is here represented as an eternal substance, it is ubiquitous 
and conterminous with space. Knowledge is produced in it by a special 
contact with an internal organ of a physical nature. When the body is 
removed from one place to another, feelings and ideas are produced in a 
new part of this same motionless 1 substance by its occasional contact with 
the internal organ which follows the movement of the body. Soul is thus 
a semi-material ubiquitous substance similar to space and time which in this 
system are equally conceived as separate ubiquitous substances. This con¬ 
struction facilitates the transition out of phenomenal life with its feelings 
and cognitions into the Absolute, which is the absolutely senseless and 
lifeless state of this very substance. By the power of absorption the internal 
organ is kept back from all contact with the Soul and the senses. No con¬ 
sciousness is then produced, all life is annihilated, but the substance of the 
Soul reverts in Nirvana to its original and natural condition ( svarupavastha ). 

The Nyaya and Vaisesika were at an early date engaged in a contro¬ 
versy with the Vedantins about the condition of the liberated Soul. The 
YaiSesikas maintained that it was simply a- cessation of all life, just as 
a cessation of fire when all fuel is exhausted. 2 What is this eternal bliss 

1 Faddegon, Vaisegika System, p.272—3, thinks that this Soul was imagined «as really 
moving». Thi3 is quite impossible since it represents a unity (Vais. S. HI, 2, 19) and is omni¬ 
present (vibhu, parama-niahat, ibid. VII. 1, 22). Cf. also NySyabindutika ed. B. B., p. 65, ni*kriya$ 
catma... sarvagatah. 

2 In his vindication of a substantial Soul Faddegon, op. cit., p. 276 ff., apparently 


XX. NYAYA-VAISESIKA 59 

and what is this e'ernal consciousness, they ask, which constitutes the essence 
of the eternal spiritual principle according to the Vedantins? Since all objects 
of knowledge have entirely disappeared for ever in Nirvana, it is a joy 
without something to be enjoyed, and it is knowledge without knowing 
anything. Such feeling and such knowledge, even if they existed, would 
be as good as if they never existed at all ( sthitopy asthitan na visisyate)} 
«But then», asks an objector, «your Soul would be as lifeless as a stone?» 2 
The Vaisesika concedes the argument, although he seems to prefer, as 
a sort of image mediatrice, the comparison with space. 3 A question is 
next asked which gives expression to that feeling of estrangement which is 
so strong when we think of annihilation as an ultimate goal. «No wise men 
will ever strive to attain Final Deliverance (moksa-nirvana) if, after all 
consciousness and life have been annihilated, it becomes similar to a piece of 
rock (sila-sakala-kalpa),* if it is undistinguishable from a stone ( pdsdna - 
nirvisesah), if it is inanimate (jada).y> «But, says the author, wise men do not 
exert themselves for bliss alone. Experience shows that they also exert them¬ 
selves to escape pain, like when they, e. g, «avoid being stung by thorns». 5 
Phenomenal life being here comparable to pain, the result is that the annihila¬ 
tion of it alone is the ultimate aim of man on earth. This ultimate annihilation 
and this lifeless substance receive the epithet of the place of Immortality 
( amrtyu-padam ), 6 the same epithet wlich final annihilation receives in 
Early Buddhism. Its eternal unchanging character is thereby emphasized. 

Nor was this analogy between the theories of the Buddhists and the 
Nayayikas ignored by the latter. We find in the Nyayamanjari of Jayanta 
(p. 512) the following very characteristic deliverence: «By nirvana and 

assumes that the Vaise§ikas imagined the Soul as a conscious substance, just as the Sankhyas 
and the Vedantins did. But consciousness (buddhi) is in that system only a guna of the atman, 
it appears occasionally through a special contact. The Soul in itself ( svarupavasthaydm ) has 
neither consciousness, nor feeling. 

1 Nyayakandali ,p. 2S6 (Vizian.', cf. Nyayamanjari, p. 510, 1.12—13. 

2 Ibid. That the pure essence of a Soul, or of the substance that produces consciousness 
is itself as lifeless (jada) as a stone seems to be here an extreme consequence drawn by 
the objector, the comparison with space, as an ubiquitous substance, is more adequate. 

3 Cf. Vais. sutra, VII. 1.22; Bbasarvajnas Nyayasara, p. 39 (B. Ind. 1910) 

4 Cf. Nyayamanjari, p. 508 f. and Nyayatatparyadlpika, p. 282 (Ibid). Cp. Naigadhlya, 
XVII. 75, muktaye yah silatvaya idstram uce... Gotamam. 

5 Nyayasara, p. 40. 

6 Nyayabhasya, p. 30, cf. likewise p. p. 31-34 where the controversy with Vedanta is al¬ 
ready in full swing. 


60 


XIRAANA 


XXI. CONCLUSION 


61 


similar expressions the Buddhists mean an absolute end ( apavarga ) which 
is either (in Hinayana) the annihilation of the flow of consciousness, or (in 
Mahayana) a flow of pure (objectless) consciousness. (The first) solution — 
annihilation — is even more pitiful than (the condition to which Soul is 
reduced in nirvana) according to the Nayayikas, since it does not leave to 
the Soul even a stonelike condition. But in one point we agree with the 
Buddhists, viz. that there is a difference between the essence of the 
Soul by itself and the form iu which it appears in its reciprocal action with 
other objects. A constant change of (this substantial) Soul (as maintained 
by the Buddhists) is absolutely inconceivable, it must be rejected as impos¬ 
sible, just as (the converse theory of the Buddhist about the sound, viz. that) 
sound is a substance (sc. atomic).» 

The Nirvana of the old 1 Nyaya-Vaisesika school is thus lifeless and 
similar to the Nirvana of the Vaibhasika-Buddhists. On the other hand 
the Nirvana of the Mahayanists, to which the Sautrantikas adhered, has the 
same pantheistic character as the Nirvana of the Vedantists. 

XXI. Conclusion 

The probable history of the Buddhist conception of the Absolute is, 
therefore, the following one. 

1. In the VI century B. C. there was a great effervescence of philo¬ 
sophical thought among the non-brahmanical classes of India, and a way out 
of phenomenal life was ardently sought for, the majority of the solutions 
having a materialistic tinge. Buddha at that time proposed, or accepted, 
a system denying the existence of an eternal Soul, and reducing phenomenal 
existence to a congeries of separate elements evolving gradually towards 
final extinction. 

2. To this ideal of a lifeless Nirvana and an extinct Buddha some 

1 In later theistic Nyaya Final Deliverence is reached by the direct contemplation of God, 
and the condition of the liberated Soul is defined as blissful, cf. Nyaysara, p. 40, and Nyayatat- 
paryadlpika, p. 293. Both the Vaisesika and the Nayayika systems were originally atheistic, 
cf. H. Jacobi, Die Gottesidee bei den Indern, (Bonn 1923) p. 47 ff. and Faddegon, op.cit.p.165 
and 354. That the idea of an eternal God could not easily tally with the system is seen from 
the embarrasment to decide whether it should be classed as a muktatman or not. The question is 
solved, in agreement with Yogasutra 1.24, by admitting that the quality of consciousness, 
■which is only accidental in Souls, becomes eternal in God, cf. Nyayakandali, p. 58 (Vizian) 
and Nyayavartika p. 469. Both theistic and atheistic Nayayikas existed at Sriharsa’s time, 
cp. Naisadhiya XVII, 75 and 77. 


schools alone remained faithful. A tendency to convert Buddha into a su¬ 
perhuman, eternally living, principle manifested itself early among his 
followers and led to a schism. 

• 3. This tendency gradually developed until in the I century A. D. it 
ended int the production of a luxuriant growth of a new kanonical literature. 
It then adopted, probably borrowing from some Aupanisada school, the 
brahmanical idea of a pautheistic Absolute, of a spiritual and monistic cha¬ 
racter. After this Buddhistic adaptation of the Vedanta the Buddha was 
converted into a full blown brahman and its personification worshipped 
under the names of a Cosmical Body ( dharmakaya ), Samantabhadra, Vairo- 
eana and others. 

4. The philosophical doctrine of the old church stuck to the central 
conception of separate elements of Matter, Mind and Forces, composed lists 
of them with a view to investigate the method of their gradual extinction in 
the Absolute. 

5. Among the early schools the Mahasamghikas, Vatsiputriyas and 
others already assumed a kind of consciousness surviving in Nirvana. 

6. They were followed by a school with critical tendencies, the Sau¬ 
trantikas, which cut down the list of artificially constructed elements, cut 
down Nirvana itself as a separate entity and transferred the Absolute into 
the living world, thus constituting a transition to Mahayana. 

7. The philosophy of the new religion is an adaptation of the Vedanta 
system. It forsook the pluralistic principle altogether and became emphati¬ 
cally monistic. 

8. It then took a double course. It either assumed the existence of a 
store-consciousness of which all phenomenal life was but a manifestation. 
This school in the sequel cultivated logic. The other school denied the possi¬ 
bility of cognising the Absolute by logical methods, it declared all plurality 
to be an illusion, and nothing short of the whole to be the Reality directly 
cognised in mystic intuition. 

9. The transitional school of the Sautrantikas coalesced in the V century 
A. D. with the idealistic school of the Mahayana and produced India’s greatest 
philosophers Dignaga and Dharmakirti. With regard to Nirvana it assumed 
the existence of a pure spiritual principle, in which object and subject 
coalesced, and, along with it, a force of transcendental illusion ( vasana) 
producing the phenomenal world. 


62 


NIRVANA 


10. Contemporaneously with this highest development of Buddhist 
philosophy, in the VII century A. D., the relativist school of early 
Mahayana received a fresh impulse and a revival of popularity. This led to 
the formation of new hybrid schools. 

11. The very high perfection to which philosophy was brought by both 
the idealistic and relativistic schools of Buddhism could not but influence 
all philosophical circles of India, and we see in the next period the old 
Vedanta remodelled and equipped with fresh arguments by an adaptation to 
it of the methods elaborated in the Vijhanavada and Sunyavada schools of 
Buddhism. 


APPENDIX 


A TREATISE ON RELATIVITY 
BY NAGARJUNA 

CHAPTERS I AND XXV 
TRANSLATED 




A TREATISE ON RELATIVITY 

by 

NAGARJONA 


PREFATORY ' 

Nagarjuna is the author of three different works upon the Buddhist Theory 
of Relativity ( sunyata ), a fundamental (muh), complete work, Madhyamika- 
Sastra, and two short summaries — Yukti-sastika and Sunyata-saptati. 

The complete work contains about 400 aphorisms divided into 27 chapters. 
The first chapter is devoted to a critique of the conception of Causality. It reduces our 
every-day conception of it and all realistic theories ad absurdum and thus indirectly 
establishes Monism ( advaita ). The rest of the work is filled with the application 
of this result to every separate item of the Hlnayanist philosophical system } 
Nagarjuna is also the author of two short tracts dealing with the method of 
negative dialectics adopted by him. One of them «The Refutation of Contests» 
(vigraha-vyavartani) fs very often quoted. 

Whether he is the author of numerous other works which go under his 
name, and whether he is the same personality as the celebrated metallurgist, 

1 The following is the list of subjects treated, ch. I On Causality, II On Motion, III on the 
sense-faculties ( indriya ), IY On the elements of existence ( skandha), V On the component ele¬ 
ments (dhatu) of an individual, YI On passions (rdga), YII On momentariness (samskrta—trilak- 
san I), VIII On Agent and Action ( karma-karaka ), IX On the unreality of the preceding moment 
(purva), X On the relation of fire and fuel, XI On the Infinite (purvdparakoti), XII On the un¬ 
reality of the phenomenal world (duhkha = paflcopaddnaskandha), XIII On the unreality of all 
the forces (samskdra) of life, XIV On the unreality of relations ( samsarga ), XY On the notion of 
Essentia (svabhava), XVI On Bondage and Deliverance, XVII On Karma and its result, XVIII On 
the doctrine of a Soul ( atman ), XIX On Time, XX On the notion of a Totality of causes (sa- 
tnagrl), XXI On the notions of origin and end (sambhava-tibhava), XXII On the reality of 
Buddha, XXIII On logical incongruity ( viparayasa ), XXIV On the «Four Truths#, XXV On Nir¬ 
vana, XXVI On the Twelve Stages ( nidana ) in the development of an individual life, XXVII On 
false dogma ( drsti). 


5 


66 


NIRVANA 

chemist and alchemist Nagarjuna is very doubtful. 1 His pupil and successor 
Aryadeva, a Ceylonese by birth, has composed an independent treatise about 
the same subject, also in 400 aphorisms, but following another, more systematic, 
arrangement. 

About the date of both these authors there is till now no absolute certainty, 
but the II century A. D. is generally accepted as most probable. Although both 
were born in the South, the scene of their activity is Northern India, during the 
best time of the Kushan empire. 

After that there was a break in the development of the Madhyamika phi¬ 
losophy. During two centuries we hear of no prominent personalities and no 
works dealing with it. It seems as though it were partly fallen into oblivion. It 
is impossible otherwise to explain the total silence of Buddhagliosa about it. 

During the next period, the golden age of Indian civilisation, the age of 
the Gupta empire in Northern India, the brothers Asanga and Yasubandhu 
appear in the V th century as the champions of a somewhat modified Monism 
which receives in their hands an idealistic interpretation. 

The scene of the development of the Madhyamika philosophy after that shifts 
to the South. We witness there, in the VI th century A.D., a powerful revival of the 
genuine, uncompromising Relativism of Nagarjuna. Contemporaneously with 
the pupils of Yasubandhu, Sthiramati and Dignaga, two very celebrated men, 
who were working, the one in Yalabhi in Surat, the other mainly in Orrissa, 
two equally celebrated champions of the Madhyamika system, the Masters 
(dcarya) Buddhapalita and Bhavya or Bhavaviveka, 2 appear in the South. 
The Mahayana Monism becomes now definitely split into the idealistic school in 

1 There is an old tradition according to which the authentical works of Nagarjuna 

are six, but there is no agreement about how this nu mber is composed. Generally admitted are 
1) Mula-madhyamika-sliatra, also called Prajna-mula, 8 celebrated men have com¬ 
mented upon it, Nagarjuna himself, Buddhapalita, Bhavya, Candrakirti, Devasarma, 
GunasrI, Gunamati and Sthiramati, 2) Yukti-gastika, a very condensed statement of 
the_theory; its composition, Wassilieff thinks, possibly preceeded the composition of the main 
work, 3) Suny ata-saptati, askort poem on Relativity with the author’s own comment, 4) Vigra- 
ha-vy avartanl, also with comment, a work on logic already mentioning the four pramanas of 
the Naiyayiks, 5) Vaidalya-sutra and prakarana, self defence of Nagarjuna against the 
charge of perverting logic. The sixth is according to Bu-ston a work which is not trans¬ 
lated, Tha-snad-grub-pa, «A vindication of empirical Reality». However, others reckon, 
instead of it, Akutobhaya, a comment upon the mula-karikas. But Wassilieff remarks 
(in his «Review of the Madhyamika literature)), Mss musei As. Petrop.) that «the authenticity of 
this work was doubted even by the credulous Tibetans#. Candrakirti evidently held that 
Nagarjuna did not write any comment upon the mula-karikas, cf. text, p. 25. 6, but Ava- 
lokitavrata, commenting upon Prajna-pradipa calls it ran-hgrel. Besides these works the 
Bstan-hgyur contains 1) Mahayana-vimsika, in 20 verses, 2) Aksara-sataka, in 
3 lines, and 3) Pratltya-samutpada-hpdaya, in 5 lines, renewed attempts to express with 
utmost shortness the main conception of a monistic ( aikyam ) motionless Universe. They probably 
are spurious. ■ 

2 Perhaps Bhavyaviveka — legs-ldan-hbyed. 


appendix: Nagarjuna’s treatise on relativity 


67 


the North, the Yog&caras, and the relativistic one in the South. The latter is 
again divided between the followers of Buddhapalita and the followers of 
Bhavya. 

The condemnation of all logic for the cognition of the Absolute was final in 
the first of these schools, it admitted no bona fide argument at all, but undertook 
it only to show hopeless inconsistency in whatever logical argument would be pro¬ 
duced by its opponents. This school received the name of Madhyamika-Prasan- 
gika. The other school, the followers of Bhavya thought it necessary to 
supplement the short rules of Nagarjuna by independent ( svatantra ) arguments 
constructed in accordance with the rules of logic. This school received the name 
of Madhyamika-Svatantrika. Bhavya is a very subtle logician. He 
perhaps, more than any other one, deserves to be compared with Zeno 
of Eleia. Some of his baffling «sophisms» made his name celebrated in the 
Buddhist world. His school had success and was more numerous than the school 
of Buddhapalita in the beginning. But in the next VII th century A.D. the 
Master Candrakirti appears as a mighty champion of the purely negative 
method of establishing Monism. He succeeds in driving Bhavaviveka’s school 
into the shadow and finally settles that form of the Madhyamika System which 
is now studied in all monastic schools of Tibet and Mongolia where it is con¬ 
sidered to represent the true philosophical basis of Mahayana Buddhism. 

We can thus establish' the following periods in the development of the 
philosophy of the Mahayana, 

1) I century A. D., the rise of Mahayana, dlaya-vijnuna and tathata both 
admitted by Asvagho§a. 

2) II century, the theory of Universal Relativity ( sunyatd ) formulated by 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva 

3) III and VI centuries, a gap. 

4) V century, the idealistic interpretation of Asanga and Yasubandhu. 

5) VI century, a split between the idealistic and relativistic schools, 
Sthiramati and Dignaga representing the first, Buddhapalita and Bhavavi¬ 
veka the second. 

6) VII century, final establishment of the Madhyamika System in its ex-, 
treme form by Candrakirti. 

We now give the translation of the first chapter of the treatise of Nagar¬ 
juna with Candraklrti’s comment. 1 All the protagonists of the development 
just sketched together with some representatives of the brahmanical systems 
will he here seen at work. From the rest of the work the chapter about Nirvana 

1 Candrakirti has given to his comment the title of «The Clear-worded# (prasanna- 
padd) probably not without some dose of irony, since, as prof. Wassilieff attests, its extreme 
dialectical subtlety, especially in the first chapter, is equalled by no other work in the whole 
domain of northern Buddhist literature. 


68 


NIRVANA 


has been chosen as an illustration of the method which is in turn applied to 
every philosophic conception. 

In our translation we have endeavoured to avoid, as far as possible, literal 
renderings when they convey no clear meaning, in order to escape what 
M. A. Barth has called «traductions infideles a force d’etre litt4rales». Sanscrit 
scientifical works are not supposed to be read, but to be studied, their style is 
laconic and their technical terms suggestive of a wide connotation. Their trans¬ 
lation, in order to be comprehensible, should be, to a certain extent, an expla¬ 
nation. The literal rendering, when needed, is given in a foot-note. The sanserif 
text has been edited by M. de la Vallee Poussin in the Bibliotheca Buddhica. 
The division into small sections has been introduced by the translator in order 
to facilitate a vue d’ensemble. 


A TREATISE ON RELATIVITY 


DEDICATION 

The Perfect Buddha, 

The foremost of all Teachers I salute. 
He has proclaimed 

The Principle of (Universal) Relativity, 
; Tis like blissful (Nirvana), 

Quiescence of Plurality. 

There nothing disappears, 

Nor anything appears, 

Nothing has an end, 

Nor is there anything eternal, 

Nothing is identical (with itself), 

Nor is there anything differentiated, 
Nothing moves, 

Neither hither nor thither. 




CHAPTER FIRST 


EXAMINATION OF CAUSALITY 

I. 

There absolutely are no things, 

Nowhere and none, that arise (anew), 

Neither out of themselves, nor out of non-self 
Nor out of both, nor at raudom. 

II. 

Four can be the conditions 
(Of every thing produced), 

Its cause, its object, its foregoing moment, 

Its most decisive factor. 

III. 

In these conditions we can find 
No self-existence of the entities. 

Where self-existence is deficient, 

Relational existence also lacks. 

IV. 

No energies in causes, 

Nor energies outside them. 

No causes without energies, 

Nor causes that possess them. 


NIRVANA 


appendix: Nagarjuna s treatise relativity 


73 


V. 

Let those facts be causes 

With whom coordinated other facts arise. 

Non-causes will they be, 

So far the other facts have not arisen. 

VI. 

Neither uon-Ens nor Eus 
Can have a cause. 

If non-Ens, whose the cause? 

If Ens, whatfore the cause? 

VII. 

Neither an Ens nor a non-Ens, 

Nor any Ens-non-Ens, 

No element is really turned out. 

How can we then assume 

The possibility of a producing cause? 

VIII. 

A mental Ens is reckoned as an element, 

Separately from its objective (counterpart). 

Now, if it (begins) by having no objective counterpart, 
How can it get one afterwards? 

IX. 

If (separate) elements do not exist, 

Nor is it possible for them to disappear. 

The moment which immediately precedes 
Is thus impossible. And if ’t js gone, 

How can it be a cause? 

X. 


The (formula) «this being, that appears» 
Then loses every meaning. 

XI. 

Neither in any of the single causes 
Nor in all of them together 
Does the (supposed) result reside. 

How can you out of them extract 
What iu them never did exist? 

XII. 

Supposing from these causes does appear 
What never did exist iu them, 

Out of uon-causes then 
W^hy does it not appear? 

XIII. 

The result is cause-possessor, 

But causes are not even self-possessors. 
How can result be cause-possessor, 

If of non-self-possessors it be a result? 

XIV. 

There is, therefore, no cause-possessor, 
Nor is there an effect without a cause. 

If altogether no effect arises, 

(How can we then distinguish) 

Between the causes and non-causes? 


Finished the Examination of Causality, the first chapter of the 
Treatise on Relativity. 


If entities are relative, 

They have no real existence. 


appendix: Nagarjuna’s treatise on relativity 


CHAPTER XXV 


EXAMINATION OF NIRVANA 

I. 

If every thing is relative, 

No (real) origination, no (real) annihilation, 

How is Nirvana then conceived? 

Through what deliverance, through what annihilation? 

II. 

Should every thing be real in substance, 

No (new) creation, no (new) destruction, 

How would Nirvana then be reached? 

Through what deliverance, through what annihilation? 

III. 

What neither is released, nor is it ever reached, 

What neither is annihilation, nor is it eternality, 
What never disappears, nor has it been created, 

This is Nirvana. It escapes precision. 

IV. 

Nirvana, first of all, is not a Kind of Ens, 

It would then have decay and death. 

There altogether is no Ens 

Which is not subject to decay and death. 


V. 

If Nirvana is Ens, 

It is produced by causes, 

Nowhere and none the entity exists 
Which would not be produced by causes. 

VI. 

If Nirvana is Ens, 

How can it lack substratum, 

There whatsoever is no Ens 
Without any substratum. 

VII. 

If Nirvana is not an Ens, 

Will it be then a non-Ens? 

Wherever there is found no Ens, 

There neither is a (corresponding) nou-Ens. 

VIII. 

Now, if Nirvana is a non-Ens, 

How can it then be independent? 

For sure, an independent non-Ens 
Is nowhere to be found. 

IX. 

Coordinated here or caused are (separate things), 
We call this world Phenomenal; 

But just the same is called Nirvana, 

When from Causality abstracted. 

X. 

The Buddha has declared 

That Ens and non-Ens should be both rejected. 

Neither as Ens nor as a non-Ens 

Nirvana therefore is conceived. 


mm 

76 



If Nirvana were both Ens and non-Ens, 

Final Deliverance would be also both, 

Reality and unreality together. 

This never could be possible! 

XII. 

If Nirvana were both Ens and non-Ens, 
Nirvana could not be uncaused. 

Indeed the Ens and the non-Ens 
Are both dependent on causation. 

XIII. 

How can Nirvana represent 
An Ens and a non-Ens together? 

Nirvana is indeed uncaused, 

Both Ens and non-Ens are productions. 

XIY. 

How can Nirvana represent 

(The place) of Ens and of non-Ens together, 

As light and darkness (in one spot) 

They cannot simultaneously be present. 

XV. 

If it were clear, indeed, 

What an Ens means, and what a non-Ens, 

We could then understand the doctrine 
About Nirvana being neither Ens nor non-Ens. 

XVI. 

If Nirvana is neither Ens nor non-Ens, 

No one can really understand 
This doctrine which proclaims at once 
Negation of them both together. 


appendix: Nagarjuna’s treatise on relativity 7 7 

XVII. 

What is the Buddha after his Nirvana? 

Does he exist or does he not exist, 

Or both, or neither? 

We never will conceive it! 

XVIII. 

What is the Buddha then at lifetime? 

Does he exist, or does he not exist, 

Or both, or neither? 

We never will conceive it! 

XIX. 

There is no difference at all 
Between Nirvana and Samsara. 

There is no difference at all 
Between Samsara and Nirvana. 

XX. 

What makes the limit of Nirvana 
Is also then the limit of Samsara. 

Between the two we cannot find 
The slightest shade of difference. 

XXI. 

(Insoluble are antinomic) views 
Regarding what exists beyond Nirvana, 

Regarding what the end of this world is, 

Regarding its beginning. 

XXII. 

Since everything is relative (we do not know), 

What is finite and what is infinite, 

What means finite and infinite at once, 

What means negation of both issues? 


78 


NIRVANA 

XXIII. 

What is identity, and what is difference? 

What is eternity, what non-eternity, 

What means eternity and non-eternity together, 

What means negation of both issues? 

XXIV. 

The bliss consists in the cessation of all thought, 

In the quiescence of Plurality. 

No (separate) Reality was preached at all, 

Nowhere and none by Buddha! 

Finished Examination of Nirvana, the twenty fifth chapter of the 
Treatise on Relativity. 


THE CLEABWORDED 

A COMMENT 
UPON 

NIGARJUNA’S TREATISE ON RELATIVITY 

BY 


CANDRAKIRTI 




THE CLEARWORDED 


Dedication 

To that Nagarjuna I "bow who has done away all recourse to the abode 2 . 3 . 
of Duality, 1 

Who has emerged out of the ocean-like (all-embracing) Spirit of the 1 . 3 . 
Supreme Buddha, 2 

Who mercifully has explained the deeper meaning of the treasury 3 of 1 . 4 . 
religion, according to his own conception of it, 

Whose pilosophic fire consumes even now the fuel of opposed systems 1 . 5 . 
and burns down the darkness in the hearts of simple mankind, 

Whose words, containing incomparable knowledge, (like) a host of ar- 2 . 1 . 
rows, completely destroy the army of our foes (and deliver us from the bonds 
of phenomenal) existence, 

Whose words assume the majesty of rule over (the denizens) of all the 2 . 2 . 
three spheres of existence, 4 the Buddhist converts and the gods. 

1 The method of adopting a middle course (madhyama pratipad) between two opposite extre¬ 
mes from which theMadhyamika school has received its name is differently applied inHlnayana,e.g., 
S.N.III. 135.lt is there a term designating the central conception of Hlnayana, a middle course be¬ 
tween ((everything exists and nothing exists », meaning that a limited catalogue of ultimate ele¬ 
ments ( dharma ) exist in interdependence ( pratitya-samutpdda ). In Mahayana it is synonymous 
with the central conception of the Madbyamikas and means their idea of Relativity or Negativity 
(madliyamd pratipad—iunyata=pratitya-samutpdda), cp. XXIV. 18. The ff. terms are declared 
byCandraklrti, p. 504.13, to be visega-samjha’s, i. e., different m anners of expressing the same idea, 
anta-dcaya-rahitatva — sarvasvabhdxdnutpatti—pratitya-samutpdda—sunyata—wpaddya-praj- 
fiapti—madhyama pratipad. As usual the first word of the work is significant, it refers to its 
main idea. The translation of madhyamilca-Sdstra as The Doctrine of the Middle Path (Die Mit- 
tlere Lehre) is ambiguous since there are different middle paths. 

2 sambuddha-dhi-sdgara refers evidently to the doctrine of dharma-Jcdya. 

3 Read koSasya with the Tib. 

4 i. e., the worlds of carnal desire ( kama-dhdtu ), the heavens of ethereal beings ( rupa- 
dhdtii) and the heavens of pure spirits ( arupa-dhdtu ). 


6 


82 


KIEV ANA 


2 . 


Having made my salutation to that Nagarjuna, I am proposing to 
write an explanation of his aphorisms in clear sentences containing the 
right explanation unobscured by the fires of dialectics. 1 


1 This is a jeer at Bhavaviveka who below, p. 31.1, is called a (champion of) logic {tor- 
Jcika). It does not mean that dialectical subtleties will be avoided, but that all arguments will be 
indirect. The word tarkanila, p. 2.4, evidently alludes to Tarkajvala the title of Bharat eka =» 

work. 


CHAPTER FIRST 

EXAMINATION OF CAUSALITY 


I. Peeliminary 

The treatise which will be here expounded, is that which begins with 2 . 
the statement «there is neither a causa materialis , nor a causa efficiens, nor 
are (the things of the Universe a product of the combination) of both (these 
causes))). 1 The question now arises how does this doctrine affect (us), what is 
its subject matter and what its aim. The connection of the treatise (with 
us) 2 is the following one. (In a previous work), ((Introduction into the 
Madhyamika System», 3 we have elicited that in order to attain the (supreme) 
knowledge of a Buddha the first step to be taken is an initial vow (of devo¬ 
ting oneself to the Final Deliverance of all living creatures, this vow) har¬ 
monising with a monistic view (of the Universe), and inspired by a feeling 
of Great Commiseration. 4 Our revered Master Nagarjuna was himself wholly 
equipped with the (true) unflinching method of (our monistic system re¬ 
vealed in the predication about) the «Climax of Wisdom», 5 and he graci¬ 
ously has condescended to lay it down in a treatise for the enlightenment of 
others. 

1 Lit, p. 2.5, «not from self, not from other, not from both», cp. infra, p. 93. 

2 Sambandha discussed at the beginning of every scientific work means usually its re¬ 
lation to the subject matter, Nyaya-bindu, p. 2.15 (B. B.). Here it refers to the importance of 
the work for the Salvation of mankind. 

3 Madhyamika-avatara. The Tib. transl. ed. by de la Vallee Poussin in B. B. IX 
and partly translated in the Mus6on 1907, 1910 and 1911. 

4 The Mahayanistic Great Commiseration ( mahakaruna) differs from the Hinayanistic one, 
it agrees with Monism. This means that the Mahayanist strives for the weal of all living beings, 
cp. Suzuki, Mahayana, p. 292 ff, Madhy. av. p. 6.9 ff. The Tibetans make a distinction between 
the Mahayanistic conception, thugs-rje-chen-po and the Hinayanistic one, shin rje-chen-po. 

In Sanscrit the same word is used. 

5 projna-paramita, one of its synonyms is sunyata. 

6* 


84 


NIRVANA 

3. 3. (Indeed a philosophic treatise should contain a doctrine of Salvation, 
it then «rules and it saves»). «It rules over all our enemies, our passions. 
It saves us from the misery and from phenomenal existence (altogether). 
Those two advantages are not to be found in other philosophic doctrines». 

(Therefore the teaching of Nagarjuna should appeal to every one.) 

(What is its subject matter?) 

3. 5. The Master himself (discloses it in his initial prayer). He hints at the 
idea which will be developed during the whole treatise and at its aim. He 
tries to impress upon us that it will be a grand and fundamental treatise, 1 
because it will present (this idea) in a thorough 2 and unflinching mauner. 
Since this central idea of the (whole treatise) cannot be separated from (the 
Mahayanist’s conception of a Buddha, 3 Nagarjuna) in making his initial 
salutation to Him, the Supreme Teacher, alludes to the cause that induced 
him to compose this treatise aud says — 

(Buddha has proclaimed) the monistic Principle of Relativity, 4 the 
principle that nothing (in the Universe) can disappear, nor can (anything 
new) arise, nothing has an end, nor is there anything eternal, nothing is 
identical with itself, nor is there anything differentiated (in itself), 
there is no motion, neither towards us, nor from us, etc. etc. (everything 
is relative). 

3. li. The subject matter (the central idea) ol the treatise is the monistic 

princiciple of Relativity characterised by these eight (negative) characteri¬ 
stics, nothing disappears, etc. 

4. l. The aim of the treatise is indicated (in the same salutation). It is 

Final Deliverance, Nirvana, which is characterised as the bliss of the Quies¬ 
cence of every Plurality. 5 

The salutation itself is expressed by the words «I praise this highest ot 
all Teachers.» 

1 mahatmyam sc. sastrasya. The ideal scientifical work for India is the Grammar of 
Pauini with the Mahabhasya of Patahjali. A mahdSdstra is a icistra possessing mahatmyn, 
i. e., treating the subject with the thoroughness exhibited by’both these authors in theirgreat work. 

2 sam-prakaSana—samyak prakasana. 

3 Buddha’s Cosmical Body ( dharma-kaya) is the unique transcendental essence of the 
Universe and it is synonymous with Sunyntd, cp. de la Vallee Poussin, The three Bodies, 
J. R. A. S. 1906, p. 952. 

4 pra1itya-samutpada—sunyatd=antadvaya-rahitatva. 

5 On Mahayanistic Nirvana see above and Suzuki, op. cit., p. 339 If., S. Schayer, Die 
Mahayanistischen Erlobsungslehren (Muncheu. 1921). 


appendix: CANDRAKlRTl'S comment on relativity 


85 


This is, first of all, the general meaning of the first two stanzas. We 4. 3 
are now going on to detail the meaning of every word. 

«To disappear)) means to be evanescent. The split (of all existence into 4 . 5 
discrete) point-instants is here meant. 

(Nothing new can arise), to «arisen means to emerge as an individual 
existence. 

(Nothing has an end), an «end» means cutting off the stream of (con¬ 
secutive point-instants). 1 

« Eternal)) means perpetual, existing through all times. 

(Non-identical). Being identical means not being separate, not being 
discrete. 

(Non-differentiated). Differentiated means being different, i. e., dis¬ 
crete. 

«Motion hither», means the motion of distant objects into a near 
place. 

The «motion thither», means the motion of objects from a near into a 
remote place. 

II. The meaning of Pratitya-samutpada according to the author 



preposition prati). The root i means motion, the preposition prati means 
«reaching)). But the preposition (when added to a verbal root) modifies its 
meaning. It has been said that «the meaning of a verbal root (is changed 
by the preposition as if it were) violently dragged into another place, just 
as the sweet waters of the Ganges (change their savour when reaching) the 
waters of the ocean.» Therefore the word pratitya , being a gerund, means 
((reaching)) in the sense of being dependent (or relative). The word samut- 
pada means appearance, manifestation. It comes from the verbal root pad 
which with the preposition samut has this meaning. Thus the term pratit¬ 
ya - samutpada (in our system) conveys the idea of a manifestation of 
(separate) entities as relative to their causes and conditions. 2 

1 prdbandha = ksana-santana. 

2 hetu -pratyaya - aptksa. 


86 


NIRVANA 


III. The meaning of this term in Hinayana 

5. 7 . Others, (Srllabha and other Hinayanists), 1 maintain that pratltya- 

samutpada means (appearance and immediate) disappearance of everything. 
The verb i means to go, to disappear; itya is the participle, meaning «fit 
to disappear)). The preposition prati generalises. Pratltya is thus (not a 
gerund), but a derivative noun (meaning that everything is momentary). The 
evanescent momentary things appear—that is their explanation. 

IV. The Hinayanist interpretation rejected. 

6. i. This interpretation fits very well such passages of the Scripture as the 

following one, «0 Brethren! I will teach you the Dependent Origination (of 
everything). Those who will get an insight into it, will have grasped the 
teaching (of the Buddha), etc.» The sense of generalisation and the suggested 
grammatical composition of the term can be accounted for. 

6. 3. But (in other passages) there is altogether no generalisation, 2 because 
a single particular case is directly referred to. E.g.,in the following words, 
((visual consciousness appears when coordinated with the faculty of vision 
and (a patch) of colour.)) In this expression «in coordination with the faculty 
of vision», the word «in coordination)) takes into account one single flash 3 
of consciousness, produced also from one single (moment) of the faculty of 
vision. There is no generalisation. 

6. 5. But (the interpretation which we propose applies in both cases). The 
meaning of relativity applies when the word pratltya does not refer to a 
single case. It then means relative existence (in general), origination relatively 

1 In the sutras of the Hinayana the term is mainly applied to the doctrine about the twelve 
consecutive degrees in the development of an individual life (sc. of the skandhas), from prenatal 
forces samskura up to the continuation of life after death (jati). But this, according to the abhi- 
dharma, is only a special case of the general law of interdependance between the separate elements 
of life ;pratitya-samutpada or °panna is here interpreted as a synonym of all samskrta-dharmas, 
cp. my Central Conception p. 28. The formula of this interdependance «this being, that becomes, 
from this that arises» has then been criticised, because the. generalised formula, since it refers 
to all elements, to those also that exist simultaneously, the meaning of a consecution will not be 
quite correct. Therefore Srilabha proposed his interpretation, according to which the f.rst 
part of the term is a participle, not a gerund, and does not imply consecution, but simultaneity 
and evanescence. Cp. Ab. Kosa-bhasya ad III. 28. In this treatise pratltya-samutpada is 
treated in the first chapter, the 12 nidanas quite separately in the 26‘ h . 

2 This is the same criticism which is already mentioned by Vasubandhu, op. cit ad III. 28. 

3 eka-vijnanotpatti. 


appendix: CANDRAKIRTI’S comment on relativity 


87 


(to something else). It also can be applied when a particular single occasion 
is referred to, for in that case we interpret it as meaning «with reference 
to the faculty of vision, in coordination with this faculty, having regard for 
this faculty, — visual consciousness appears)). 

If we take the word itya as a derivative adjective, then the above 7. 2 . 
sentence «visual consciousness arises in coordination with the faculty of 
vision and some colours» (will altogether change its meaning). This word, 
if not a gerund and when not the first part of a compound, must appear in 
its inflected form (pratUyam). 1 The meaning of the sentence would then 
be the following one, «all visual consciousness is evanescent ( pratUyam) in 
regard of the faculty of vision and the colours)). 2 This is impossible! Therefore 
it must be taken as a gerund and indeclinable. (We will then get for the whole 
term the meaning of dependent origination, or relative, unreal existence). 

V. The opinion of Bhavaviveka 

Now, (another author, Bhavaviveka, dealing with this topic) begins by 7. 6. 
quoting opposed opinions and then goes on to refute them. He quotes in 
the following way.«One party (the Mahayanist Buddhapalita) explains the 
term pratltya-samutpada as meaning ((manifestation, dependent on every 
cause» or ((relative existence)). They assume that the preposition prati has 
a generalising sense, the verbal root i the sense of relativity, the word 
samutpada the sense of existence or origination. Another party (the Hina¬ 
yanist Srllabha) maintains that pratltya-samutpada means the apparition 
of all immediately disappearing things)). 3 

First of all, we notice here a remarkable incapacity of quoting foreign 8. l. 
opinions (with anything like precision). How is that? Because that party which 
interprets the word pratltya as indicating relativity, does not also give to the 
preposition prati a generalising sense, nor does it give to the verb i (by 
itself) the meaning of being relative. It (on the contrary) explains the pre¬ 
position prati as meaning relativity, and then takes the whole composite 
word pratltya as meaning likewise relativity. 4 

1 pratitya-samutpadah—pratityasya ( kSanikasya) samutpadah. 

2 Lit. «eye-evanescent sensation and colours». 

3 Lit., p. 7.6-8.1 «But one who quoting the explanation of others thus, since the preposition 

means generalisation, tit means reaching and the word samutpada means becoming, with refe¬ 
rence to such and such cause reaching-becoming, thus one (party); in every, every case origina¬ 
tion of evanescent (things) is pratltya-samutpada, thus the other (party) . . » 

4 But they never have given to the root i the meaning of prapti as imputed p. 7.6. 


88 


NIK V AN A 


APPENDIX: CANDKAKIRTI’S comment on relativity 


89 


} 


8. 5- Now, if we take 'pratitya-samutpada as meaning «relative existence» 
(then it will cover both cases, wliere the generalised meaning is wanted and 
w T here a single case is meant). When it takes into account all possible 
things then the generalised meaning is applied in the following way, «in 
every case, dependent upon a correspondiDg complex of causes and conditions, 
something exists, i. e., it arises, in coordination with them)). 1 But when a 
single thing is referred to, then there is no need for applying the genera¬ 
lising meaning, (we then understand it to mean that, e.g., some visual con¬ 
sciousness has arisen) in coordination with (some momentary flash) of the 
faculty of vision and some colour. But the Master (Bhavaviveka in main¬ 
taining that we assume generalisation in all cases) has betrayed his incom¬ 
petence to quote the opinions (which lie combats). 

VI. BhAVA VIVEKA’S CRITICISM OF BUDOHAPALITA’S COMMENT 

8. io. The following (criticism of our definition by Bhavaviveka) is likewise 

unfounded. (He thinks that our interpretation of the sentence) «visual 
consciousness arises w hen coordinated with the sense of vision and some 
colour» is wrong, (because w r e have expressed this interdependence by the 
word «reaching», pratitya—prapya, one thing springs up when ((reaching» 
the other). «There are here (says he) no two things («reaching» one an¬ 
other)!)) We cannot understand this criticism! What is the reason adduced? 
He says that if one thing is not attained, not ((reached)), how r is (the other) 
to originate? There is no argument. It is mere begging the question. 2 

9. l. But perhaps his real argument is the following one. Consciousness being 

mental (and the sense of vision physical), the first cannot be reached by the 
second. Experience teaches that only material things can be reached by the 
sense of vision. But this is a trivial (objection). The term ((reaching)) is 
used (in Scripture when the attaining of spiritual aims is in question), e. g., 
«this recluse has reached the goal®. Others reject the criticism upon 
the score that ((reaching® is synonymous with «being dependent®. Our 

1 This is also mentioned by Vasubandhu loco. cit. and Yasomitr a, as the interpretation 
of Srllabha. The interpretation pratitya=prapya is also criticised in the Ab. Kosabh. ad III. 28, 
but on different grounds. It is supposed to suggest a consecution of elements, and to leave out of 
account the interdependance of simultaneously existing elements. 

2 Lit., p.8.10-9.1. «And this is wrong (on the part of Bhavaviveka. He says,) „and more¬ 
over it is not right to maintain that in relation to ( = in reaching) the eye and the colours, visual 
sensation arises, because two things (reaching one another are here) impossible “. Just the incri¬ 
minated fault is nonsense. Why? Because «how is it that (one thing) will arise when (the other) 


(common) Master Nagarjuna has himself used it in this sense (in his Yukti- 
sastika), «if something springs up after having reached this or that, (i.e., if 
something is dependent upon this and that), it is not really produced (by 
these conditions).® 

VII. The DEFINITION OF THE TERM BY BHAVAVIVEKA 

As to the opinion pleaded by (Bhavaviveka) himself it is also not (quite) 9. 7 . 
correct. Indeed he gives the term pratUya-samutpada the meaning «of being re¬ 
lative to something else® in the sense of (a disjunctive judgment), «if this is, 
that appears®, ((because this has appeared, that will appear®. 1 Although the 
w r ord ((dependent, origination® consists of tw r o w r ords, it is not right to sup¬ 
pose that each part refers to a different object. 2 The (parts) are only men¬ 
tioned with a view r to etymological explanation. 

(Bhavaviveka) further says, « pratltya-samutpcida is thus named (wit- 10 . 3. 
hout any regard to its being composed of two words), we can take it as a 
conventional expression (for Relativity) just as the expression «the forest 
ornament® (is used to designate something utterly useless, without any 
connection either with forest nor with ornament)®. 

This also misses the mark, since our Master admits the term to have 
a meaning which harmonises with the meaning of its parts. (Indeed he says), 
((whatsoever appears as relative to this and that is not really existent®. 

At last (Bhavaviveka) explains the term to mean (mere Relativity), io. 6. 
«this being, that becomes, e. g., as far as there is something short, there is 
also something long®. Does he not admit exactly the same meaning as w r e 
do, i.e., (the meaning of Relativity)? The long exists (not independently, but) 
as far as it is coordinated to the short, as relative to the short, as dependent 
upon the short. Thus Bhavaviveka rejects (with one hand) w T hat he accepts 
with the other. This is not right, but w r e will not insist upon this point. 

is not attained, not reached))?—(these words of Bh.) are a bare postulate without any argument)). 

On p. 9.1 read with the Mss. Tcatham anava(ga)te ’prapte sambhavah, and on p. 8.10 preferably 
etaccayuktam. 

1 Bhavaviveka here partly returns to the interpretation already contained in the Hina- 
yana sutras (e. g., M. N. III. 63), but of course its meaning is quite changed. Formerly it re¬ 
ferred to real elements ( dharmas ), now it means Sunyata, or unreal dharmas . 

2 The difficulty arising from the interpretation of the term as involving a disjunctive sen¬ 
tence is also mentioned by Vasubandhu, op. cit. ad. III. 28. 


90 


NIRVANA 


VIII. The principle op Relativity the Law of all pluralistic 

EXISTENCE 

10 . li. Thus it is that Buddha wished to put in a strong light 1 (the principle 
of Relativity, i.e.), the fact that entities are produced only in the sense of 
being coordinated. 2 He therefore maintains that they neither are produced 
at random, nor from a unique cause, nor from a variety of causes; he denies 
that they are identical (with their causes), that they are different from them, 
10 . 12 . or that they are both (partly identical and partly non-identical). By this 
negative method he discloses the true relative character of all the relative 
entities (of every day life). This is the relative existence or dependent ori¬ 
gination, 3 because nothing really new is produced. From the transcenden- 
talist’s 4 point of view it is a condition where nothing disappears, (nor some¬ 
thing new appears) etc., and in which there is no motion. It is a condition cha¬ 
racterised by the eight above mentioned characteristics, ((nothing disap¬ 
pears)) etc. 5 The whole of this treatise is intended by its author to prove 

1 paridlpayatd—parito dlpayatd. 

- hetu-pratyaya-apeksa. 

3 pratitya-samutpdda is here synonymous with sunyatva — anta-dvaya-rahitatva = ad- 
vaita, and although it is the contrary of samvrtti, it is here called sdmvrttah pratitya-samut- 
padah meaning, that pratitya-samutpannalva or advaita or iunyata is the real condition which 
is «covered)> or hidden behind the phenomenal world, the samvrtti. (It is a karma-sddhana, i. e., 
samvriyate etad iti sdmvrta, not a karana-sddhana, i. e., not samvriyate aneno). 

4 The drya or arya-pudgala is the Buddhist Saint who has entered the path of Salvation, 
has become srota-apanna, has reached insight (drsti-marga) of reality as it reveals itself to the 
philosopher. In Hlnayana it is the man who has acquired the intellectual habit of seeing every¬ 
where only separate, discrete, evanescent elements ( dharmata—anatma ). He has got rid of the im¬ 
pression of stability which the world produces upon the ordinary man. In Mahayana, as is seen 
from this passage, it is the man who has acquired a monistic view of the Universe, he has 
cognised the pratitya-samutpdda as Sunyatd—dharma-nairdtmya. From the phrasing of this 
and many other passages it clearly appears that the Mahayanistic Saint, the arya and the 
Bodhisattva, possesses, in addition to his moral achievements, his Mahayanistic bodhi-citta- 
utpada, the practise of the naramitas, the attainment of bhumis and the Mahayanistic Great 
Commiseration, as a foundation of all this, a monistic view of the Universe, acquired by yogi- 
pratyaksa. It constitutes the Omniscience, sarvajTiata , of the Bodhisattva which together with 
the sarva-dkdra-jnata of the Buddha is the main idea of the. abhisamaya or prajna-pdramitd 
in Aryasanga’s interpretation. This starvajrlatd is accordingly very different from our con¬ 
ception of Omniscience. We find a very interesting exposition of these topics in Vacas- 
patimisras Nyayakanika, the sarvajHa-vdda begins p.110.16 (Keprint from the Pandit), the Bud¬ 
dhist yogi-pratyaksa p. 147.4 ff., the brahmanical yogi-abhimata-sarvajna p. 205.16 ff., its re¬ 
futation (sva-matena) p. 181.25 flf., Naiyayika-abhimata-yogi-pratyaksa p. 168.12 ff. 

5 Lit., p. 10.12-11.2.«By this negation the concealed essence of the covered entities is dis¬ 
closed as it exists. And now just this concealed pratitya-samutpdda is characterised by eight 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKlRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY 


91 


that the condition of interdependence (or the principle of Relativity) does not 
allow (for something in the Universe) to disappear, nor (for something new 
to appear). 

The principle of Relativity (being the central law of all existence) can n. 4 
be characterised by an infinite number (of finite characteristics), 1 but only 
eight have been selected, because they are predominant in the sense of having 
given opportunity for discussion. 

It is also called (Nirvana) the Quiescence (or equalisation) of all plu¬ 
rality, because when it is critically realised 2 there is for the philosopher 3 
absolutely no differentiation of existence to which our words 4 and (concepts) 
could be applied. That very (essence) of Relativity is called (Nirvana) the 
Quiescence of Plurality, for which there are no words. 

Thoughts and feelings 5 do not arise in this (undifferentiated whole), 11 . o 
there is no subject and no object of knowledge, there is (consequently) no 
turmoil like birth, old age and death, there is (eternal) bliss. 6 

Since the principle of Dependent Origination, as it is here defined (as 
meaning the Relativity of existence), represents the direct object of the 
process of instruction, it is (in the dedicatory verses) alluded to as the object 
of Buddha’s teaching — 

The perfect Buddha, 

The foremost of all Teachers I salute, 

He has proclaimed 

The Principle of (Universal) Relativity. 

characteristics, non disappearance etc., since, as it has not been produced in its own essence, 
there is in it, with reference to the drya, no disapearance, up to «there is no motion out.» 

1 Cp. Spinoza’s idea that the essentia Dei is equal to an infinite number of finite attri¬ 
butes or modes. Here we have exactly the same thought expressed by the Indian Monist, viz. 

( Buddhasya=dharma-kdyasya=sunyatdydh ) ananta-viSesana-sambhave ... 

2 yathavasthita ... darSane. 

3 aryandm, cp. above p. 90. n. 4. 

4 prapanco tdk, cp. M. vr., p. 373. 9; the reality is niSprapanca—anirvacaniya ; but,of 
course, net only words, concepts are also meant. 

5 citta-caittah. 

« This idea of bliss as equivalent to absence of suffering is the same as in the Nyaya 
system, cp. above p. 54 ff. It coincides with the Vedanta idea by the conception of all plurality 
being merged in an unique allembracing substance. It is also a spiritual substance because 
dharma-kaya is spiritual (jiidna). According to Deussen, System des Vedanta, p.228-9, dnanda 
with Sankara also means Freiheit von Leiden, cp. ibid, p. 150. Nevertheless the Buddhists would 
probably not characterise their Sunyatd as dnanda which carries a flavour of worldliness. 


92 


NIRVANA 


APPENDIX: CANDEAKIETI’S COMMENT ON KELATIV1TY 


93 


’Tis (like) blissful (Nirvana), 
Quiescence of Plurality. 

There nothing disappears. 

Nor anything appears, 

Nothing has an end, 

Nor is there anything eternal, 
Nothing is identical (with itself) 

Nor is there anything differentiated, 
Nothing moves, 

Neither hither, nor thither. 


12. i. Buddha alone has rightly taught the doctrine of Relativity, because he 
has conceived it in the manner here described. Our Master Nagarjuna having- 
realised that all divergent doctrines are nothing but foolish talk (as com¬ 
pared with this doctrine of Buddha) gives expression to his deep feeling 
of devotion and praises the Buddha by inserting the characteristic «He is 
the foremost of all Teachers». 

IX. Causality denied 

12. 4 . In such a (Universe nothing can disappear). The denial of extinction 
comes first. This is to illustrate the fact that it is not (in every respect) 
established that every thing must first appear and then disappear. Indeed 
it will be stated below— 

If birth comes first, 

Decay and death comes later, 

We will then have a birth 
Without decay and death, 

And what is born will be immortal. 

12. 8 . Therefore there is no hard and fast rule that everything must first ap¬ 
pear and then disappear. The author now intends to explain the principle 
of that Relativity which implies the denial of extinction and other charac¬ 
teristics. But he thinks it more convenient to begin with the denial of ori¬ 
gination, (i.e., of causality), because the denial of extinction etc. will be¬ 
come after that an easy task. 


Causation which is imagined in other systems (as a real production) 12. 11. 
appears either as a (new manifestation) of the same (continuant stuff), or as 
(an influence) of separate (factors), or as the result of both (a continuant 
stuff and separate factors), or as proceeding at random (without any regula¬ 
rity). The author decides that none of these theories is in the right. 

Never at all, nowhere and none 
Are the things that arise 
Out of self, of non-self, or both, 

Or at random. (I) 

(The meaning of the words) is here the following one. «At all» means is. 1 
at any time. «Somewhere» means the place, it is equivalent to «in what¬ 
ever place». «Something» means the objects situated on the place, it is 
equivalent to «some things». (All this is denied — never, nowhere and 
none). The meaning is the following one. Never, nowhere and nothing is found 
which is produced out of its own self. And in the same way the three (next) 
predicates, (out of non-self, out of both, without a cause) must be interpreted. 

It can be objected that an undesirable consequence 1 will follow, if we 13. 4. 
lay stress (upon the negation and maintain that entities do) not at all arise 
out of themselves. It will follow that they arise out of some non-self, (i. e., 
out of factors separate from them). No, this will not follow, since only a 
simple negation 2 is expressed, (without any implied affirmation of the con¬ 
trary). Production out of something separate will likewise be denied. 

X. Identity of cause and effect denied 

The argument against self-origination, (i. e., against the preexistence 13. 6 . 
of the effect in its material cause) must be constructed upon the same lines 
(which we have sketched) in our ((Introduction into the Madhyamika System». 

We find there the following statement . 8 

Thus, 

No real advantage (will accrue) 

If something will be born (that already exists). 

If (something really) does exist, 

Its own repeated birth is quite a nonsense. 

1 prasanga. 

- prasajya-prntisedha. 

3 M. av. (B. B. IX), VI. 8. 


14. 1 


14. 4 


15. 3 


04 NIRVANA 

The Master Buddhapalita makes the following comment. «Entities 
do not arise out of their own self, since such origination would serve no 
purpose, and because the quite absurd consequence 1 would follow (that every¬ 
thing is eternally arising!. Indeed if things exist, there is no need to pro¬ 
duce them once more, and supposing an existing thing could be (once more) 
produced, never would it be non-nascent.» 

XL Bhavaviveka assails the comment of Buddhapalita 

Some philosophers (viz. Bhavaviveka) have raised objections against 
this (interpretation ot Buddhapalita). His comment, (they maintain),misses 
the mark, because 

1 ) neither a reason nor an example are given, 

2 ) objections are left unanswered, 

3 ) it is a mere deduction ad absurdum, 2 (consequently) in contrast (with 
the denial) expressed, a contra-thesis and a contra-reason will emerge (by 
implication). (It will then follow) that entities are produced out of some¬ 
thing (essentially) separate from them, since this will serve a purpose, and 
since this will prevent (eternal new) production (of the same already exist¬ 
ing thing). 3 

XII. The first objection of Bavaviveka answered 

We consider all this attack to be ill founded. For what reason? Re¬ 
garding the first (objection), viz. that no (independent) reason and no 
example are given, we answer that this is not to the point. Why? Because (the 
position is the following one). An opposing party (the Sankhya System) 
advocates the identity of cause and effect, 4 and is invited to explain, what 
may be the use of causation in regard of something already existent. In 

1 atiprasanga. 

2 prusanga-vakya. 

3 Lit., p. 15. 1-2. «Through an obversion of the subject stated, when the contrary subject, 
as a predicate and its appurtenance, will emerge, it will be a contradiction with the adopted 
principle, viz. „ entities have arisen from something extraneous, since their birth is useful and 
since (their birth) shall have an end‘ ! .» sddhya=paksa , taddharma—paksa-dharma, vyakti— 
arthapatti , krtcinta = siddhanta. 

4 svata utpattih—satkaryam. 


APPENDIX! CANDRAK1RTTS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY 95 

saying that the cause is the self, you ("seemingly) maintain that one’s own 
self is once more produced. Now, we do not understand the meaning of a 
new production of what already exists. Moreover, we see (the danger of) an 
infinite regress. (The newly produced thing will be as long as it exists again 
and again produced and so on ad infinitum ). 1 

But you (the Sankhya) do not really mean to maintain that an exist- 15. c. 
ing thing is once more produced, neither do you admit an infiuite series 2 (of 
self-productions). It follows that your theory (of a substantial identity be¬ 
tween cause and effect) is absurd 3 and, (expressed as it is), it runs against 
your ow r n intentions. 

Now, (you think) that if (the Sankhya), our opponent, is assailed 15. 8 , 
merely in this way, he will not yield (to our onslaught), and an (other) rea¬ 
son with example is needed in order to make it (more) efficacious. But if 
you have detected a self-contradiction (in the argument of your) opponent 4 
and he nevertheless persists (in his errors), neither will he be reduced to 
silence by (new r ) arguments and examples, for (his obstinacy is due) to his 
impudence and it is not worth our while to carry on a disputation with 
a fool. 

The Master (Bhavaviveka) betrays indeed a certain bias for syllo- 16. 1 
gistic reasoning. He would like a syllogism to be introduced at the wrong 
place. But according to the Madhyamika (method of dialectics) an indepen¬ 
dent argument is never needed. (This method consists in producing a contra- 
thesis and then balancing two conflicting views) without admitting either of 
them. It has been said by Aryadeva, 

If I neither admit a thing’s reality, 

Nor unreality, nor both (at once), 

Then, to confute me 
A long time will be needed . 5 

1 It would be similar to the Hinayanist and Yogacara view, sarvam ksanikam. 

2 anavastha. 

3 nirupapattika. 

4 The Sankhya admits both utpada and svatah, i.e.,he admits that tad eva utpadyate, but he 
does not wish it to be an absolute identity, thus he is in conflict with himself, there is sva-upa- 
gama-virodha. 

5 Lit., p. 16. 4-5, «who has no thesis „is, is not, is-is-not“, his confutation even long it is 
impossible to tell». Cp. Catubsataka, XVI, 25. 


96 


APPENDIX: CANDBAKlETI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


97 


NIRVANA 

Iii the ((Repudiation of Conflicts)), (the manual of Nagarjuna), it is 
likewise stated, 

When I have theses (of my own to prove), 

I can commit mistakes just for the sake (of proving) 

But I have none. I cannot he accused 
(Of being inconsistent). 

If I did (really) cognise some (separate) things, 

I could then make an affirmation or a denial 
Upon the basis of these things perceived or (inferred). 1 
But these (separate) things do not exist for me. 2 
Therefore I cannot be assailed on such a basis. 

XIII. The second point of Bhavaviveka, viz. that the answer of 

THE SANKHYA IS LEFT UNNOTICED BY BUDDHAPALITA, REJECTED 

10. ii. Thus it is that since the Madhyamika is not obliged to have an argu¬ 
ment of his own (in which he believes, why do you require Buddapalita) 
to confute the Sankhya by an independent argument, like the one (produced 
By yourself, viz. that) «the mind and the sense faculties 3 are not neces¬ 
sarily 4 identical to their cause»? (The Sankhya, indeed, has responded to 
this argument in the following way). «What is the meaning of your argu¬ 
ment? Do you deny an identity between cause and effect because an effect is 
really a new manifestation of the same matter, or because you deny the 
identity of matter itself? 5 If it is the first, then you bring against us a 

1 ddi in 16. 10 refers probably to anumana. 

- i. e., for the Monist. 

3 adliyatmika-ayatana are the six subjective bases of our cognitions, i. e., five sense fa¬ 
culties and pure, undifferentiated consciousness (i vijiidna ), cp. my Central Conception, p. 7. 
All mental phenomena are, according to the Sankhya System, essentially physical, products of 
the evolution of Matter and, in this sense, they are identical with their cause or, as this is here 
expressed, produced out of their own self, out of the same substance. Bhavaviveka sets forth 
against this theory a regular syllogism, which will be analysed by Candrakirti in the 
sequel, p. 25. 9 ff. 

4 From the Tib. ues-te, cp. M. vr, p. 17. 4. 

5 Lit., p. 17. 1-18. 1. «What is here the meaning of the thesis? Is it „from self‘ ; as con¬ 
taining the result or „from self“ as being the cause. If from (the self) as containing the result, 
it is establishing the established. If from the self as being the cause it is contradiction, since 
every thing having origination originates as being necessarily existent as a cause.» 


point which we never doubted, (we agree that the effect is a new manifes¬ 
tation of a continuant stuff). If it is the second, then (it is you, Buddhapalita), 
who are contradicting yourself,' (not I, because even you, the Monist, must 
agree) that every product necessarily preexists in its cause ». 2 

(To this retort of the Sankhya Bhavaviveka requires that Buddha¬ 
palita should give a reply). But how can we (Madhyamikas who do not is. l. 
believe in logic altogether) produce an argument 3 (like the one produced by 
Bhavaviveka) about the (transcendental) reality (of all mental pheno¬ 
mena)? (This argument the Sankhya could indeed declare) either trivial, 
because he never doubted it, or self-contradicting (because it really implies 
the identity uf cause and effect). Why should we bother ourselves with a 
reply to this (imputed) irrelevance or this (imputed) self-contradiction? There¬ 
fore, since these accusations of the opponent are absolutely out of place, it 
was not incumbent upon our revered Buddhapalita to refute them . 4 

1 Buddhapalita first accuses the Sankhya of self-contradiction by imputing to him the 
idea that an already existing thing is once more produced, although it already exists. The San¬ 
khya answers by accusing Buddhapalita of self-contradiction on the score that a Monist must 
admit the identity of cause and effect. The Vedantin, indeed, admits satkdrya-vada. 

2 xbe Sankhya maintains that, since Matter is eternal, every thing is identical with it as 
far as it is an impermanent manifestation of this permanent Matter. He does not deny the evolu¬ 
tion of this Matter into different forms. The objection, of Buddhapalita is unfair, because the 
Sankhya never denied the variety of the manifestations. If, therefore, na svatah—na karanat- 
makarn , this will contradict the principle of sntkdryavdda, but if na svatah—na karyatmakam, 
the Sankhya will agree, he will say sarvamkaranatmakam vidyate, karyatmakam (Idryam—dvir- 
bhavah) na vidyate , karane nasti vivaJah, kdranam sat, karye tu tnahdn vkadah. The Vai- 
se§ika maintains that iu the effect even the stuff is different, although related by samavdyi-ka- 
rana. The Hinayana Buddhist denies the existence of a continuant stuff altogether. The Ma- 
dhyamika’s intention is to show the hopeless mutual contradictions of all these views and thus in¬ 
directly to establish Monism. By leaving the main issue, the difference between origination 
and manifestation, intentionally in the dark, by taking the expressions svata utpadah ^origination 
out of one’s own self», satkarya «preexistence of the resultn literally, Buddhapalita secures 
a dialectical triumph. Bhavaviveka wishes to improve the position of the Madhyamika by pro¬ 
ducing a sound argument. 

3 This argument of Bhavaviveka is given below, text p. 26.1.For the Sankhya all mental 
pheuomena and the intellect are of a physical nature, but an eternal, unchanging, motionless 
Spiritual Principle is reflected in them. Bhavaviveka, as a Monist, assimilates all mental phe¬ 
nomena, from the transcendental point of view, to this eternal unique principle. The Sankhya re¬ 
plies that this is not a refutation, but a corroboration of au identity between cause and effect, 
and that it is a self-contradiction, since it at the same time denies and accepts this identity. For 
Buddhapalita it is enough to point to the contradiction between utpdda&ndvidyamdnatva, he, from 
his transcendental point of view, neither believes in the one, nor in the other. Cp. p. 105, § XVIII. 

4 Lit., 18. 1-3. «How can we have a reason „because they exist“, a reason that would 
either be a proof of the proved or a contradiction, for the refutation of whose proving the proved 
or its contradictory (character) we should take pains? Therefore, since he is quite unaffected by 

7 


98 


NIRVANA 


XIY. The Madhyamika method explained. 

18 . 5 . But perhaps (we must understand Bhavaviveka to mean the following 

thing). Since the Madhyamika does not admit any valid reason, thesis or 
example, and cannot produce any independent argument, let us concede 
that he is incapable himself of proving what he would like to prove, viz. 
that there is no real causation out of the same (stuff). We also (admit that 
it is impossible for him) to combat the tenet of the opponent by an argu¬ 
ment (based upon facts the reality of which) both parties admit. 

is. 7. However in accusing your opponent of contradiction you must yourself 
take your stand upon an argument which, in your own opinion , 1 would be 
free of those logical errors to which a thesis, a reason or an example are 
liable. But (Buddhapalita) has given no (reason and no examples), neither 
has he shown (his capacity) of avoiding the logical errors (pointed out by the 
Sankhya). Therefore the accusation (that he has proved nothing by his 
deduction ad absurdum) stands. 

19. l. To this we answer: this is not right! Why? Because (of the following 

considerations). Certainly, wdieu someone is vindicating an assertion, he is 
desirous to convince other people, just as he is convinced himself. He must 
prove to his opponent the validity of that very argument by which he himself 
has arrived at the right conclusion. 

19. s. It is indeed a general rule that the opponent should be (at length) 
induced to agree with that very line of argument which the respondent himself 
has set forth in order to prove his own thesis. But (the case of the Madhyamika 
is quite different). He does uot vindicate any assertion in order to convince 
his opponent. He has no (bona fide) reasons and examples (of which he himself 
is convinced). He sets forth a thesis of his own (and) undertakes to prove it. 
only so far it runs parallel (and destroys) the argument (of his opponent). 

19. 5 . He thus brings assertions which cannot be proved . 2 He is in conflict 
even with himself. He (certainly) cannot convince his opponent (of this ima¬ 
gined thesis). 

tie accusations pronounced by the opponent, revered Buddha pal it a is not obliged to expatiate 
upon their refutation.» If we accept the Sanscrit, not the Tibetan, text ot the last sentence (sc. 
omitting na and the a of prasanga), it will mean, ((therefore revered Buddhapalita is obliged 
to expatiate upon a refutation of them (only) when he is himself affected by the accusations 
of the opponent®. 

1 svata eva. 

2 nirupopattika-paksa. 


APPENDIX. - CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


99 


But can there be a more eloquent refutation of an opponent than (the 19 . 6. 
proof) that he is not capable to establish his own thesis? Is there really any 
necessity to produce (new) counter arguments? 1 

XY. Buddhapalita’ s comment vindicated from the standpoint of 

FORMAL LOGIC. 

However (if you insist that this must be necessarily done) and require 19. 8. 
that the contradiction (in the tenet of the opponent) should be disclosed by 
an independent argument, we maintain that Buddhapalita has done it. 

If you ask, how is that? We answer: he has said, 

Entities do not arise out of themselves, 

Because such origination would serve no purpose. 

Here the word «such» refers (to a new origination) of something by 
itself (already) existing. 

The following words contain a comment upon this short statement. 2 20. 3. 
«If something already exists in its own real individuality, it does not need 
to be produced once more». This sentence points to the example, 3 i. e., an 
aualogous case admitted by the opponent where both the reason and the 
predicate coexist, (e. g., an existing jar). The reason is indicated by the 
words «existing in its own individuality)), aud the predicate is indicated by 
the words «because such origination would serve no purpose)). (We thus 
shall have the following regular syllogism —) 

(Thesis. An entity does not require a second production). 

(Reason. Because it exists). 

(Example. Just as a jar). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever exists does not require to be produced once 
more). 

(We can indeed express a syllogism in two different ways, e. g., we can 
express it thus — ) 

1 ctnumana-badha. 

2 read p. 20. S— tasya grahanaka-vakyasya. What a grahanakavakyam is appears clearly 
from Tatparyatika, p. 145.16 and an overwhelming multitude of similar phrasing in all Nyaya 
literature. The argument is first stated laconically ( grahanaka ) and then developed ( vivarana ). 

3 The example is always a very important part of the Indian syllogism, pararthanumana. 

It points to the particular facts on which the general rule or the major premise is established. 

Apart from such formal syllogism, Indian logic knows a simple inference from one particular to 
another one, svarthanumana, it is a simple inference by analogy which is considered as repre¬ 
senting the essence of thought or of synthesis in general. 



100 


NIRVANA 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


101 


20. 7. (Thesis) The word is not an eternal substance . 1 

(Reason). Because it is produced. 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is produced is not eternal). 

(But we can put it also in another way, e. g.,) — 

(Major premise). Whatsoever is produced is known to be non-eternal. 

(Example). As e. g., a jar. 

(Minor premise). The word is produced. 

(Conclusion). Therefore, being produced, it is not eternal. 

In this instance the reason (middle term) reveals itself in the minor 
premise, («the word is produced)), where the application of the middle term 
to the minor is indicated). 

21. l. This is (just what Buddhapalita has done) in the present case. (He 

has said), 

Entities do not arise out of their own self, 

Since the production of what already exists is not needed. 

(He might have put the same argument in another form, viz.) — 

(Major premise). Whatsoever already exists does not want to be produced. 

(Example). As e. g., this jar standing before us. 

(Minor premise. It already exists). 

(Conclusion. It needs no second production). 

21. 3 The jar in its (potential) condition in a clump of clay is an example 
(by contrast ), 2 (since it needs to be really produced). But if you mean the 
jar which (already) exists by itself, such ajar is not produced (once more). 

21. 4. Thus it is that the reason (i. e. the middle term in Buddhapalita’s syllogism) 
is the fact of direct (individual) existence, a fact which precludes a second 
origination (of the existent); it is expressed (in the minor premise, .the so 

1 The school of the Mimamsakas imagined that the word was an eternal transcendental 
substance, somewhat similar to the Platonic idea. The uttered word was then only its particular 
manifestation. The logicians and all other schools of philosophy denied the existence of the 
eternal word on the score that the word which we know from experience is an impermanent pro¬ 
duction. To illustrate the rules of logic this example is as popular in the whole East, as the de¬ 
duction of Socrates’s mortality is the current example of the first form of the syllogism in the 
West. 

2 Instead of readiug, p. 21. 3, tathci ca it would be preferable to read na tu , but tathd ca 
is also possible, since a vaidharmya-drstdnta is also sometimes introduced in this way. After 
avasthayam a cheda must be inserted. 

3 upanayana. 


called) application (of the middle term to the minor), and thus it is that 21. 5 . 
(Buddhapalita) lias really elicited in the argument of the Sankhya a 
contradiction, (he has done it) just by an independent argument of his own. 

How is it then that you accuse him of giving neither a reason, nor an example? 21. 7. 

XVI. The answer of the Sankhya virtually repudiated by Buddha¬ 
palita 

(We have thus shown that the accusation of Buddhapalita) for not 21. 8 . 
having produced (a regular syllogism) with a reason and example is not foun- . 
ded. But not only this. Equally unfounded is the accusation of not having 
repudiated the (double) stricture of the opponent, (sc. the Sankhya, who 
accuses him either of telling nothing new or of contradicting himself ). 1 
(Virtually he has repudiated the Sankhya also). How is that? (The San¬ 
khya maintains that if our denial of identity between cause and effect only 
means that the effect is a new manifestation of the same stuff, this he has 
himself always admitted). Yes, but the Sankhya has never admitted that 
causation consists in a manifested jar, a jar standing before us, being once 
more manifested, and it is just this manifested jar, in its ready form , 2 that 
we take as an example (when we prove the absurdity of the idea of an 
identity between cause and effect). 

Regarding the non-manifested jar, the jar in its potential condition 3 21. 10. 
(as a clump of clay), it is clear a fortiori 4 that (from our point of view) it 
cannot be produced. How is it then possible to accuse our thesis of falling 
in (with the Sankhya view ) 5 and how is it possible to accuse our argument 
of being selfcontradictory ? 6 

(To summarize) our opinion. (Buddhapalita) has pointed out the 21. 13. 
contradictions (in the Sankhya theory of causality not only by a deduction ad 
absurdum , but) also by an independent argument. Nevertheless the faults 
imputed to him do not exist. It is therefore impossible to maintain that he 

1 Cp. above p. 97. 

2 Lit., p. 21.10, «be cause its form (or essence, rupa — svariipa) is established (as an 
example)#, cp. the Tib. transl. 

3 Sakti-rupdpanna. 

4 viiista-sddhya, a qualified predicate, a predicate d fortiori ; anabhivyakta-rupa-anut- 
patti = karana-rupa-karyasya anutpatti—parata anutpatti. 

b Lit., p. 21. 11, «the objection of a faulty thesis of proving the proved#. 

6 Cp. above, p. 97. 


102 


nirvana 


APPENDIX: CAN DR A K1RTI 8 COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


103 


has not answered the accusations of the Sankhya. The whole onslaught (of 
Bhavaviveka) is therefore absolute nonsense . 1 

XVII. Some minor points explained. 

22. l. (It might be objected that the example of a jar is not convincing enough. 
The rule may apply for the production of a jar out of clay, and not apply to 
the production of a piece of cloth out of threads? No, because) we say a jar 
etc. By the etc. the inclusion of every possible object which can originate is 
indicated. There is not the slightest possibility to doubt (that the rule might 
not apply) to a cloth etc. 

22. 3. The argument (against the Sankhya) may have also been formulated 
(by Buddhapalita) in another way, viz., 

(Thesis). All physical entities do not arise out of themselves. 

(Reason). Because they always exist in their own essence (i. e., because 
Matter is eternal). 

(Example). Just as the (eternal) Spirit does. 

The (Sankhya who advocates the identity of cause and effect (must 
accept this argument) for that very reason (that he advocates this identity 
which is here exemplified by his changeless Spirit). This example (of the 
Spirit whose eternal identity the Sankhya admits) may have also been quoted 
(by Buddhapalita in order to combat the Sankhya view ). 3 

22. 6 . It might be maintained that (the Sankhya) is not affected by this denial 
of origination. He vindicates thq theory (that causality consists in a new) 
manifestation (of an existing stuff). However the term «origination)) may also 
have the meaning of «manifestation)). 

Indeed (both origination and manifestation) have the common feature 
of representing something that was formerly unperceived and became perceived 
after. Therefore a new manifestation can also be called a new origination. 

1 Lit., p. 21. 13 — 14. ((Therefore if there is also, an objection ( codana ) of contradiction by 
a self-argument ( = 8vdnumdnena, i. e., even admitting that Buddhapalita has produced a real 
argument), since the faults as they have been depicted do not exist, the non-refutation of the 
faults mentioned by the opponent is quite impossible. Thus this critique is quite incongruous. This 
should be known*. 

2 Lit., p. 22.3 — 5. «Or else the following other way of formulation. Entities which are not 

Spirit, (i. e. are physical), for the advocate of self-origination, for that very reason, do not origi¬ 

nate out of themselves, because they exist in their own self, just as the (individual) Soul. Thus 

this example can be quoted*. 


It then becomes impossible for the Sankhya to maintain that he is not affected 
by the denial (of an identity between a cause and its effect ). 1 

It may be asked, how is it possible to deduce all these considerations 22. 9 . 
of detail (out of the short statement of Buddhapalita), since he does not 
mention them? We answer. His words are full of (profound) meaning. In a 
concise manner they include the above mentioned details. When analysed 
they reveal their own self in these details. We do not invent something 
that is not included in them . 2 

XVIII. The third stricture of Bhavaviveka answered. The denial 
OF one view does not imply the acceptance of the contrary. 

(Bhavaviveka maintains that the repudiation of the Sankhya theory 23. 3 . 
of causation by a mere deduction ad absurdum involves acceptance of the 
opposite theory, viz. that cause and effect represent two different sub¬ 
stances. This is wrong), because the converse theory will be again charged 
to the account of the same opponent, not to our account , 3 since (we have 
declared that) we have no theory of our own. We therefore (can¬ 
not be accused) of contradicting our own principles. But if the many objec¬ 
tions that have been already raised against the opponent are accrued by 
charging to his account the counterpart of our deduction, we really will 
only welcome it . 4 

The Master Buddhapalita is a faithful adherent of the method of 24. 1. 
Nagarjuna. How can he possibly pronounce something inadvertently 5 that 
wmuld give an opportunity (to his opponent)? When a philosopher who 

1 Lit., p. 22. 6'—8. ((Although the denial of origination does not repudiate the maintainerof 
manifestation, nevertheless by using the word origination in the sense of manifestation, since by 
the similarity of non-perception before and perception after just a manifestation is expressed by 
the word origination, the denial is not non-repudiatory». 

2 Lit., p.22.9—23.2. «How is again this detailed analysis (vyasta-vicara) attained 
without an expression of the meaning as it is here told? It this is asked, then this is answered. 

These sentences, (full) of meaning, are very much meaning, they are turned out ( pravrttani ) in 
summarizing the meaning as it has been told and, being commented upon, they give birth to 
their own self, the meaning as is (here) told, thus nothing is imagined which is not (really) as¬ 
sumed*. 

3 Both prasanga and tad-viparyaya are used together to prove the same thesis in, e. g., 
Sasvadars., p. 21 (Poona, 1924). 

4 Lit., p. 23. 4-6. «And the more faults of the opponent are deduced through a deduc¬ 
tion of the contrary of (his, sc. Buddhapalitas) deduction, the more desirable will it indeed 
be for us.» 

5 sdvakaSam. 


104 


NIRVANA 


appendix: candeakIrti’s comment on RELATIVITY, I 


105 


24. 7. 


24. 8. 


24. 10. 


24. 12. 
26. 1. 


denies the reality (of single objects) deduces ad absurdum the conception of 
their reality , 1 how can he be charged with the counterpart of this deduc¬ 
tion? Our words are not policemen! They cannot deprive us of our liberty! 
(Words) possess a power (to express something), but they are controlled 
by the intention 2 of the speaker. Therefore the only result of our deduction 
is to repudiate the theory of our opponent. Our acceptance of the converse 
theory is not at all therewith implied . 3 

Our (common) Master Nagarjuna, when combating opposed opinions, 
has very often had recourse just to a deduction ad absurdum , (without ever 
admitting its positive counterpart). 

E-g., 

We find nothing (called empty) Space, 

Before its essence has (here) been determined. 

If it would previously to this determination preexist, 

It would be Space without an essence . 4 
Supposing all the causes of some matter taken off, 

And we would call it matter none the less, 

It would be matter without causes. 

But nowhere without causes any matter does exist . 5 

(This does not at all imply that Nagarjuna admitted the existence 
of caused matter). 

Another example, 

Nirvana is no (separate) entity, 

Or else it would be subject to decay and death. 

There is no (separate) entity 

That never would decay and never die . 6 

1 Lit., deduces ad absurdum «the maintainer of reality », the Realist (sa-svabhdva-vadin). 

2 We would expect either vivaksaya or vivaksdm anu vidhiyante. 

3 Lit., p. 24. 5-6. «There is no accepted deduction ( arthapatti ) being the contrary of the 
unacceptable deduction (prasanga).» 

4 M. s., V. 1. It does not follow that Nagarjuna admits the existence of a real space. 

5 M. s., IV. 2. 

6 M. s., XXV. 4. If the converse conception be that of a Nirvana immanent in the world 
and eternal, Nagarjuna admits it, cp. ibid. XXV. 9. 


(Bhavaviveka). But these are aphorisms . 1 The sentences of our 25. 3 . 
Master contain profound intentions. They can be variously tackled 2 and 
give rise to a variety of syllogistic formulation. 

(Answer). Why, to be sure, should not the comment of Buddha- 25. 4 . 
Dalita (which does not contain any syllogistic formulation) be accepted 
just in this sense, (as the only faithful rendering of Nagajuna’s inten¬ 
tion). 

(Bhavaviveka). It is the business 3 of the writers of detailed com- 25. 4—5. 
mentaries to make detailed statements about the syllogistic formulations 
(implied in the aphorisms). 

(Answer). This is not (always) the case. Our Master has written a 25. 6 . 
commentary upon his own manual of dialectics, «The Repudiation of Con¬ 
tests)), but he did not indulge in it in syllogistic formulations . 4 You are, 
indeed, merely parading with your cleverness in the science of dialectics. 

Although you pretend to be an adherent of the Madhyamika system, you 
nevertheless compose independent syllogistic arguments. But for such a 
logician, as you would like to appear, (the Madhyamika method) is only a 
very great encumbrance. It makes him pile up mistake upon mistake . 5 

How is that? 

XIX. Examination of Bhaviveka’s formal argument against 
the Sankhya. 

(To combat the Sankhya theory of Causality you have composed the 
following syllogism). 

(Thesis). Mental phenomena , 6 if considered from the transcendental 25.9—26.1. 
standpoint (of the Monist), are no new productions out of the same (sub¬ 
stance). 

1 artha-vakya 

2 parikalpyante. 

3 or method, nyaya, 

4 This statement can be interpreted as an indirect indication that Gandraklrti knew 
nothing about a commentary written upon the mula-karikas by Nagarjuna himself. It would 
follow that the work called Akutobhaya is a forgery as suggested by Wassilieff. 

5 Lit.,p.25.7-9.((Merely throughthedesire of displaying the own proficiency in the science 
of dialectics, the use of independent syllogisms ( prayoga-vdkya ), although having accepted the 
Madhyamika system, is an indirect indication ( upalaksyate ) of such a logician who is in a very 
high degree the receptacle of an assemblage of many logical mistakes!» 

6 ddhydtmikany ayatanani , cp. above, p. 96 n. 3. 


26. 3. 


26. 4. 


26. 7. 


26. 10. 


106 NIRVANA 

(Reason). Because they exist. 

(Example). Just as the Conscious Principle (of the Sankhya which is 
an eternal unchanging entity). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever already exists is not a new self-produc- 

tion). 

Now, in this syllogism, by you so formulated, what is the use of the 
qualification «from the transcendental standpoint (of the Monist )))? 1 

(Bhavaviveka). If we take our stand on phenomenal reality we 
caunot deny origination (of mental phenomena). If this were denied, it 
would follow that the contrast which we’assume (between the absolute 
thing in itself and phenomenal reality) does not exist . 2 

(Answer). This is not right, because we deny the identity of cause 
and effect 3 from the phenomenal point of view also. It is corroborated by 
the following words of the Scripture . 4 «This sprout which springs up from a 
seed is not produced out of itself, neither is it produced out of non-self, nor 
out of both, nor without a cause. It is neither created by God , 5 nor by 
Time, nor from the Atoms, nor from Primitive Matter , 6 nor by Nature ». 7 
Here is another text. «The sprout does not belong to the seed, neither is the 
seed identical with the sprout, nor is it non-identical. It is (a manife¬ 
station of that unique) Reality 8 which neither (can be determined as) 
annihilation , 9 nor as (one of the Eternal Principles ))). 10 

And in this treatise the author will make the following statement, 
Whatever relatively does exist 
Is really not what (it appears to be). 

But neither is it something else. 

1 Lit.,p.25.9—26.2, «Here the syllogism which has been stated thus, as absolute reality the 
internal bases do not arise out of self, since they exist, just as consciousness, whatfor again in it 
the qualification «as absolute reality® has been assumed?» 

2 Lit, p. 26. 3-4. «And if denied, the admitted repudiation ( badha ) (of the phenomenal by 
the absolute) would not be entailed (read prasangat)». 

3 svata utpatti. 

4 From Salistamba-sutra, cf. Sikgasamuc, p. 219. 10 ff. 

5 iSvara. 

6 prakrti. 

7 svabhava. 

8 dharmata. 

3 uccheda. 

10 Such as God, Time, Atom, Matter, Nature etc. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAK1R1TS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, 1 107 

Therefore it neither has an end, 

Nor has it a beginning . 1 

(Bhavaviveka). The qualification («from the standpoint of trans- 26. 13. 
cendental reality») has been introduced (iuto the above syllogism) iu consi¬ 
deration of the opinion held by the opponent. 

(Answer). This is a wrong method, because we do not admit his con¬ 
struction , 2 eveu from the point of view of phenomenal reality . 3 Non-Bud- 
dhists are absolutely lacking the right understanding of (the division 27. 1. 
between) both realities, (the transcendental and phenomenal one). (It is 
therefore much better) to repudiate them from both these standpoints. 

I would think it a great advantage. The above qualification is thus out 
of place, even if it is introduced in order (to distinguish the view taken 
by the author from) the views of the opponent (or from the ideas of simple 
people). 

As to simple people they do not understand what self-origination 27. 3. 
means. For them also the qualification is useless. Unsophisticated people 
simply admit that an effect is produced by a cause. They do not enter into 
such considerations as to whether (the effect) is identical (to the cause), 
or not. 

Our Master (Nagarjuna) has (really) established the same thing, (viz. 
that we must avail ourselves of the every day idea of causality without 
any hope to explain it metaphysically). It is therefore clear that the 
qualification is absolutely senseless. 

XX. Bhavaviveka 5 s argument assailed from the standpoint of 
FORMAL LOGIC. 

However (let us agree and admit that) the qualification might have 27. 7. 
been introduced in order to intimate that phenomenal causality is not 
denied. (The syllogism of Bhavaviveka will then nevertheless be formally 
deficient, since its example, the Spirit, and its reason, the fact of «the 
existence)) of mental phenomena, will both be ultimately unreal). We will 
then have either the logical error of a faulty thesis, since it will refer to 

1 M. s., XVIII. 10 ,pratitya — Sunya; Sasvata « beginningless®, cp. XXV. 21. Cp. Kant’s 
solution ef the first antinomy, viz. that the world is neither finite, nor infinite because «a pheno¬ 
menon does not exist by itself®, op. cit. p. 410 ff. 

2 vyavastha. 

3 It is not right to maintain that the Sankhya’s view of phenomenal reality is admissible 
with the qualification that from the transcendental point of view it will be an illusion. 



108 NIRVANA 

something (sc. the mental phenomena) which (the author of the syllosgim) 
himself, (from his own monistic point of view), does not accept as real ; 1 or 
we shall have the logical error of a faulty reason , 2 (viz. the fact of the 
existence or reality of mental phenomena) which will then refer to something 
(equally) unreal. 

Indeed (Bhavaviveka) himself (being a Madhyamika) does not admit 
the transcendental reality of (separate) mental phenomena 3 (and at the 
same time he composes a syllogism about this very non-existing thing). 

27. 9 . (Bhavaviveka). This does not matter, since we admit the pheno¬ 

menal reality of the sense of vision etc.! 

(Answer). But then, who is qualified by the words «from the transcen¬ 
dental standpoint))? 

27. 10. (Bhavaviveka). If considered from the transcendental point of view 
the existence 4 of the phenomenal sense faculties 5 (and of empirical conscious¬ 
ness ) 6 is not real. The qualification is introduced in order to specify the 
kind of causality which is denied. 

27 . n. (Answer). Then you ought to have expressed yourself (otherwise. 
You ought to have spoken) exactly thus: «the supposed phenomenal reality of the 
sense-faculties etc. is no reality in the transcendental sense». But your ex- 

28. l. pression is different . 7 However, even supposing you would have expressed 

yourself (properly), nevertheless (you would not have escaped) the logical 
error of a faulty thesis since it would then have referred to (empirical 
sensations, i. e., something quite) unknown to your opponent . 8 (For the 

1 This paksa-dosa would be probably classified by Dignaga as anumana-nirakrta, cp. 
Nyayabindu, p. 59.1. (B. B. VII). 

2 About the aSraya-asiddha hetu-dosa cf. Nyayabindu, p. 64.16. The logic of Dignaga 
forbids deductions from facts which the author of the syllogism, from his own point of view, 
does not admit as real, cp. ibid. p. 63.13 ff. 

3 Lit., «of the basis of the sense of vision ( caksur-dyatana ) and other (subjective bases of 
cognition, i. e. ddhydtmika-dyatana)». 

4 utpatti. 

5 eaksuradi. 

6 citta (= manas—vijridna ) is included among eaksuradi as dyatana A: 6, cf. my Central 
Conception, p. 96. 

7 The expression that «from the transcendental standpoint the sensations do not arise 
out of themselves# can be understood as meaning that the transcendental sensations are not 
identical to their causes. But transcendental sensations do not exist from the Monist’s point 
of view. Hence for him it will be a syllogism composed about a non-existing thing. 

* Lit., p. 28. 1-3. « And even if told, since the opponents admit exclusively a really existing 
faculty of vision etc., and do not admit nominal realities, it will be a faulty thesis whose sub¬ 
stratum will be unreal for the opponent. Thus it is not right#. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKlRTl’s COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, 1 1 09 

Sankhya) indeed all sensations are absolutely real. He has altogether no 
nominal (or empirical) realities. 

Thus it is that the argument is wrong (either from the standpoint of 28. 3. 
its author, for whom the separate mental phenomena are not real, or from 
the standpoint of those to whom it is addressed, because they do not admit 
any difference between phenomenal and absolute reality ). 1 

XXI. Another attempt of Bhavaviveka to vindicate his argument. 

But be that as the case may be, we may envisage (the syllogism in 28. 4. 
question) as referring in general terms just to the relation between a fact, 

(the mental phenomena), and one of its characteristics, (viz. existence), 
without enlarging upon the special (theories which might be entertained by 
both parties about the nature of mental phenomena or the essence of exis¬ 
tence). E. g., when it is inferred that words are non-eternal (the general 
relation of this characteristic to the characterized fact is alone referred to). 

Indeed the work of inference would become quite impossible, if the special 29. 1. 
views entertained in different systems) were to be taken into account. (There 
are no two systems which agree in the question about the nature of the 
sound). If we admit (with the Hlnayana Buddhist) that the sound 
is a secondary element of matter, dependent upon the four universal ele¬ 
ments , 2 this will not be admitted by his opponent (the Vaisesika), (because 
he, on the contrary, maintains) that the sound is a quality of the ether, (it is 
not a substance). This again the Buddhist does not admit on his own 
behalf. Similarly when the Vaisesika undertakes it to prove that the word is 29. 3. 
non-eternal, (he can be asked) whether he means the word as a physical 
product, or the word as a manifestation (of an eternally existing substance). 

The first is not admitted by his opponent (the Mimamsaka who postulates 
the existence of a special eternal substance of whom the spoken words are 
nothing but separate manifestations). The second is not accepted by (the 
Vaisesika) himself. 

1 According to the logic of Dignaga a discussion must start from facts admitted by both 
parties, cp. Nyayabindu, p. 62. 3. Sensations real in the absolute sense do not exist for the 
Monist. The difference of sensations empirically real is unknown to the Sankhya, for him all sen¬ 
sations are real. Hence, accordingly as we take it, the syllogism of Bhavaviveka will refer either 
to something non-admitted by the respondent himself,or to something not admitted by his opponent. 

2 Cp.. my Central Conception, p. 14. 


110 


NIRVANA 

29. 4 . The same (applies) mutatis mutandis 1 (to every philosophic issue). (If 
you admit) that the destruction (of an object) must have a cause, this will not 
be accepted by the Buddhist on his own behalf, (since he maintains that 
every existence consists of discrete moments which are evanescent by them¬ 
selves, without a cause ). 2 But if he alludes to uncaused (invisible) destruc¬ 
tion (going on at every moment) this will not be admitted by his opponent, 
(the Vaisesika). 

29. 5. Therefore, just as in the case (of the evanescent character of the 

sound), only the relation of this characteristic to the characterized substratum, 
in general terms, is taken into account, just so in the present in¬ 
stance, the mere fact that there is some substratum (called sensations), 
should be taken (in general), without entering into details, (whether it be a 
phenomenal or an absolute existence). 

29. 7 . (Answer). This is not so, (since in the present case it is just the 

existence of such a general substratum that is denied). It is denied by no 
one else than (Bhavaviveka) himself. His avowed aim is here to deny 
Causality. However, just in denying every causality, he at the same time 
(eo ipso) denies its substratum, (the caused thing), the substance (of the thing 
produced), (converting it in a thing which) owes its existence to a mere 

30. 2 illusion. Illusion and reality are indeed opposites. (The pluriverse as it ap¬ 

pears before the unsophisticated eyes of mankind is either logically incon¬ 
sistent or it is a reality) . 3 

30. 3. If it is logically inconsistent , 4 and if (this plurality) which is not 
the real (condition of the universe) is wrongly apprehended by us as 
real, if it is a false impression in the mind of the perceiver , 5 then 

1 yatha-sambhavam. 

2 Cp. Nyayabindu, p. 33.6 ff. 

3 We find here an eloquent expression of that genuine conviction very much spread, even 
in our days, among the pandits of India who have studied the various systems of their country 
that Monism is superior to all other systems by the fact of reaching the limit of all philoso¬ 
phic construction. The realism of Nyaya-Vaisesika and Mimamsa, the dualism of the Sankhya, 
the radical pluralism of Hinayana Buddhism — all were engaged in constructing a skeleton of 
the Universe out of a limited number of ultimate data and have then stopped before them, re¬ 
fusing to go deeper into them and to reduce them to their still deeper root. Should they have 
embarked on a further analysis of those ultmate principles at which they had arrived they 
would have been inevitably landed in Monism. Only in Monism does philosophic analysis reach its 
real limit — yathd yatha vicdryate tatha tathd brahmany eva ekasmin sarvam paryavasyati. 
In modern philosophy, as far as I am aware, a similar view has been taken by Ladd,Introd. to philos.p.403. 

4 viparyasa. 

5 Lit. «like (non-existing) hair etc. by the ophthalmic>». 


Ill 


appendix: candrakirti’s comment on RELATIVITY, I 

there is (in this plurality) not the slightest bit of what is (absolutely) real. 1 But if 
there is no (transcendental) illusion, if it is not a mirage, 2 if (we perceive) a real 8 
(pluriverse), not the one constructed (by our imagination), then there is not the 
slightest vestige of something unreal (in pluralism), (nothing at all to justify 
the claim) that a phenomenal reality has been established (by us). 4 

Our venerable Master (Nagarjuna) has therefore said, 30. 6. 

If I did really cognize some (separate) things, 30. 7. 

I could then make an affirmation or denial 

Upon the basis of these things perceived or (inferred). 

But these (separate) things do not exist for me! 

Therefore I cannot be assailed on such a basis. 5 

Since it is so since (transcendental) illusion is one thing and (trans- 30. 9. 
cendental) reality another, since for the transcendentalist, 6 in what (he con¬ 
siders to be) absolutely real, there is no room for non-reality, (what is then 
the meaning of Bhavaviveka’s syllogism? He takes) the phenomenal visual 
sensations and other (mental phenomena) as a minor term, (the subject of 
his deduction). He thus cannot escape from the criticism that his thesis is 
logically impossible, since it refers to a non-entity, or that his middle 
term is contradictory, because it appertains to an unreal substratum. (The 
syllogism would be equivalent to the assertion that non-existing things 
do not arise out of themselves, «because they exist*). 

As to the analogy (with the discussions about the nature of the word), 30. 12. 
it does not exist. In those (discussions there always) is an agreement be¬ 
tween (every) pair of contending views about what sound, in general, and 
what evanescence, in general, are, without entering into details (about the 

1 sad-bhuta-padartha-leSa, a hint at Dignaga’s ksana = svalaksana —paramar tha-sa 
and at his claim to have vindicated phenomenal reality, cp. below, text page 66 ff. 

2 Lit., «like (real) hair etc. by the non-ophtbalmic». 

3 Read bhutam in stead of abhutam. 

4 Lit., p. 30. 1-5. « Because just when the denial of origination is here intended to be a 
characteristic to be established, just then the negation of the characterized, of its substratum, 
which has reached its own existence only through an illusion, is admitted just by himself 
Different are indeed illusion and non-illusion. Therefore if, owing to illusion, non-Ens is taken 
as Ens, just as by the ophthalmic (non-existing) hair etc., then wherefrom would even a bit of a 
really existing thing be apprehended? But if through non-confusion, the real, non-imagiued (is 
perceived), like by the non-ophthalmic (real) hair etc., then wherefrom the perception of even a bit 
of a non-really-existing thing, so as then there would be phenomenalism ( samvrttih )?». 

5 This stanza from the Vigraha-vyavartani has been quoted above, text p. 16.9. 

6 vidusam, they are identified with the aryas, cf. above p. 90 n. 4. 



112 


NIRVANA 


APPENDIX! CANDEAKlRTl’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, 1 


113 


nature of the sound). There is no such agreement between the radical Re¬ 
lativist 1 and the non-Relativist (or Realist ), 2 iu regard of what visual 
sensations in general are, either from the phenomenal or the transcen¬ 
dental point of view. For this reason the (two) cases are not comparable. 

30. is. All that has been said about the logical impossibility of a thesis which 
refers to a non-entity is applicable ( mutatis mutandis) as the proof of the 
futility of (the conception of) «existence)) as a logical reason. 

XXII. Bhavaviveka also avails himself of the argument that for 

THE MONIST ALL INDIVIDUAL EXISTENCE IS UNREAL. 

si. i. Such is (the force) of this (argument ) 3 that even (Bhavaviveka) him¬ 
self, this champion of logic , 4 is (obliged) to admit (the condemnation of 
logic) which we have exposed. 

31. i. (He examines the following syllogism). 

(Thesis.) The causes and (conditions) which produce mental phenomena 5 
really exist. 

(Reason.) Because this has been declared by Buddha. 

(Major premise). Whatsoever has been declared by the Buddha is 

true . 6 

(Example). As e. g., (his statement) that Nirvana is (Final) Quies¬ 
cence. 

si. 3. This syllogism has been advanced by a (Hinayanist) opponent of 
(Bhavaviveka). He replies by the following criticism. «In what sense, do 
you think, the word «cause» is here used? Has Buddha spoken from the 
phenomenal point of view or from the transcendental 7 one? If it is taken 
in the phenomenal sense, the reason has (eo ipso ) no (ultimate) reality for 
(Buddha) himself. But supposing it is taken in the sense of something trans- 
cendentally real, (then we must remember the following words of N agarj uDa), 

1 Sunyata-vadin. 

2 aSunyata-vadin. 

3 The argument, namely, that for a consistent Monist every separate thing and every se¬ 
parate reason is ultimately unreal. 

4 tarkika. 

5 adhyatmika-ayatana. 

6 Lit., «Indeed what (and) how is taught by the Buddha (to exist), is so». 

7 paramarthatah. 


Neither an Ens, nor a non-Ens, 

Nor any Ens-non-Ens, 

No element 1 is really ((turned out». 2 

How can we then assume 

The possibility of a producing 3 cause ? 

«Since causation 4 of things, whether real or unreal or (partly) real 31. 7. 
and (partly) unreal, is excluded, there is no such thing as a (really) efficient 31. 9. 
cause». This is the meaning of the words (of Nagarjuna). 

((Therefore from the transcendental point of view 5 there is altogether 31. 9. 
no efficient causality. 6 Every reason (you may adduce) will be either (ulti¬ 
mately) unreal or contradictory)). 

By adopting this line of argument (against the Hinayanist, Bhavavi- 31. 11. 
veka) has himself admitted the unreality of every reason (from the trans¬ 
cendental standpoint of the Relativist). Thus all logical demonstrations are 
smashed, since in all such syllogisms reasons are adduced which (in the 
opinion of the opponent) are founded on real fact, but in the opinion of (the 
Relativist) himself they are all (ultimately) unreal. 7 

In the following (two syllogisms of Bhavaviveka the middle term 31. is. 
must likewise be declared faulty, on the score that it is meaningless from 
the Monist’s transcendental point of view). E. g., 

(Thesis). Mental phenomena 8 do not really 9 arise from corresponding 
causes, separate from them. 

(Reason). Because these are separate (entities). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is a separate substance cannot really be 
a cause). 

1 dharma. 

- nirvartyate. 

3 nirvartaka. 

4 sad-asat-karya-pratyayatva, i. e., neither satkarya- nor asatkarya-vada is admitted. 

5 paramarthatah. 

6 nirvartya-nirvartakatva. 

7 Lit., p. 31. 11-13. aSince thus be even himself by this method has admitted the un¬ 
reality of the reason, therefore in all syllogisms which have middle terms suggested by attributes 
of real entities, since just by themselves reasons etc. are unreal, just all demonstrations are 
killed.® 

* adhyatmika-ayatana , lit.. «the (six) subjective bases (of cognition)®. 

9 paramarthatah. 


8 


31. 14 


32. I 


32. 3 


32. 4 


114 NIRVANA * 

(Example). As the causes of ajar 1 (which are not real in the ab¬ 
solute sense). 

Or (another example), 

(Thesis). The causes which, iu the opinion of our opponents, 2 produce 
mental phenomena 3 are not understood to be causes in the absolute sense. 

(Reason). Because they are separate (entities). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is a separate entity is not a cause in the 
absolute sense). 

(Example). As e. g., the threads, (the loom, the weaver etc. are not 
the causes of cloth from the transcendental point of view). 

The reason ((because they are separate (entities))) is not a valid middle 
term, since (for the author of these syllogisms) himself it has no (ultimate) 
reality. 

Another example where (Bhavaviveka implicitly admits that the trans- 
cendentalist has to forego usual logical methods, is the following one). He 
is desirous to elicit that the reason given by his opponent (the Sautran- 
tika) is wrong, because it represents a fact whose (ultimate) reality he, 
(as a consequent Relativist), does not accept. (The argument of the Sau- 
trantika runs thus). 

(Thesis). Internal facts 4 (i. e., mental phenomena) really arise (i.e., 
they have a real existence). 

(Reason). Because they produce purposive actions directed towards the 
same objects as (our thoughts have been directed to). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is efficient is real). 

(Bhavaviveka repudiates this conclusion by quoting the following paral¬ 
lel argument), 

(Thesis). The Yogi, when merged in transic meditation, perceives by his 
supernatural faculty of vision the ultimate reality, he then apprehends cau¬ 
sation, motion etc. as they really are. 0 

1 Read ghatasya. 

2 Read paraih instead of pare. 

3 Lit., «The (six) subjective bases (of cognition), the faculty of sight (caksuh) etc.». 

4 adhyatmika bhavah. 

5 The definition of reality ( paramartha-sat ) as efficiency (artha-kriya-haritva) is ac¬ 
cepted by Dignaga and Dharmakirti, cp. Nyayabindu. p. 13. 15. It is also shared by the 
Sautrantikas, cp. N. b. Tipp., p. 19. 

6 In the Santanantara-siddhi, §90 (B. B. XI), Russian transl. p. 47, Dharma¬ 

kirti denies the capacity of the yogi to perceive the ultimately real. 


appendix: candrakIrtTs comment on relativity, i 115 

(The reason adduced is the same as in the foregoing syllogism, viz.) 32. 5. 
((because they produce purposive actions directed to the same objects (as his 
thoughts have been directed to»). In this argument, (says Bhavaviveka), the 
reason does not represent a real fact (from the transcendental point of view). 

It is moreover (unreal, says he), because motion does not exist. 1 Since 32. c. 
there is no (real) causation, (motion cannot exist)». 2 

Now this method (by which Bhavaviveka here combats the argu- 32. 7. 
ment of his opponent can be mutatis nmtandis ) applied to his own deductions 
(which he produces bona fide , viz.), 

(Thesis). The future does not exist in an absolute sense. 3 

(Reason). Because it represents time. 4 

(Example). Just as the past time (does not exist). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is «time» does not represent an ultimate 
reality). 

(To this syllogism we may likewise) apply (the stricture) that the 32. e 
reason a time» represents nothing real (to the author of the syllogism) himself. 

(The student will be now able) himself to extend (the critique here ex- 33. 2 
pounded) upon the unreality of the reasons (adduced by Bhavaviveka in 
the following three syllogisms). 

1 . (Thesis). The operating 5 sense of vision does not perceive colour. 32. 9 

(Reason). Because it is a sense of vision (in general). 

(Example). Just as a non-operating 6 (sense of vision always is). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is a sense of vision does not necessarily 
perceive colour). 7 

1 In Hlnayana motion is denied ( na gatir naMt, Ab. Kosa, IV. 1) since it represents iu 
reality a series of separate momentary productions ( nirantara-utpada ), as in a cinema. In 
Mahayana motion is denied because all these moments are relative (svabhava-Sunya). 

2 Lit., p. 32. 3-7. «Just as he has said when eliciting the unreality (asiddharthatd) of 
this reason given by an opponent, viz. ((internal facts ( bhavah ) are necessarily (exm) produced, 
since they produce actions characterized as possessing their objects)); now it is being proved 
that «for the meditating Yogi who by his eye of wisdom sees the real pith of existence ( bhdva - 
ydthatmya), origination, motion etc. exist in the absolute sense (paramarthatah), then there is 
unreality of the reason, because they produce actions characterized as possessing their objects, 
and motion is denied just because origimation is denied. Just so...» 

3 Lit., aThe not-run is not at all being run in the absolute sense». 

4 adhvan. 

5 Read sabhagam instead of saSrayam. Sabhaga — sva -karma-lift, cp. A. Kosa, I. 39- 

6 tatsabhdga = a-sva-karma-krt, cp. Ab. Kosa, 1.39. 

7 For the Monist, according to Candrakirti, it would have been sufficient to deny a 
real perception of colour on the score that all separate facts have no ultimate reality for a cou- 

8 * 



116 nirvana 

33. i. 2 . (Thesis). The organ of vision does not apprehend colours. 

(Reason). Because it is physical . 1 

(Example). Just as any physical object , 2 (e. g., a jar etc.). 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is physical does not apprehend colours ). 3 

33. 2. 3 . (Thesis). The solid bodies 4 do not really possess solidity. 

(Reason). Because they represent Matter . 5 

(Example). Just as the gazeous bodies. 

(Major premise. Whatsoever is Matter is not always a solid body ). 6 

XXIII. Another formal error in the syllogism of Bhavaviveka. 

33. 4. Moreover the reason «because they (sc. mental phenomena) exist » 7 is 
«uncertain» from the standpoint of the opponent. (The syllogism of Bhavavi¬ 
veka is directed against the Sankhya who admits a double kind of exis¬ 
tence, the eternal, changeless existence of the Spirit and the changing 
existence of Matter. It is therefore uncertain) whether the words '<mental 
phenomena do not arise out of themselves because they already exist» mean 

sequent Monist, or only a second hand reality (paratantra) for a Yogacara, cp. above p. 33. 
But Bhavaviveka apparently tries to corroborate this view by something like a formally 
correct syllogism. He seemingly has detected in the judgment «the eye is a colour-perceiving organ» 
the same contradiction as really appears if the copula be taken in the sense of an equation. The eye 
thus does not perceive colour because it does not always perceive it, perception is not its 
essence (svabhava) as, e. g., the quality of being resistent is the essence of the hard stuff. 

1 bhautika. 

2 rupa, the first rupa = rupa-dyatana, the second probably --- rupa-skundha. 

3 Here Bhavaviveka has recourse to an idea of the i^yaya-Vaise§ika school (bhauti- 
kani indriyani) in order to undermine the fact that colours are perceived through the eye. 
According to Candraklrti this is quite superfluous for a believer in Universal Relativity 
$unyata=nihsvabhavata), and moreover constitutes a fault in formal logic, since the reason, 
the physical character ( bhautika ) of the organ, has no real force from the point of view of the 
author of the syllogism, it is asiddha svatah. 

4 mahl—prthim , cp. my Central Cone., p. 13. 

5 bhuta=maha-bhuta, cp. ibid. 99. 

6 Solidity ( Jcharatva) is the essence (laksana) of the solid bodies. All the work of predica¬ 
tion being relative, it can, from this point of view, be maintained that the solid body is not solid, 
sc. is not solid by itself, but only in relation to others. This is a case of the laksana-nihsva - 
bhavata, or Sunyata, cp. Triinsika, p. 32. For Candrakjrti it is enough to point out this 
general conception in order to establish the relativity and consequent unreality of the idea of a 
solid stuff. But Bhavaviveka wishes apparently to construct a formal syllogism on the same 
basis as the first one, i. e., he finds a contradiction in the sentence «a solid stuff is a stuff» na 
the score that there are stuffs that are liquid and gazeous. These three syllogisms are cele¬ 
brated among Tibetan schoolmen as baffling arguments establishing Relativity ( Sunyatd ) accor¬ 
ding to the system of the Svatantrikas founded by Bhavaviveka. 

7 Cp. above, p. 26.1, sattvdt — vidyamanatvat. 


appendix: candrakirti’s comment on relativity, i 117 

that they exist eternally 1 like the Spirit 2 exists, or whether the words 
((because they already exist» refer to that kind of origination which is 
exemplified by the origination of jars and'Other (physical existence in ge¬ 
neral, an origination which represents a change in a permanent stuff, 
since according to this system mental changes are in themselves phy¬ 
sical). 3 

It may be objected (that the adduced example, the identity of matter 33. 5. 
in physical objects) like jars etc., is a petitio principii* and therefore the 
argument is not uncertain, (but wrong). 5 However this is not so, because 
the argument is stated not in conformity (with our view, but from the stand¬ 
point of the Sankhya, where mental phenomena indeed have a double 
nature, they are physical in themselves and at the same time they are 
the reflection of the eternal changeless Spirit). 

XXIV. The Madhyamika repudiates his opponent on principles 
admitted as valid by the same opponent. 

But it may be objected that our own argument will then be liable to 34. 1. 
just the same criticism which we apply to the arguments of our opponents. 

(All our arguments will be also wrong, because) the reasons (which will be 
adduced) will either be non-entities (themselves), or they will represent 
something appertaining to a non-entity. When both parties are guilty of 
the same fault, it cannot be charged to the account of one of them alone. 

All this our attack (on logic) will thus become unfounded. 

To this we reply. This objection affects only those who (being Madh- 34. 4. 
yamikas, nevertheless, like Bhavaviveka), have recourse to bona fide 
arguments. 6 But we do not resort to direct proof by syllogism. Our argu¬ 
ments can have only the result of repudiating the tenets of our opponents, 

(for us they are not valid by themselves). 

1 Lit., «should not arise », i. e. not change. The spirit of the Sankhya is changeless. 

2 caitanya. 

3 Lit., p. 33. 4-5. «Because they exist, this reason is uncertain, what? should the (six) 

internal bases (of cognition), because they exist like the Spirit, not arise out of self, or like jars 
etc., they should arise out of self?» 

4 sadhya-sama. 

5 not anaikantika , but asiddha , cp. Nyayabindu, p. 62. 

6 svatantra-anwmana. 


118 


appendix: candrakIrti’s comment on RELATIVITY. I 


119 


nirvana 

34. 6. Supposing someone maintains that «the eye perceives external ob¬ 
jects». He will then be repudiated on principles which lie himself admits. 
You maintain, (lie will be told), that the eye lacks the capacity of 
introspection 1 which, in your opinion, is invariably concomitant with the 
capacity of apprehending external objects. 

Now, (we will assail it by a counter-argument). 

(Major premise). Wheresoever introspection is absent, cognition of ex¬ 
ternal objects is also absent. 

(Example). E. g., (in physical objects) like jars etc. 

(Minor premise). The eye lacks the capacity of introspection, (it is 
physical). 

(Conclusion). Therefore it cannot cognize external objects. 

3-i. 9. Thus it is that the perception of an external object like (a patch of) 
blue colour is in conflict with the fact that the eye itself is deficient in 
self-perception. This contradiction (in the argument of our opponent) 
has been disclosed by another argument which is valid from (the stand¬ 
point of the opponent) himself. 

34. n. This alone is elicited by our syllogism. How is then the above men¬ 
tioned accusation possible? How can it be maintained (that our deduction 
contains) the same flaw (which we have found in the argument of our op¬ 
ponent? 

XXY. Logical refutation on the basis of facts admitted by only 

ONE PARTY. 

34. 13. (Bhavaviveka). (It is true that for us Monists all individual facts 
possess no reality). However (a discussion is possible) even then when an 
argument is combated on the basis of principles admitted by one of the 
parties. 

(Answer). Yes, but it must be done on the basis of principles ad¬ 
mitted by yourself, not on the basis of principles admitted by your opponent. 

1 svdtnm-adarSana-dharma. 

2 Dignaga has.established the rule'that a discussion must start from facts the reality 
of 'which is admitted by both parties. For the Madbyamika as a Monist all individual facts 

have no reality. Transcendental logic is thus doomed. But Bhavaviveka deems it possible to 
establish a kind of logic on the basis of facts the reality of which is admitted by one party 

alone, viz. by the opponent. Candraklrti, on the contrary, requires that the facts should be 
recognized by the disputant. He thus cannot produce any direct proof. 


This 1 is what happens in everyday life. Indeed, sometimes in common 35. l. 
life two contending parties appoint somebody to judge them, and according 
to his verdict the gain or the loss are settled. Sometimes the disputant 
himself declares (that he has won or lost). But never is this question of 
gain and loss to be settled by the enemy. What is good in common life is 
equally right in logic, because scientific logic is exclusively concerned 
(with an examination of the principles which underly purposive action in 
common life). 2 

For this very reason some (logicians) have maintained that an argu- 35. 4. 
ment cannot be exploded on the basis of the principles admitted by the 
opponent, because it is just these principles, by him admitted, that it is in¬ 
tended to reject. 

Of course (Dignaga) thinks that a demonstration or a refutation (can 35. 5. 
be valid, if it is carried on principles) admitted by both parties, not by one 
of them only. 3 If admitted (by one of them only), it will be inconclusive. 

But even he must make allowance for the just mentioned method prevailing in 
common life (and admit the validity of arguments which start from prin¬ 
ciples admitted only by one party). 

Indeed (he admits that when discussions are going on about religious 35. 8. 
matters), you cannot repudiate the Scriptures (adopted by your opponent 
on the basis of some other Scriptures which would be adopted by both 
parties. As to individual judgments 4 (which are going on in every man’s 35. 9. 
consciousness) they are guided exclusively by what people themselves think 
right, not by what both parties, (a respondent and his possible opponent), 
may agree upon. 

Therefore the standpoint of (strict) logic is to no purpose. The Buddhas 36. 1. 
have favoured their converts, who were not versed in the (science of logic), 
with arguments which suited the occasion. Enough about this subject! Let 
us continue our comment. 

1 Read evam instead of eva, p. 35. 1. 

2 Cp. below, text p. 58.14 and Nyayabindu, p. 3.5. 

3 Ibid. III. 58 (p. 62). 

4 svarthanumana corresponds to our judgement, it includes every our cognition which is 
not a direct passive sense perception. 



36 . 3 . 

36 . 5 . 
36 . 10 . 

36 . 6. 

36 . 8. 

36 . 11 . 

36 . 13 . 


120 NIRVANA 

XXYI. Denial of Causality through a separate substance. 

Neither do entities arise out of something different from them, just 
because (from the monistic point of view) the different does not exist. 1 This 
point will be elicited later on, a where it will be expressed that «(what be¬ 
longs to the things themselves), their own essence, does not belong to their 
causes and (conditions)*). 3 

Therefore, just because they do not preexist in something else, they 
cannot be produced out of it. Moreover the impossibility of a substantial 
break 4 between cause and effect can also be established on the lines which 
we have laid down in our ((Introduction into the Madhyamika System» 
where it is said, 5 

If, to be sure, a thing were «other)) in regard to causes, 

Deep darkness would then be produced from light. 6 

Then surely everything could be produced out of anything, 

Since «otherness» is just the same (in causes and) non-causes. 7 

The Master Buddhapalita comments, •«entities cannot arise out of 
something (essentially) different from them, since it would follow that every¬ 
thing could then arise out of anything)). 

The Master Bhavaviveka assails this comment. «It is nonsense! he 
says, because the argument contains its own destruction, 8 since 1) it is 
mere deductio ad absurdum , 2) it conflicts with the point previously esta¬ 
blished. Indeed in taking the counterpart of the reason and of the predicate 

1 or «just because entities do not exist in something else {=parasminn abhavad eva)u as 
e. g., the cloth in the treads, the jar in the clay, etc. 

2 Cp. aphorism I. 3. 

3 Lit., 36. 4. «The own existence (svabhdra) of entities ( bhavanam ) is not found in their 
condition, etc.». Cp. infra I. 3. This is the Vaise$ika view, the cloth is something different from 
the sum total of the threads, the jar something over and above the some total of the atoms of 
clay, etc. 

4 parata utpattih , 36.10, 

5 Madhy. av., VI. 14. * 

6 When causality is understood as a regularity of consecution the day will be the cause 
of the following night and night would produce the following day, a question that has been 
often discussed in European philosophy. 

7 Among all considerations which tend to undermine our usual conceptions of causation 
this one is considered by the Tibetans to be the strongest, they say it is as solid as diamond. 

* p. 37. 2 read sadhana-dusanantah . .., i. e. ity asya sadhanasya dusana - 


APPENDIX.* CANDRAKlRTl’s COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 121 

(we will have the following argument), «since everything must arise out of 
something (and the origination out of non-self is rejected), entities must then 
arise either out of themselves or out of self and non-self combined, or 
without a cause, otherwise (really) everything would arise out of anything)). 

It is not nonsense ! 1 We have shown above (that a deductio ad ab- 37 . 4 
surdurn is a valid proof). As to the accusation that (Buddhapalita) in con¬ 
futing the tenet of his opponent . 2 has (indirectly) invalidated (his ow r n ) 3 
previously established point, it is trivial . 4 We will not again take pains 
to refute this! 

XXVII. Combined causality denied. 

Neither do the entities arise out of both (a continuant stuff and se- 38. 1 
parate factors), since all the incongruity attaching to each of these hypo¬ 
theses separately, will then attach (to their combination). 

(But then both causes may perhaps work alternately, not simultane¬ 
ously? No,) since if they are not fit to produce something separately, (they 
neither will be fit to produce something alternately). Indeed it will be 
stated later on that— 

The world 5 could be a product 38. 3 

From a double (set of causes), 

If separately they were efficient . 0 

XXVIII. No PLURALISTIC UNIVERSE WITHOUT CAUSATION. 

But neither can (the saparate entities of this world) arise without a 38. 4 
cause. The incongruities which would follow on such an assumption will be 
pointed out later on, where it will be said, 

1 p. 37.4 read with the Tibetan asamgatartham ndsti. 

2 The Vaisesika who maintains parata utpatti. 

3 sc. paradusanena svadusandntahpatitam. 

4 Lit., p. 37.4-7. « And that he has fallen into a refutation by refuting the thesis of the 
opponent, this is anything (but truth)», i. e., by denying causation between independent sub¬ 
stances Buddhapalita has indirectly admitted causation out of the same substance — this 
argument is worth nothing. 

5 duhkha , cp. above p. 55 n. 3 

e M. s., XII. 9. 



38. 5. 


38. 7. 


38. 10. 


38. 12. 


39. 5. 


122 NIRVANA 

If there be no causation, 

(All difference) will vanish 
Between a cause and its effect. 1 

(In our «Introduction to the Madhyamika System») we have also indi¬ 
cated the following incongruity, 

Nothing at all could we perceive 
In a universe devoid of causes, 

It would be like the colour and the scent 
Of a lotus growing in the sky. 2 

The Master Buddhapalita comments. Entities, (says he,) neither can 
arise without a cause, since everything would then be possible at any time, 
and in any place». 

This also has been assailed by Bhavaviveka. (He says), «this is 
again a mere deductio ad absurdum and it can be turned into the contrary, 
if the meaning of the argument be disclosed by taking the counterpart of 
the reason and of the predicate. (You say ((entities are not without a cause, 
since otherwise everything could appear at any time and at any place». 
I say) ((entities must have a cause, since everything springs up at a definite 
time and in a definite place, and because (as experience proves) efficient causes 
produce (new) results)). Therfore the comment (of Buddhapalita on this 
point) is wrong, because it contains the same misconception (as his com¬ 
ment on the foregoing points). 

(As) opponents 3 (we will repeat) that this criticism misses the mark. 
Its refutation has been made above. 

XXIX. Causality through the will of God. 

(It may be supposed that this critique of the usual notion of causality 
is intended) in order to introduce God or similar (transcendental supreme 
causes). But this is also impossible, because God must be included in one 
of the alternatives discussed, according to the idea we entertain (about his 
essence). He is either immanent in the world, or transcends it, or he is both 
(simultaneously immanent and transcendent). 

» VIII. 4. 

2 M. av., VI. 100. 

3 The same use of the term apara as above, text p. 9.6. 


APrENDIX: CANDEAKIR'JTS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 123 

Thus (it is established that) there is no causality (in the ultimate sense). 

The Dependent Origination (or Relativity) with its (eight) characteristics 
of no real origination etc. is thus established. 

XXX. Mahayana and Hinayana contrasted. 

An objection is here raised (by the Hmayanist). If it is so, (he says), 39. 8 . 
if your interpretation of the principle of Dependent Origination (as a prin¬ 
ciple of Relativity) involving that there is no (real) Causality (is correct), 
how are the deliverances of the Buddha (to be explained which run against 
such a theory? Indeed it has been declared), 

1. «The forces 1 of life are influenced (in this world) by illusion (and 39. 9 . 
desire). When illusion (and all desires) have been suppressed (in Nirvana), 
these forces are extinct)). 2 (This suggests the reality of the force of illu¬ 
sion and of Nirvana). 

2 . All elements 3 of life, 39 . 11. 

They (all) appear and disappear; 

As soon as they appear they vanish. 

Their (final) stoppage is the (only) bliss. 

And further, 

3. ((Whether (some) elements of existence have appeared or whether 40. 1- 
thev have not appeared, there is, according to the teaching of the Buddhas 
(no controlling conscious Agent who makes them either appear or not ap¬ 
pear), remains (unchallenged) just this (eternal) essence of what the elements 
(really) are, (their causal interconnection)». 4 

1 saviskara. 

2 This is the abridged formula of pratitya-samutpada as applied to the development of 
an individual life in 12 conseculive stages, the so called prakarsika or avasthika pratitya- 
samutpada. Its first part corresponds to the direct order ( anuloma) of the members, its second 
part to their reversed (pratiloma) order. This abridgment clearly reveals the simple meaning 
of the formula as it is understood in ali Buddhist countries. Cp. 0. Rosenberg, Probleme, 
ch. XVI, and my Central Conception, p. 28 n. 3. 

3 samskara for samskrta-dharma. 

4 This is the celebrated formula of pratitya-samutpada in its generalized sense, as given in 
the Salistamba-sutra, it is very often quoted, cp. references in M. de la V. P.’s text 
edition, p. 40 n. 1. The second tathugatandm must be dropped and the first understood with 
Madha vacarva, Sarvadars./p. 21.8, in the sense of tathagatdnam mate. Lit., ((whether 
according to the Buddhas the dharmas originate or if they do not originate, this their essence 


124 


NIRVANA 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


125 


40. 2. 4 . «There is one fundamental law 1 for the subsistance of living 

beings, that is their fourfold nutrition». 

5 . «Tliere are two mental elements 2 which protect the world, humility 
and the sense of justice)). 

4o. 4. 6 . «There is a descent from another world into this one, and a depar¬ 

ture from this one into another one ». 3 

40. 5. Thus (it is clear) that Buddha has taught a principle of Dependent 
Origination which is not incompatible with the disappearing (of some things 
and the appearing of others). How can you (assert) that it does not inter¬ 
fere with (your principle of Relativity )? 4 

40. 7. It is just for this reason, because (Scripture) mentions a principle of 
Dependent Origination meaning that some elements disappear (when others 
appear), it is for this very reason that our Master (Nagarjuna) has com- 
" posed this Treatise on Relativity, in order to show the difference between 

necessarily stands ». The notion of causality, as well as the idea of a gradual evolution (by karma) 
of the world towards Nirvana, the absence in this process of any Controlling Conscious Will, all 
this is included in the connotation of the term dharma itself. Therefore dharma as an element 
of existence and dharma as the doctrine about these elements are expressed by the same word. 
The formula is found in Hlnayanistic, as well as in Mahayanistic literature. Madhavacarya, 
borrowing from some Buddhist source, gives it a Hlnayanist interpretation ( dharmdnam kdrya- 
larana-rupanam). Candrakirti takes it as a comprehensive formula admitting both doctrines, 
it very well suits his aim in this place, since he wishes to establish that the Hinayanist view is 
the simpler one and the Mabayanist the deeper one. In Agtas. Prajiiap., p. 573.21 ff. and in 
Bodhicary av. t. ad IX. 150 it is given a Mahayanist interpretation as a denial of Causation 
and of Plurality. The meaning of the formula may then be freely rendered thus. «Whether we, 
with the Hmayanists, decide that according to the teaching of the Buddhas there is a causality 
between the separate elements of existence, or whether we, with the Mahayanists, decide that 
there is none, the (eternal) essence of elements stands (as a Unity)». At the time when the 
theory Jof a kdrana-hetu was established in the Abhidharma, this theory which implies a uni¬ 
versal link of a special causality between all the elements of the Universe, past, present and 
future, at that time the Mahayanistic Monism was already foreshadowed. 

1 Here dharma is not used in the Buddhist technical sense of an element. It is not one 
of the 75 dharmas. The conception of food as an abstract principle keeping life going is in¬ 
herited from theUpanishads (cp. Jacob, Concordance, s. v. anna). The food is physical in the 
realms of gross bodies. It is spiritual, consisting of sensations (sparia), volitions ( cetana ) 
and consciousness (vyhana), in the mystical worlds of ethereal bodies and pure spirits. 

2 Here dharma is used in the technical sense, since hri and apatrapa are included in the 
75 dharmas. The prominence given to these moral forces ( samskuras) is natural, since the reverse of 
them, irreverence and indifference for injustice, are supposed to be the deepest root of every immoral 
deed, cp. my Central Conception p. 101, 102. Their definition is a shade different in the Trim- 
sika, p. 27. 

3 i. e., first of all, out of this world into one of the mystic ones. For the identification 
of all these quotations cp. the notes of M. de la V. P. to his edition. 

4 Read virudhyate instead of nirudhyate. 


the real and the conventional meaning of the Scriptures. All the above 
utterances which mention a principle of Dependent Origination along with 
(real) causation do not refer to the pure essence of the objects (which re¬ 
veals itself) when the darkness of our ignorance (in philosophy) is dispelled . 1 
On the conrary it refers to that condition of the world which reveals 
itself to the mental eye 2 whose vision is vitiated by the darkness of illusion. 

There are other utterances of Buddha which, on the contrary, hit the 41. 4. 
absolute reality,— 

1 . «The paramount Reality, Brethren, is Nirvana, it is not a clandes¬ 
tine Reality . 3 Ail the combined forces (of phenomenal life) are illusion)). 

2 . «There is here (in this world) neither Reality, nor absence of illusion. It, 41. 6. 
is surreptitious Reality, it is cancelled Reality, it is a lie, a childish babble 

an illusion»! 

Further,— 

3 . (All) matter is a piece of foam, (all) feeling is a bubble. 41. 9. 
A mirage all ideas are, a (hollow) plantain trunk the forces, 

The sunlike (Buddha) has declared 
(All) consciousness is but illusion . 4 

4 . Attentive, mindful day and night, 42. 1. 

The recluse full of courage, 

By contemplating (separate) elements , 5 
Should penetrate into Quiescence, 

The bliss where all the energies 5 repose. 

5 . ((Because all elements (that are active in the process of life) contain 42. 4. 
nothing real, (Plurality is an illusion )®. 6 

1 Read asrava (sc. vigata .... asrava) instead of anasrava. 

2 mati-nayana—prajfld-caksuh. 

3 «The element having the characteristic of not being some stolen good», i. e., the non- 
relative. 

4 This stanza is found in Sanryutta N., III. 142 where the illusion regarding the 
5 skandhas must be understood as referring to the theory of pudgala-nairutmya. Here 
evidently Candrakirti takes it as referring to the theory of dharma-nairdmya. 

5 dfiarma=sarnskrta-dharma—8amskdra. 

0 A very frequent proposition referring to the theory of dharma-nairdtmya. 


42. 5. 


42. 9. 

43- 3. 

42. 10. 

42. 12. 

43 . 1 . 

43 . 3 . 
43 . 4 . 


126 KIEVAN A 

XXXI. The direct and indirect meaning of Buddha’s words. 

For the sake of those who, having no thorough knowledge of the in¬ 
tention contained in the (different) utterances of Buddha, fall into doubt whe¬ 
ther (a particular expression) refers to the (absolute) truth or whether it does 
(depart from it) with a special intention; and for the sake of those w T ho, 
owing to their slow wits, mistake a metaphorical expression for the real in¬ 
tention; for the sake of both these (classes of men) needing instruction, is 
this treatise composed, in order to dispel doubt and misconception by the 
way of argument and references to Scripture. 

The arguments have been exposed above (in commenting upon the 
aphorism «entities do) not arise out of themselves etc.». 

The scriptural references are given (by Nagarjuna in the follow¬ 
ing chapters, e. g.), 

The stolen goods are of no use, 

This has been said by Buddha. 

And all the forces (in this world) 

Are stolen goods. They are illusion ! 1 

(And further), 

This world has neither a beginning nor an end. 

We do not see its first extremity. 

The Great Ascetic lias declared, 

It has no first, it has no last . 2 

(And further), 

When speaking to Katyayana the Buddha did elicit, 

What is existence, non-existence what? 

He then denied both issues, 

The possibility of affirmation and negation." 

In these and similar (aphorisms of Nagarjuna) Scripture is quoted. 

Some supplementary (scriptural evidence is here appended). In the 
discourse with Aksayamati (we find the following statement). «What are 

1 M. 8., XIII. 1. 

2 M. s., XI. i. 

3 M. 8. XV.7. 


appendix: candrakIrits comment on relativity, i 127 

the scriptural texts which have a conventional meaning, and what are those 
which have a direct meaning? Those discourses which have been delivered 
in order to teach the Path of Salvation are metaphorically expressed. Those 
discourses which are delivered in order to teach the Final Result are ex¬ 
pressed with precision. Wheresoever you find a text specifying the entrance 43 . 6 . 
into that kind of Final Deliverance which is Relativity, where there is no 
separate object, no profound meditation, no volition, no birth, no causation, 
no existence, no Ego, no living creature, no individual Soul, no personality 
and no Lord — they are all called texts having direct meaning. This, o Re- 43 . 8 . 
vereud Sariputra, is called keeping to the precise meaning of the Scrip¬ 
tures and not to their metaphorical expressions)). 

Further it is stated in the Samadhirajasutra, 44 . l. 

A man who knows the difference 
Of the precise meaning of Scripture, 

Knows in what sense the Relativity 1 
Has been conceived by Buddha. 

When, on the contrary, the Personality, 

The Being, the Spiritual Self are spoken of, 

He knows that all the elements are then 
Conventionally taken. 

Therefore, in order to show that the doctrine wdiick admits causality 44 . 6 . 
etc. is a wrong doctrine, our Master (Nagarjuna) has undertaken to re¬ 
consider the doctrine of Dependent Origination. 

XXXII. How is the moral law be to vindicated in an unreal world? 

Now r , the following objection (will eventually be made). If the Master 44. 8. 
has composed this treatise in order to prove that there is no real causation 
and that the plurality of the elements of life is a mere illusion, then, con¬ 
sidering that what is an illusion does not really exist, it will follow that 
wicked actions do not exist, and if they do not exist, neither do miserable 
lives exist, nor are virtuous actions possible, and without them no happy 
life. Without the happy and unhappy lives there will be no phenomenal 
world , 2 and thus all endeavours (towards a better life) will be absolutely 
fruitless. 

1 sunyatd. 

2 samsara. 


128 NIRVANA 

44 . 12. We answer. We teach the illusion ol existence as an antidote against 
the obstinate belief of common mankind in the reality of this world, (we 
teach its relative truth). But for the Saints 1 (there is no need for that). 
They have reached the goal. They apprehend (no plurality), nothing that (could 
be) illusion or non-illusion. And when a man has thoroughly realized the 
(pluralistic) illusion of all (separate) entities, (there is for him no Moral 
Law). How can there be any virtuous actions for him, or any phenomenal 
life? The question whether an entity exists or does not exist will never 
occur to him. 

45. l. Accordingly Buddha has declared in the «Ratnakuta Discourse)). 
«0 Kasyapa! if we search for consciousness we do not find it. What is not 
to be found, is not to be perceived. What is not to be perceived is neither 
past, nor future, nor present. What is neither past, nor future, nor present 
has no separate 2 reality. What has no reality has no causation. What is un¬ 
caused cannot disappear. But (an ordinary man) follows wrong views. He 
does not realize the illusive character of separate elements. He obstinately 
thinks that the contingent entities have a reality of their own. Swayed by 
this inveterate belief in the reality of separate things, 3 he takes action, 4 and 
as a consequence of this he migrates through this phenomenal world. As long 
as lie takes his stand on such confusion, he is not fit to attain Nirvana». 

45. 8. But although the reality of (these separate) entities is an illusion, 

they nevertheless can produce either moral defilement or purification, just 
as the magical apparition of a beauty (inspires passion to those) who have 
not realized her nature, and just as a vision evoked by the Buddha (is 
a cause of moral purification for those) who have practised the roots of virtue 

46 . l. This is stated in the ((Discourse with the Drdhasaya». «It is similar, 

o noble son, to somebody watching a magical show. He contemplates the 
vision of a (pretty) woman and his heart fills with passion. Feeling shy 
before the assistance, he gets up from his seat and disappears. After having 
left, he tries to persuade himself that the woman was ugly, that it is (even) 
no real personality, but (an assemblage) of elements impermanent, disquiet¬ 
ing and illusive etc». 

46 . s. The following is stated in the Yin ay a. «An engineer 5 might construct 

1 drya. 2 svabhavatah. 

3 idamsatya-abhinivesa, i. e. regards the dharmas as real. 

4 karma , technically it means that blind biotic forces (karma) operate, seemingly through him. 

5 yantra-kdra. 


appendix: candrakirtts comment on relativity, i 129 

a mechanical doll (with the form of) a beautiful young woman. It was not a real 
woman, (but the workmanship was so perfect) that it appeared as a real beauty, 
and an artist painter (really) fell in love with it. Just so is it that phenomena, 
although having no separate reality of their own, are nevertheless efficient 
producers either of moral pollution or moral purification for simple people#. 

We find in the Ratnakutasutra 1 the following (story). «At that time 47. 1. 
there were five hundred monks who did not understand the preaching of 
the Buddha. They did not go deep into it. They had no fervour for it. They 
then stood up from their seats and went away. The Buddha on this occa¬ 
sion produced a magical vision of two recluses on the path by which the 
monks were receding. The five hundred monks then reached the place where 47. 5. 
the two apparitional recluses were standing. Having met them they spoke 
unto them. «Where are both the Reverend Fathers going»? The magical monks 
answered. «We are retiring to the woods. There we will live enjoying the de¬ 
lightful feeling of trance. We cannot penetrate the doctrine taught by the Bud¬ 
dha, we cannot go deep into it. We feel no devotion, we fear it, we are 
trembling before it». Then the five hundred monks spoke. ((Neither we can 47. 9 . 
penetrate into the doctrine taught by the Buddha, nor can we go deep into 
it, nor are we devoted to it. We fear, we tremble, we have got quite in a 
tremble. Therefore we too will go to the w 7 oods and live there enjoying the de¬ 
lightful feeling of trance». The magical monks spoke. ((Therefore, 0 Reve- 47. 11. 
rends, we shall be united, we shall not quarrel. Above all duties for the 
monk, not to quarrel is the paramount!)) «Whom do the Reverenus think to 
get rid of»? They answered. «We think to get rid of covetousness, of 
hatred and of infatuation». The two magical monks spoke. «But are the 
Reverends (really) possessed of those covetousness, hatred and infatuation 
which they want to forsake ?» They answered. «They are not to be perceived, 
neither in us internally, nor in the things externally, nor in the space between 
both. Nor can they indeed arise without having been imagined)). The magical 48. 3. 
monks spoke. ((Therefore, 0 Reverends, do not imagine them, do not fancy them. 

And if the Reverends will not imagine, will not fancy them, they will neither love 
nor dislove. Tne man who neither loves nor disloves, is called dispassionate. 48. 5. 
Merit, 0 Reverends, neither migrates, nor finally disappears. Trance, Wis¬ 
dom, Deliverance, the intellectual awakening (of the first glimpse) of 
Nirvana 2 —they do not migrate, nor do they disappear, they are the ele- 

1 Cp. AVassiliew. p. 157. 2 vimukti-jndna-dariana. 


9 


130 


NIRVANA 


131 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIR1TS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, 1 


48 . 7 . ments, o Reverends, through which Nirvana is suggested. But (in them¬ 

selves), o Reverends, these elements are also relative , 1 they have no essence. 
You must forget, o Reverends, even the idea of a (separate) Final Nirvana! 
Do not produce conceptions about what is only a conception, do not con¬ 
ceive an idea about what is only an idea! For him who very much thinks 
about an idea as an idea, this idea becomes a prison. 0 Reverends, you must en¬ 
ter that mystic condition where all concepts and all feelings are extinct! We 
tell you that a recluse who is merged in such a trance (has reached the 
43 . 12. climax) after which no further progress is possible)). After that these five 
hundred recluses have got their minds delivered (from all bonds, even from) dis¬ 
passionate bonds. Having got their minds thus enlightened, they approached the 
place where the Buddha was dwelling. After having approached they saluted 
the feet of the Lord in touching the ground with their heads and sat aside». 

49. l. «The Reverend Subhuti then spoke to the recluses thus. «C> Brethren, 

where did you go, wheretrom are you coming ?» They answered. «0 Reverend 
Subhuti, the system taught by the Lord does not allow for moving to some 
place nor for coming from some place». Subhuti spoke. «Who is your tea¬ 
cher))? They answered. «That one who never was born and never will disap¬ 
pear )). 2 He asked. «In what (spirit) has philosophy been taught to you»? They 
answered. «The goal was neither Bondage nor was it Deliverance». He 
asked. «Who has drilled you?» They answered. «That one who neither 
has a body nor a mind». He asked. «What was the method of your prepa¬ 
ration?)) They answered. ((Neither that of foregoing ignorance nor that of 
49. 6 . acquiring knowledge)). He asked. «Wkose disciples are you?» They answe¬ 
red. «Of that one who has not reached (Nirvana), who has not attained at 
the Supreme Enlightment». He asked. «Who are your fellow disciples?" They 
answered. «Those who never appear in one of the three planes of existence'). 
He asked. «0 Brethren, how long will it take you to reach Supreme Nirvana?)) 
They answered. «We will have reached it when (all) the magical bodies 
created by the Buddhas will vanish)). He asked. «(How) have you reached the 
goal?» They answered. «By analysing the idea of Self and the idea of Mine». 
49. 9 . He asked. «How have you got rid of passions ?» They answered. «By the utter 
annihilation of all the elements of life». He asked. «How r have you chal¬ 
lenged the Temptator?» They answered. «By disregarding the Temptator who 

1 Sunya. 

- pcirinirvasyati. These denials evidently refer to the Hinayanistic conceptions of Nirvana. 


is inherent in the elements of our individuality". He asked. «How 7 have you 
been communicating with your Teacher?» They answered. ((Neither bodily, 
nor vocally, nor mentally)). He asked. «How have you discharged your charity 
obligations?)) They answered. «By taking nothing, by receiving nothing)). 

He asked. «How have you escaped rebirth?» They answered. «By (evading) 
both annihilation and eternity». He asked. «How have you reached the goal 
of charity?» They answered. «By being absolutely averse to every property". 

He asked. «What are you going in for?» They answered. «Weare going in for 
the same aims as (all) apparitional existences created by Buddha». 

((During this meeting when Subhuti was starting questions aud the 4!). ir> 
recluses giving answers, 800 monks got rid even of their dispassionate bonds 1 
and 32.000 men had their spiritual eyes cleared of all dust and filth, with 
regard to the (reality of all) elements of life». 

Thus it is that the two magical apparitions which had no real exis- r.o. 4. 
tence, which were magically created by the Buddha have laid down the 
foundation for the purification of five hundred recluses. 

It is also declared in the Vajramanrladharanl . 2 «Thus it is, n 50. 6. 
ManjusrI, that conditioned by a piece of wood, and conditioned by attri¬ 
tion, and conditioned by an effort of a man's hand smoke appears, and fire 
appears. But this conflagration is neither in the piece of wood, nor in the 
attrition, nor is it included in the effort of the hands. Even so it is, 0 Mah- 
jusrl, that in the individuality (called) man one feels bewildered by an illusive 
unreality. The conflagration of lust, the conflagration of hatred and the con¬ 
flagration of infatuation are produced. But this conflagration is not inside 
him, neither is it in the objects outside him, nor. in the inter¬ 
mediate space between both. Again, 0 ManjusrI, what we call illu- 50. 11. 
sion, why is it so called? Illusion, 0 ManjusrI, is (a condition) 
of complete error in regard of all elements of existence. The axiom of this 
Dharanl is that all elements are like the hells». When asked, «How is it, 0 
Buddha, that this is the axiom?» He answered. «The hells, 0 Maiijusrt, are 
produced by imagination. Fools and simple people are cheated by error and illu¬ 
sion)). He asks.« Wherefrom, 0 Blessed One, do the hells descend?" Buddha an¬ 
swers. «From the Space do the hells descend." «Do you think, 0 ManjusrI, 
that the hells are produced by our imagination or do they exist as a se¬ 
parate reality ?» He answers. «The (transmigration of our Soul into) the hells, in- 

1 I. e. they became aryas. 2 Cp. Turnout Introduction. 2 p. 434 if. 




132 


NIRVANA 


133 


to animals and into ghosts is fancied exclusively by the imagination of fools and 
simple people. By error and imputation they imagine that they suffer, that 
they live a life of misery in these three inferior planes of existence)), 
si. g. «These tortures of the hell exist, o Blessed One, only as far as I ima¬ 
gine them. Let us, e. g., suppose, o Blessed One, that somebody in a dream 
imagines himself gone down to the hell. He will then imagine that he is cast 
in an iron vessel, boiling (amidst) blazing fires, quite filled with many human 
beings . 1 There he will be tormented by a strong, acute, intense pain. This 
awful suffering he will imagine in his mind. He (nevertheless) will be 
frightened, will be terror stricken. Having then awakened , 2 he will cry out 

51. li. «Oh, how awful! how awful!» He will be distressed and lament. His friends, 

acquaintances and relatives will ask, «who has made you suffer so much»? 
He will reply to these friends, acquaintances and relatives. «I have suffered 
the tortures of the hell». He will then revile and repeat, «I am suffering 
the tortures of the hell, and you ask me to tell you who has made me so 
suffer!» Then these friends, acquaintances and relatives will address the 
man in the following way. «Be not afraid, o man, vou were asleep, you 
have not left this house». He will then regain memory (and think), 
■(yes, T have been asleep, this is all wrong, it is my imagination))! And he 
will again recover his good spirits*). 

52. 4. «Thus it is, o Blessed One, that this man dreaming in sleep has ima¬ 
gined, through a wrong imputation, that he has been in the hell. It is in the same 
maimer, o Blessed One, that all simple and foolish people are saturated with 
an imagined sexual appetite. They construct (for themselves the idea of) 
a woman as the target (of their desires). Having constructed it, they ima¬ 
gine that they are enjoying themselves in her company. To such a foolish 
and simple man it occurs, «I am a man, she is a woman, she is my wife!» 
His mind is overcome by lust and delight, he allows his mind to indulge in 
pleasure. Moved by such (feelings) he (might) produce a row, a dispute, an 
altercation. His senses become obscured, he breathes hate. With these 
illusions he then imagines himself passing away and suffering in the hells during 

52 . li. many thousands of eons. The friends, acqaintances and relatives of this 

man, o Blessed One, will speak to him in the following way. «Don’t fear, 
don’t be frightened, o man! You were asleep, you did not leave this house!» 

1 eka-paurusa, cp. Tib. 

2 samunah, «with self assurance**, accord, to Tib. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S comment ON RELATIVITY. I 

«0 Blessed One! it is just according to this (relativity of the pheao- 52 . 12. 
menal world) that the divine Buddhas have preached their doctrine to the 
living creatures who are imbued with the fourfold 1 illusion (of the world’s 
reality). «There is here (in this world, they teach,) neither man nor woman; no 
living creature, no Soul, no Spirit, no Personality! All this plurality of 
the ultimate elements 2 of existence is an illusion. They do not exist. They 
are misleading, they are like a trick, they are like a dream, they are like 
magic, they are like the reflection of the moon in water etc.». Having 
received this instruction of the Buddha the (living creatures) perceive the 
plurality of elements without their enticement, without their illusive 
character, without considering them as separate existences, without this 
covering (of plurality). They pass away with their mind merged in Space. 

After having passed away they will be completely merged in the Final 
Reality of Nirvana . 0 Thus, 0 Blessed One, do I regard the hells»! 

It is also said in the ((Questions of the Venerable Upali », 4 «I have 53 . g. 
seen the many terrors of the hell, by which thousands of creatures are tor¬ 
mented. But there are no creatures in this world who after death go to the 
tortures of the hell. There are there no swords, 110 arrows and no spears, by 
which torture is inflicted. In imagination they fancy them falling upon 
their bodies. There are no (real) weapons. (And in the heavens) delightful 54. 1. 
golden palaces decorated with beautiful variegated flowers appear before us, 
but nobody has constructed them. They are also constructed by imagination. 

The simple man constructs them in imagination. The foolish sticks to these 
constructed conceptions. Whether we stick to them or do not stick to them, 
they are not real. These our conceptions are like fata morgana ». 

Thus it is proved that these (separate) entities (of the phenomenal 54 . 5 . 
world) have no real (independent) existence of their ow r n. To simple people 
who are mislead by their own subjective illusions they become a source of 
moral defilement in this life. In our ((Introduction into the Madhyamika 
System *) 5 we have explained at length how it is that objects which have no 
reality of their own can nevertheless produce eitlier moral defilement or 
moral purification. There it can be learnt. 

1 i. e. the illusions of a real Self,its bliss,its purity and its permanence, cp. Yogas., II. 5. 

3 sarve dharmdh. 

3 nirupadhi - Sese nirvana,-dhatau. 

4 This work is quoted in Sikijasamucc.ay a asanautkorityon confession, p, 104,168,178,200. 

5 Tha tenor of this work in general is probably meant. 



NIRVANA 


1 34 

XXXIII. The twelve membered Causal Series refers to the 

PHENOMENAL WORLD. 

54. o. To this (the Hinayanist) objects. If there is (altogether no causation), 
if things arise neither out of themselves, nor out of something extraneous, 
nor out of both these sources, nor at random, (how is the causal series 
preached by the Buddha to be understood), how is it that he has declared 
that as long as illusion (has not been extinct by knowledge and meditation) 
prenatal forces (will always produce new lives ')? 1 

54. in. We answer. This is the phenomenal'point of view ), 2 it is not (absolute) 
reality . 5 

54. li. The Realist. Please tell, how is phenomenalism proved? 

Madhymika. Phenomenalism is nothing but (the expression) of the fact 
of (Universal) Relativity . 4 It cannot be established otherwise than by denying 
the four theories (of causation just examined), siuce they necessarily imply the 
realistic view 5 (of a plurality of substances having their own reality). But if 
we take our stand upon Universal Relativity , 4 the cause and effect, being 
correlative, have neither of them any absolute existence. Realism 5 is thus 
repudiated. 

1 The last but one chapter of the Madhy. sastra is devoted to an examination of the 
formula of the twelve inembered Causal Series. Jt is there given the following interpretation. 
There is in the world a craving for life (punar-bhavdrthaxn) produced by an illusion (avidyd) 
which can be stopped by the tattvadarsin. In Mahayana it is the Saint who intuits the world 
sxib specie aeternitatis. (In Hinayana it it is the Yogin who really stops all the functions of life 
and converts it into an eternal death). Under the influence of such illusion prenatal forces 
(samsl'Tirn = karnui) produce a new life ( vijnana ), an embryo (ndma - rupa = panca- skandlia) 
is formed Ikuksau riamarupam nisicyate), which gradually develops the senses ( sadUyatana ), 
sensation ( sporsa ), feeling (vedarid), sexual appetite (trsnn), the habits underlying (upadana) life, 
life itself (bhava = new karma), and, after death, a new birth, old age and death again. The 
formula represents the rotation of phenomenal life (duJikha) in which there is no eternal prin¬ 
ciple, which is kevala = andtma = 12 ayatana, with the implication that it can be completely 
stopped, without any residue of life, in Nirvana. If its connection with the theory of the separate 
elements ( dharmas ) and there total extinction in Nirvana, ultimately through yoga, is overlooked, 
the formula simply states that living beings come and go, are born and die. Cp. 0. Rosenberg, 
Problems, ch. XVI. The interpretation of Nagarjuna is virtually the same as is current in all 
Buddhist countries, cp. Aung, Compendium, p. 259 ft’. In prof. B. Keith’s interpretation, op. cit. 
p. 99 ff, the simple formula is converted into a heap of absurdities. 

2 samvrtih, or this is «the covering». «the face of it». 

3 tattvam. 

1 idarnpratyayatd-mdtram — pratitya-samuipada-md.tr am, cp. tex. 67.12, transl. p. 152. 

J sa-8vabhdca-vddah. 


appendix: candeakirti's comment on relativity, i 135 

Accordingly it has been said , 1 55. 2. 

Philosophers assume phenomenal world 3 
Either as self-produced or as non-self produced. 

Or causeless or both (self and non-self made). 

But You have proved, it is contingent . 3 

And it will be stated (in this treatise) later on , 4 55. 5. 

So far there are effects, there is a cause, 

So far there is a cause, there are effects. 

We cannot realize 

For their reality another reason. 

Just the same has been declared by Buddha himself in the fol- 55. 8. 
lowing words, 

«The theory of separate elements 5 (implying the denial of personal 
identity ) 6 means that «this exists so far as that exists», «if this has appeared 
that will appearn , 7 e. g., prenatal forces exist so far illusion (and desire 
have not been stopped), a new life s is produced so far there are prenatal 
forces which produce it, etc. etc.)). 

XXXIV. Controversy about the validity of logic. 

A vehement protest 9 is raised by some (philosophers against this 55 . 11. 
condemnation of logic ). 10 «You maintain)) (they say) «that (separate) entities 

1 Lokatita-stava. 19, Bstan-ligyur, Bstod, I (M. de la V. P.). 

- duhkha. 3 pratitya-ja. 4 VIII. 12. 

'■> dharma-samketa—andtma — pudyala-nairdtmya —12 ayatana, cp. Central Cone., p. 28. 

6 pudgala-nairatmxja = andtma. 

7 This very ancient formulation, cp. Majjh. N., III. 63, is given a realistic interpre¬ 
tation in Hinayana and a transcendental one in Mahayana, cp. above p. 40. 

s vijnana. In the first period of the development of the embryo it is dormant ( sammurcchita ), 
until sensation ( sparsa ) appears. In a bird’s egg, as long as it has not lost vitality, there is vijnana 
according to the principles of pratitya-samatpdda. When the term is mistranslated as «thought», 
«pensee» etc. confusion inevitably arises. Prof. B. Keith, op. cit., p. 101, has imagined that it is 
« visible®?! Visible is termed in the Pali Canon « sanidassana ». Among the 75 ultimates there is 
only one, the rupa-ayatana, i.e., colour, which is visible, cp. Digha N. Ill, 217, Ab. Kosabh.1,28. 

9 pari-codana. 

10 This and the following discussion refers to the pramana-vinikeaya-vada of Dignaga 
and others. The first step in the vindication of logic has been made by Bhavaviveka. But he 
remained a Madhyamika. The pramana-xiniScaya-vada is exposed by Vacaspatimisra in 
Tatparyat. p. 7 1. 28 and p. 248.25 ft., cp. Garbe, Die Sankhya Phil., p. 203. viniScaya is an¬ 
other name for Dignaga’s conception of kalpana. it represents the fundamental act of think¬ 
ing appearing in such judgments as «this is Devadatta», w this is dark complexion®, «this ismov- 
ng» etc. where the element «this» refers to the svalaksaxxa. cp.n.on p. 137, cp. Tatparyat..p. 101. 1 ff. 



136 


NIRVANA 


APPENDIX.' CANDRAK1RTPS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


137 


are not caused (in the absolute sense). Now, is this assertion founded on 
argument, or is it not founded on argument? If you admit that it is founded 
on argument, you are obliged to answer the following (questions). How 
many are the sources of our knowledge? What is their essence? what their 
scope? (What is their origin?) Have they arisen out of themselves, out of 
something extraneous, out of both, or out of nothing? But (if your denial of 
causation) is not founded on argument, it must be rejected, because our 
cognition of an object depends upon the method by which it is cognized. If 
something is not known, it cannot become known otherwise than by 
(appropriate) methods. If these methods do not exist, neither will cognition 
ever be arrived at. How is then your explicit assertion possible? You can¬ 
not (assert) that the (separate) entities are not caused. Or else just the 
same reasou which allows you to maintain that nothing is caused will also 
allow (me to maintain the contrary, viz.) that every single thiqg exists. And 
just as you assert that all (our) elements of existence are uncaused, 1 1 will 
maintain that whatsoever exists has a cause ». 2 

56. l. «Or perhaps you do not really believe that nothing is being pro¬ 
duced, (you tell it just for the sake of cavilling)? But then you will never 
persuade your opponent to believe (a theory) you do not yourself believe. 
The composition of this treatise will then serve no purpose, and the denial 
of Pluralism 3 will not have been really made». 

56 . 4 . Madhyamika. We answer. If our system did allow assertive judg¬ 
ments (implying the transcendental reality of a substratum), the question would 
then arise whether these judgments are founded on sound method or not. 
However there is no (place for them in a system of Universal Relativity). 
The reason for that is just the following one. If problematic judgments re¬ 
garding reality were admitted as possible, we would then be obliged to ad¬ 
mit the counterpart, the possibility of corresponding assertions. But we 
also absolutely deny the possibility of problematic judgments (regarding 
the transcendental reality of a substratum), how could we then make the 
correlative 4 assertions, since they would not be correlative with the other 
(unexisting) member of the relation. It would be like the length and the short- 

1 anutpannah sarva-dharmdh , (dharma — bhava). 

2 sarva-bhdvotpattih. 

3 sarva-bhava apratisddhdh. 

4 Read tadviruddho. 


ness (of an unexisting thing, e. g.), the horn of a donkey. Therefore, since we 
do not make any such assertion, (where are the things) for the sake of 
whose reality we should so much imagine the existence of the sources 
of right knowledge? 1 And how could we (establish) their number, 
their essence and their (respective) objects? How could we (decide) whether 
they originate out of themslves, out of non-self, out of both, or without a 
cause? It is not our business to answer all these questions! 

The Logician. You thus (insist that you) make no assertion whatsoever. 57. 4 
But we hear from you a proposition which looks like a definite assertion, 2 viz. 
that entities arise neither out of themselves, nor out of something different, 
nor out of both, nor at random. How is that (to be explained)? 

The Madhyamika. We answer. This our statement appears decisive 57. 5 
to simple people who (try) to understand it according to arguments fami¬ 
liar to them, but not to the Saints 3 (who can intuit absolute reality). 

The Logician. Do you really mean to say.that these Saints (believe 57. 7 
m) no argument? 

The Madhyamika. Who (can) say whether they have or not (any 

1 Lit., p. 56.4 — 57.1. a We answer. If we would Lave (what you) call assertion, it would 
be produced either by right cognition or not by right cognition. But we have none. Why? 

Here, when non-assertion is possible, its counterpart, an assertion relative to it, might exist. 

But when we, first of all, don’t have any non-assertion, then wherefrom the counterpart, the as¬ 
sertion? since (it would be) disregarding the other part of the relation, just as the length and 
the shortness of the donkey’s horn. And when there thus is no assertion, then for the sake of 
whose reality (siddhi) we would very much imagine (pari-kalp) sources of right knowledge?)) 
niicaya = adhyatasaya — vikalpa, cp. Tatparyat., p. 88. 22. vikalpa is an assertion of 
the form a this is that» sa evayam, cp. N. b. t. tipp., p. 23. 4, where the element « this» refers 
to the «Hoc Aliquid a interpreted by Dignaga as the «thing in itself» ( svalaksana ). 

The judgment is regarded as synthetic ( kalpand — nama-jdti-yojanu) and as dialectical 
(w'fcaZpa-dilemma). aniScaya evidently means a problematic judgment, iha means either = as- 
man mate, ov — satyam Sunyatayam. Cp. N. b. t. 69 . 22 ft'., where it is stated that when 
something is cognized (paricchidyate) it means that it is contrasted (vyavacchidyate) with 
its counterpart. For both parties every assertion (ni&caya = kalpand) has a counterpart (prati- 
paksa), it is a dichotomy (dtaidhl-karana), it is relational (apeksa), dialectical (vikalpa). If the 
counterpart (sambandhy-antara =.pratipdksa) is missing, an assertion is impossible, since it 
would be without a counterpart, non-relative (nirapeksa). But for the Logician every relation, 
as e. g., short and long, has an indirect (paratantra) reality in the underlying «thingin itself)) 

(svalaksana). This for the Madhyamika is like the horn of a donkey. His point seems here to 
be that Relativity is itself relative. 

2 niScita-rupam vakyam — upapattih — pramaiiain. 

3 The Buddhist Saint ( arya ) is here the equivalent of the Monist who by mystic intuition 
(yogi-pratyaJcsa) has reached a direct vision of the world sub specie aetemitatis, he has entered 
the drsti-marga, cp. above p. 90 . He has absolutely no judgmeuts ( niScaya ), strictly speaking, 
not even the assertion of Relativity ( Sunyata ), cp. above, p. 49 . 



138 


NIRVANA 


appendix: candkakIrlvs comment on RELATIVITY, I 


130 


arguments)? (About) the Absolute 1 the Saints remain silent! How is then 
a conversation 2 (with them on this subjebt) possible? (How can we then 
decide) whether there are arguments or not? 

The Logician. If the Saints do not enlarge upon arguments, how 
do they (manage) to bring home to simple folk the idea of an Absolute? 

57. io. The Madhyamika. When the Saints are engaged in a conversation with 

simple folk, they do not really exhibit their own arguments. They take the 
arguments which are just the. arguments that appeal to simple men, they 
(provisionally) admit them as a (convenient method) for the instruction of 
others, and thus give instruction to common people by just those (methods 
which simple men can understand). 

57. li. Just so it is that men influenced by sensuality invert (the real con¬ 
dition of things). The real impurity in the body (of a female) they over¬ 
look. They imagine a non-existing beauty of its forms and are tormented 
by it. In order to liberate them from their passion, a person magically 
created by Buddha or a god may depict to them the impurities of the body 
which therehefore were concealed from them under the idea of its beauty. 
This body, (they will say), is covered by hair and contains other (impurities 
in the intestines). 3 These men will then get rid of their conviction that it 
was a beauty and attain impassibility. 

58 . i. Just the same happens here. Common mankind whose power of vision 

is obstructed by the darkness of ignorance imputes to (separate) entities a 
reality which they do not possess, a reality which for the Saint 
does not exist at all. (It then happens that these ordinary men) 
are tormented by some particular thing which they somehow ima¬ 
gine to exist. 4 The Saints then try to rouse (their skepticism) 
by some argument which would appeal to them. E. g., (supposing the 
Sankhya proves his tenet of identity between an effect and its material 
cause, the Monist then says), «if the jar did really exist in the clump of 

1 paramdrthah . 

2 prapanca — vak, M. vr., p. 373 . 9 . Lit. «Therefore wherefrom the possibility there 
of speech, so that there would be either argument or no argument >». 

3 The asubha-bhavana, is here alluded to, the practice of the yoyins to concentrate upon 
the repulsive, loathsome particulars of every animal life. 

4 Lit., p. 58 . 1 - 3 . « Just so here likewise, the worldlings are very much tormented (sub¬ 
ject to klesas ) having imputed to something some inverted essence of entities, because their 
mental eyes are obstructed by the darkness (or ophthalmia) of ignorance, (an essence) whose 
substance is in every respect unperceived by the Saints ». 


clay, it would uever have needed to be produced out of it once more#. 

This will be acquiesced in. He then concludes, «if something exists before 
its production, it needs not to be produced ouce more, because it exists#. 

(Thus the Sankhya will be confuted in a way intelligible to everybody). 

Similarly (will it be said against the converse theory of the Vaise- 58 . 5. 
sikas who admit a break between the effect and its material cause), «you 
agree that a sprout cannot be produced out of blazing coal because the latter is 
different. w T e then must conclude that it neither can originate out of seeds etc., 
which are usually represented 1 (as their cause), (since they also are different). 2 

The Logician may at last (maintain that causality exists because) 58 . 7. 
such is our direct experience. 3 

Madhyamika. This also is wrong because of (the following argument). 

(Thesis). This direct experience is misleading. 

(Reason). Because it is experience. 

(Example). Just as the direct experience of a double moon by a man 
suffering from ophthalmia. 

Consequently it is wrong to oppose our argument on the basis of direct 5?. g, 
experience, since (the reliability) of the hitter remains to he proved. 4 


We have thus established in the first chapter of our work that the (sepa- 55. 10. 
rate) entities (ot the phenomenal world)ha,ve never originated (and do not exist). 

And we have proved this (by our negative method). We first assume the 
reality of something impossible and then condemn it. 5 

• The remaining parts of the treatise are now (concerned with details), as. 11. 
They are devoted to the repudiation of all (possible) characteristics (of 
reality), wheresoever (they have been assumed to exist). It will be shown 
that (in the light) of Relativity all these particular characteristics are not 

1 vital sita. 

2 In order to save the reality and substantiality of separate objects the Vaise§ikas main¬ 
tain that the effect is absolutely different ( atyanta-bhinna ) from its material cause, and that the 
whole contains something in addition, over and above its parts. But this does not prevent them 
from maintaining that the parts are inherent (samdveta) in the whole. The Madhyamika here 
resorts to his «diamond liken argument against Causality, «if the effect is different, there is no 
causation, if it is partly different and partly non-different the difficulty will be double#. This 
of course should not prevent him to make use of the every-day conception of Causality when needed. 

3 anubhava. 4 sadhya-sama. 

5 Lit., p. 58. 10, '(Therefore unproduced are the entities, thus, first of all, by counter¬ 
argument, by imputation of a contrary essence, the first chapter is composed ». 



SS. 14. 


5S. 15. 


59. 1. 


140 NIRVANA 

(ultimately) real, e.g., neither a moving object, nor the point to be reached, 1 
nor motion 2 itself (do really exist). 3 

XXXY. Controversy with the Buddhist logician continued. 

However (there is still a question to be considered, viz. the theory of our 
Buddhist epistemologists). «We are only giving,(they maintain), a scientifical de¬ 
scription of what just happens in common life, in regard to the sources of know¬ 
ledge and their (respective) objects. (We do not consider their transcendental 
reality). 4 

The Madhyamika (asks). But what is the upshot of such a description, 
(does it lead to the cognition of the Absolute) ? 

The Logician. (No, but) bunglers in logik, (the Naiyayikas) have given 
wrong definitions (of logical processes) and we have then given the right ones. 

The Madhyamika. This also is beyond the mark, (we 'will reply, 
because it the realistic logicians, the Naiyayikas, are) bad logicians, and have 
given wrong definitions (of logical processes), then there must be a gap bet¬ 
ween what humanity (at large imagines about) the essence of cognition (and what 
the realists are teaching). Then alone will your (emendatory) work prove promi¬ 
sing. But this is not the case. Your work therefore is a quite useless occupation. 5 

1 gatavya , cp. II. 25. 

2 Ch. II is devoted to the denial of motion. It is noteworthy that a splendid opportunity 
offered itself here to Nagarjuna to repeat, in some form or other, some of Zeno’s of Elea 
deductions of our usual conception of motion ad absurdum. The Greek philosopher was also 
a monist, he was anxious to prove that motion is really impossible, because he followed Parme¬ 
nides in denying plurality. There is no trace of Nagarjuna having known them. 

3 Lit., p. 58.12-13. . .in order to teach that without exception every characteristic of 

pratitya-samutpada does not exist». In this phrasing pratitya-samutpada becomes a synonym 
of reality (sdmvrtah pratitya-samutpddah). Since it is also synonymous with Sunyata, cp. p. 431, 
it is quite clear that this latter term means reality, and not voidness, the voidness refers to all 
its determinations which have only empirical reality. 

4 It seems that the first chapter originally ended with the words pratipadandrtham , 
p. 58.12—13. The following discussion with a follower of Dignaga looks like a later addition. 

s Lit., p. 59. 1—3. ((This also is wrong. If indeed bad logicians have produced inverted 
definitions, common mankind would have the reverse of what is being defined, for the sake of it 
there could be (some) fruitfulness of the endeavour. But it is not so. Therefore ther endeavour is 
quite useless ». The Naiyayikas, in their conceptions about the categories of existence and the ways 
of cognizing them, follow the every-day conceptions of common humanity. Now, if the Buddhist 
Logician, who is here represented as likewise adhering to the every-day logic, has really no 
other aim than to correct the logic of the Naiyayikas, there must be a divergence between the 
latter and the common life views, otherwise the Buddhist would have nothing to correct in these 
theories of the Naiyayikas. But «it is not so», i. e., the Naiyayika views are much nearer to the 
conceptions of simple humanity than what the Buddhists are teaching about logical questions. 


appendix: candrakirti’s comment on relativity, I 141 

Moreover the criticism (directed against epistemology by Nagarjuna in 59. 4. 
his) «Repudiation of Contests)) (must not be forgotten). (He there asks), «If 
every cognition of an object depends upon (reliable) sources of knowledge, 
these sources (being in their turn objects cognized by us), on whom do they 
depend? (If they are also cognized through other sources of knowledge, we shall 
be landed into a regressus ad infinitum )». As long as this (fundamental cri¬ 
ticism) has not been cleared away, (all your talk about) having given the 
right definition (of logical processes) is nothing. 

But never mind, (let us consider your views more closely). You main- 59. 7. 
tain that there are two sources of knowledge (sensation and intellection, 
two only), and that this corresponds to the double essentia of (every thing 
existing), the particular (or the unique) and the universal. 1 We will then 

Therefore if the Buddhist really intends to remain on empirical ground, his ((endeavour is quite 
useless», he hag nothing better to do than to accept the logic of the Realists. This the Madhya¬ 
mika has done. He accepts the categories of existence and the modes of cognizing them (the 4 pra- 
mdnas ) of the Naiyayikas, as well as the theory that our sense faculties ( sannikarsa) can appre¬ 
hend the universal as well as the particular things. He accepts all this with the proviso that it 
is empirical cognition which has nothing to do with the cognition of the Absolute, and which, 
from the transcendental stand-point, is an illusion (samvrti), since it is relative [Siinya), not abso¬ 
lute (not paramdrtJia-satya). As to Dignaga’s school, it is true that it investigates that kind of 
cognition which is not contradicted by experience, which is samvddaka , and defines reality, i. e., 
ultimate reality, as efficiency. They have the right to maintain that in their logic they partly 
remain on empirical ground. But they establish a sharp distinction between the «pure» object 
{hiddha-artha), «pure synthesis, or reasons ( sitddhd Jcalpana), pure sensation (Sucldham pra- 
tyakmm — wirvikcdpakam) and empirical definite cognition (niScaya — adhyamsdya). With 
regard to the latter there is no divergence, hardly any, between the logic of the Naiyayikas and 
the Buddhists, prapya-visaye (— adhyavasite) nasti vitadah. But with regard to the former, the 
divergence is decisive, grahya-visaye (— paramdrthasati) tu mahan vivddah. In pure sensation 
we cognize the pure object, the «thing in itself» ( svalaksana ), the point-instant (ksana), the focus 
of efficiency. Here we part with the empirical ground, the «thing in itself» cannot be cognized 
empirically ( jfidnena na prdpyate), but it is reached in pure sensation (api tu vijnanena — pra- 
tyaksena = nirrikalpakena). It is a kind of limit, a kind of « Grenzbegriff» ( loka-maryada ), and 
the logicians who have established it are transcendentalists ( atipatita-loka-maryaddh). It is as 
much the central conception in Dignaga’s system as Relativity { sunyatd ) is the central concep¬ 
tion of the Miidhvamikas and Pluralism ( dharmah ) the central conception in Hinayana. All these 
points will be put in a clearer light in the notes to my translation of the Nyayabindutlka shortly 
to appear in the B. B. translation series. But it is necessary to keep them in mind in order to 
understand the next following discussion between Dignaga and Candrakirti about the essence 
of this «thing in itself#. The attitude of the Madhyamitas towards realism corresponds to the 
attitude of the Roman Catholic Church towards the plain empiricism of Aristotle. Both the 
Madhyamikas and the Roman Catholic Church were hostile to critical systems, they preferred 
realism, with the proviso that it had nothing to do with the cognition of the Absolute which is 
cognized by revelation or by intuition. 

1 The originality of Dignag a’s system of logic consists in the doctrine which admits two 
distinct sources of knowledge, two only. He calls them perception and inference, but they differ 



59. 6 


60. 1 


60. 2 


1 42 NIRVANA 

ask, the thing possessing this double essentia, does it also exist or does it not? 

If it does, we must then have a supplementary object of cognition, (a 
third kind of it). What happens then to your two sources (established in 
exact correspondence to the double character of existence)? And if the thing 
possessing this (double) essence does not exist, the (double) essence (itself 
will remain in the air), unsupported by something (possessing it). What will 
then the double knowledge mean? (Nagarjuna) will state in the sequel. 1 

Without at all any characteristic 

The thing itself becomes impossible. 

And if impossible the thing will be. 

Characteristics likewise are impossible. 

XXXVI. Critique of the notion of an absolute particular point- 

instant. 

But (says the Logician), we should not interpret the notion of a parti¬ 
cular essence as an essence possessed by something, but we should avail our¬ 
selves of the grammatical rule allowing us to interpret this term as meaning 
the thing istelf which possesses that essence ? 2 

(The Madhyamika answers). Even so, (even supposing that you are 

very widely from what is usually understood by these terms in logic and psychology. They exactly 
correspond to the double character of everything existing, the particular and the universal. The 
particular again is not the concrete object usually so designated, but the absolutely particular, 
the unique, the thing which neither has extension ( desananugata ), nor has it duration { kaldnugato ). 
it is the thing in itself ( svalaksana ), apart from anything else ( scirvato vydvrtta, tvailokya-vydvrtta j, 
the point-instant ( ksana). By sense-perception (jpratyaksa) the knowledge corresponding to this 
point-instant is understood. It is a moment of pure sensation in which no synthesis, no integra¬ 
tion at all has been produced ( kalpanapodha ). Every synthetic process of thought is contrasted 
■with the direct cognition by the senses, as an indirect cognition or inference. Dig naga’s inference 
thus embraces, besides our inference, all that we would call judgment, intellection, ideation, 
thought, reason etc., every cognitive process, except pure passive sensation. The point-instant 
corresponding to pure sensation is the central conception in Dignaga’s system, it represents a 
differential from which, by a process of integration, all our knowledge is built up. The principle 
of the Differential Calculus of a planet’s motion ( tatkaliki gatih) was known to Indian astronomers. 
We still do not know exactly when it was first discovered. Bhaskara in the XH-th century knows 
it. but Vacaspatimisra,inthe IX-tk century A.D., avers that the point-instant of the Buddhists 
is the mathematical point known to the astronomers ( jyotir-vidyd-siddhd), cp. Tlitparya- 
tika, p. 386. 1. On the Differential Calculus of Hindu astronomers cp. W. Spottiswoode, 
J. R. A. S. 1860, p. 221. 

1 Y. 4. 

2 Lit., p. 60. 1—2. « Further let it he that a characteristic (or essence) is not that by what 
it is characterized, but, according to Panini, III. 3.13, by making the hyut to stand for the object, 
a characteristic is the characterized a. 


appendix: candrakIrtus comment on relativity, i 143 

right, if it really means the tiling possessing that essence), nevertheless a 
thing cannot be characterized by its own self. That by which it is charac- 
tized must be instrumentally related to it, it must be different (from the 
tiling itself which is) the object (of this instrumental relation). Our criticism 
(of the notion of an absolute particular) stands. 1 

(The criticism is wrong, the Logician will then answer. We assume) 
that sensation (through which the particular essence reveals itself) is instru¬ 
mentally related to it, but nevertheless it is immanent in it. We thus escape 
your criticism. 2 

(Madhyamika). Our criticism stands, we will answer. Indeed, we are go. 4—5. 
here (adhering to the usual conception of what a particular essence is). 

The particular 'essence of something, in our opiniou, is that essence 
which is the exclusive characteristic of the thing, a characteristic which it 
does not share with anything else. Take, e. g., the following definitions, 

1. resistance is the exclusive characteristic of solid bodies, 

2. feeling is the reaction (pleasant or unpleasant) produced by an 
object, 

3. consciousness is awareness in every single case (of some object pre¬ 
sent to our mind or senses)." 

This means that by such (exclusive characteristics) something is charac¬ 
terized. But you brush aside this generally knowm and far spread interpre¬ 
tation, and admit another one, according to which essence means (not the 
characteristic),.but the object characterized. 4 

However if you imagine that (the absolutely particular, the point-instant) 60 . 7. 
is characterized by our awareness of it, this can only have the following 
meaning. (The single point-instant contains a double aspect, the thing carac- 
terized and its characteristic. This, strictly speaking, will be a double parti¬ 
cular essence), one of them will be the thing characterized, and the other 

1 Lit., p. 60. 2—3. «Thus also, since it is not possible that this should be characterized by 
that, and since by what this is characterized, its instrument, is a different thing from the object, 
just the same fault». 

2 Lit., p. 60. 4—5. « Further it may be that this is not a fault, since cognition is instru¬ 
mental, and this (instrumentality) is included in the absolute particular#. Jnana is here used in 
its widest comprehension, it then includes not only pure sensation (vijiiana) but, according to 
Buddhists and Yedantins, vedema, sukhddi as well. 

3 For these definitions of prthivi, vedand and vijiiana cp. my Central Conception, p. 18-19. 

4 Lit., p. 60.7. «Having waived off the well known and followed etymology, you assume 
an object-production#. Before the word jirasiddha, p. 60.7, a cheda must he inserted. 


144 


NIRVANA 


91. i. will be the characteristic. If our awareness of the point-instant represents 
its characteristic, the thing characterized, (i. e., the objective side of the 
relation), will nevertheless represent something different from its characte¬ 
ristic. Our criticism stands . 1 

6 i. 3- Moreover (the Logician may point to the general Buddhist denial of 
all substance behind the changing sense-data,). The quality of resistance in 
solid bodies etc. is but a sense datum, revealed in our sensation, it is just 
the subjective part of that relation, and it does not differ from its particular 
essence, (it is not something revealed by the sensation, but it is the sensation 
itself ). 2 

6i. 4. TheMadhyamika. But then this moment of sensation 3 itself will never 
be objective, and then it never will be cognized, because a particular (point- 
instant,) can be cognized only under the condition of its being objective (in 

61. 5. regard to our consciousness). In that case the following qualification must 
be added to your statement about the double essence of everything cogni¬ 
zable, the particular one and the universal one. «One particular essence 
(of the point-instant) will be cognizable, that one which we (here) have 
called the characterized (aspect of it). Its other particular essence will not 
be cognizable, that one which we here have called the characterizing 
aspect of it». 

6 i. 7. But if you (go on to) maintain that this (second aspect is in its turn also) a 
thing characterized, it will then likewise require some other thing as a charac¬ 
teristic. And if you in this case imagine a further step in awareness, (an 
awareness of awareness) as its characteristic, you will incur the danger of 
an infinite regress in addition (to the fault of disregarding the relation of 
substance and quality ). 4 

1 Lit., p. 60.7—61.2 «By conceiving an instrumental essence in sensation the following is 
expressed, just the particular essence has objectivity, the character of being an instrument belongs 
to another particular essence, therefore if the particular essence in sensation is an instrument 
there should be an object different from it, thus the same faults. 

2 Lit., p. 61.3—4. « Further it might be that the hardness etc. which is containedin earth 
etc, being apprehended by sensation, it (sc. hardness) i? just the object of that (sc. sensation), 
and it is not different from the particular essences. 

3 vijudna-svalaksnnn. 

4 Lit., p. 66.6—9. (fSome particular essence which is designated «what is characterized)) 
is object of cognition, some is not object of cognition which is designated «what is characterized 
through it». Further it also is object-production. Then its different instrument must exist. If the 
instrumentality of another knowledge is with an effort imagined ( pari-kcdpana ), the fault of an 
infinite regress is incurred)). 


appendix: CANDRAKIRTI’S comment on RELATIVITY, I 


145 


XXXVII. Introspection. 

The Madhvamika. But then you have (your theory) about Introspec- 6i. 10. 
tion. According to this theory, (that consciousness which represents our awa¬ 
reness of a point-instant of reality) is apprehended by introspection. It thus 
contains (inherent) objectivity (and immanent cognizability). 1 

The Madhyamika. We answer. In our ((Introduction to the Madhya- gi. n. 
mika'Systemw we have already refuted at length this theory of Introspection. 2 
That one particular essence (the point-instant) is characterized by another 
one, (i. e., by our awareness of it), and the latter by introspection — this 
is impossible! 

Moreover (the criticism of Nagarjun a which we have mentioned above 3 62. l. 
remains). That very (moment of) consciousness cannot be real without 
having an essence of its own, it cannot exist (without it). And if (on the 
other hand) there is nothing of which it is the essence, the latter (i. e., the 
essence), having no support, will have no opportunity to realize itself. 

What becomes then of introspection (which is supposed to apprehend such 
consciousness which is itself impossible)? 4 

Accordingly it is said in the ((Questions of Ratnacuda», 5 — 62. 4 . 

((Considering consciousness he(theBodhisattva)investigates 6 the stream of 
thought, 7 and asks wherefrom does it come. The following occurs to him. Cons¬ 
ciousness arises, if there is an (immanent) object. Does that mean that cons¬ 
ciousness is one thing and the object another, or that they are identical ? In the 
first case we shall have a double consciousness. But if they are identical, how 
is then consciousness to be cognized through consciousness? Consciousness 
cannot apprehend its own self. The trenchant of a sword cannot cut its own 

1 Lit.,p.61.10—11. «Then you suppose that there is self-consciousness, therefore, objectivity 
existing because of apprehension through self-consciousness, there necessarily (cm) is inclusion 
in cognizahi]ity». 

2 VI. 73 (p. 167. ff.). 

3 Text, p. 59.10; transl. p. 142. 

4 Lit., p. 62.1—3. ((Moreover, this very knowledge, for sure, not being real separately 
from the particular essence (and therefore) being impossible, (and) in; the absence of the 
thing characterized, not being able to operate as a characteristic without any substratum, alto¬ 
gether does not exist, thus wherefrom self-consciousness? » 

5 Translated partly by Burnouf, Introduction 2 , p. 500. 

6 Notwithstanding the Tibetan, we prefer here to read with Burnouf cittarn samanu- 
paSyan, justasinthe sequel, p. 62 7 and 63.6. asamanupasyan could only mean «not having yet 
fully realized what consciousness is (i. e. not having yet attained vipaSyana), he investigates...)). 

7 citta-dhara, Burnouf — «le tranchant (de la pensee)». 


to 



146 


NIRVANA 


trenchant. The tip of a finger cannot touch that very tip. Similarly this, 
consciousness cannot be conscious of its own self*). 

63. 2 . «Thus it is that when (a Saint) is thoroughly attentive , 1 (when he is 
engaged in the spiritual exercise of the Mahayauistic application of mindful¬ 
ness 2 towards his own consciousness), then it appears to him as undefinable, 
It neither has an end nor a beginning . 3 It is not changeless, it is not causeless, 
it does not conflict with the interdependence (of the elements), but it is neither 
identical, nor non-identical, neither with itself,nor with others. He then cognizes 
this stream of thought, of thought (as thin as) a creeper, the thought-element, 
indefinite thought, non-manifested thought, imperceptible thought, thought 
as a thing in itself . 4 He intuits this (unspeakable thought) as «Tkisness», 
(the unique Reality of the Universe), he does not suppress it ». 5 

«Such is the analysis of thought which he realizes and intuits. This, o 
noble son, is the Bodhisattva’s exercise of application of mindfulness consis¬ 
ting in the consideration of what in our consciousness represents its (es¬ 
sence))). 

XXXVIII. The discussion about the point-instant resumed. 

63 . 8. We thus reject Introspection. (We now return to the single moment 
of sensation which was supposed to be characterized by self-awareness). Since 
there is no such (self-awareness, when we say that it is a «thing in itself», 
a thing characterized ((exclusively by itself», what do we mean?) who is 
characterized by whom ? 6 

63. 9 . And then (we ask), is there here (in this thing which is its own essence) 
any difference between the essence and the thing possessing that essence, 
or is there none? In the first case, the essence will be different from the 
thing, and it will cease to be its essence. It will be in the same condition 
as any other thing which is not supposed to be its essence. Similarly the thing 

1 yoniSah prciyukta. 

2 This is the third smriy-upasthdna exercise. That the Mahay'anistic exercise is meaiit 
is clear, because it results in identifying one’s own consciousness with tathata = tsunyatd. 

* 3 Cp. M. vr., p. 536.14, purantam samasritya drstili. 

4 cittasvnldksana, Burnouf — la pens6e «contenue en elle-meme». 

5 Lit.,63.5. «He does not produce Annihilation*),sc.as theYogininHmayimaissupposedtodo. 

6 The Logician, i. e. Dignaga, posits as absolutely real (paramartha sat), unimagined 
(androptta) existence, the single moment ( ksana ) of existence which is then supposed to coalesce 
with the single moment of sensation characterized by self-awareness. This moment cannot be 
characterized by something else, since this would convert it in a relational existence. It is charac¬ 
terized by itself ( sva-laksana ), it is the «thing in itself». But for the Madhyamika it is relational 
nevertheless. 


appendix: candrakirti’s comment on relativity, i 147 

being different from its essence, it will not be the thing possessing that 
essence, just as any other thing which also does not possess it. And then, if 
the essence be different from the thing, the thing will be severed 64. 2. 
from its essence, and (the result will be that) being detached from its 
own essence it will be nothing, (a non-entity) like a flower in the sky. Now, 
supposing the thing and its essence are identical. In that case the thing cha¬ 
racterized ceases to be characterized, since it has coalesced with its own 
characteristic, (it looses its separate existence), just as the characteristic also 
looses its owm separate existence. Neither does the essence retain its separate 
existence, because it has coalesced with the thing characterized. Just as the 
latter (which has then lost) its own Self (it becomes also lost). 

Accordingly it has been said 1 — 64 . 4 . 

Characteristic from the thing is different? 

The thing is then without characteristic. 

And if both are identical, 

T’is clear, You have declared 

That neither really does exist. 

And there is no middle course to be taken between identity and 64 . 7. 
otherness, if you (wish) to establish the reality of the thing characterized 
and its characteristic. The author will state this in the following verse. 2 

(Supposing thus we have two things) 64. 8. 

They are not really one, nor are they two, 

(What are they then indeed) ? 

How can we their reality assume ? 

The Logician further (makes the following suggestion). (Just as the 64. 10. 
Madhyamika asserts that ultimate reality is something unspeakable, we shall 
also say that the relation between the thing characterized and its characte¬ 
ristic is something) unspeakable and thus establish their reality. 3 

Madhyamika. This is impossible. Unspeakable reality is assumed by 64. 10. 

1 Lokatita-stava, 11 (M. de la Y. P.). 2 II. 21. 

3 Lit.,p.64.10—11.« Otherwise,(wct/atetobeomitted,cp.Tib.)(their) reality (siddhi) could (be 
established) as unspeakable ? It is not so. Indeed unspeakableness, for sure, appears when a mutual split 
cannot be thoroughly realized ». paraspara-vibhaga is here the same as dvaidhi-karana or vikalpa , 
a division of something into Aand non—A, involving the so called infinite judgment. Such dichotomy 
is then called also vikalpa and identified with kalpand « arrangement)) { — yojana), it then covers, 
directly or indirectly, the whole range of thought, the active element of cognition. Cf.M. vr.,p. 350.12 ff. 

io* 



64. 14 


65. 1 


65. 1-2 


65. 4 


148 NIRVANA 

us (when we have proved) that a dichotomy does not resist scrutiny. Indeed, 
a dichotomy is untenable when it is proved that we cannot independently 
cognize «this is the characteristic, this is the thing characterized)), we then 
conclude that both are unreal. 

But to establish (the reality of both the members of a dichotomy, as 
unspeakables), is impossible. 

XXXIX. Is THERE A COGNIZER ? 

(Further, after having discussed the question whether our knowledge 
can be regarded as playing the part of) an instrument through the medium 
of which an object becomes cognized, (it is natural to ask the question whe¬ 
ther there is something playing the part of a cognizing) agent (in this pro¬ 
cess of cognition), because neither an instrument, (nor an action, nor its 
object) are possible without an agent, just as the action of cutting (wood is 
impossible without an agent). 

Logician. (We do not admit the reality of a cognizing Soul, but the 
element) of pure, (indefinite) sensation 1 may be imagined (as playing the 
part corresponding to some sort of) agent. 

Madhyamika. Even (that sort of agent) cannot be acquiesced in, be¬ 
cause (according to your theory), the function of pure sensation (in the process 
of cognition) is to indicate the mere presence of something. The object is, 
after that, qualified by (other) mental processes . 3 It is indeed a tenet accepted 
(by you) that «pure sensation 3 apprehends the (pure) object, its qualities 4 are 
apprehended by (other) mental processes)). 

Indeed an instrument, (an object and an agent) are assumed to be a 
real instrument, (a real object and a real agent), when there is one single 
action (accomplished by a variety of factors). We may then admit that every 
one of these factors performs some special function of its own, and thus be¬ 
comes a component part (of the principal action by the production of some 
change or of new) qualities (in its object ). 5 But here, between definite 

1 citta = wjfiana, cp. Central Conception, p. 16. 

2 caitasa = caitta = citta-samprayulcta-samskdra , cp. ibid. p. 18. 

3 vijnana = citta, cp. ibid. p. 36. * 4 Tib. read dei kliyad-par .... 

5 Lit., p. 65.4—5. «When one principal action is performed, instrument etc. possess instru¬ 
mentality etc., because we admit their membership through the medium of producing qualities 
and actions for themselves respectively ». The action of cooking rice, e. g., consists in fetching 
fuel, pouring water into the kettle, putting on fire, throwing rice into the vessel, etc. All these 
factors (kdrala) concur in producing the central result, they are either instruments or object or 


appendix: candrakIrti’s comment on relativity, l 149 

cognition 1 and pure sensation, 2 there is no such central action. On the con¬ 
trary (every part has its own separate function). There is an independent 
action of indicating the mere presence of something, it is performed by pure 
sensation, and (there is another separate action) of cognizing the qualities of 
the object. This is performed by (constructive) thought. It thus becomes impos¬ 
sible (to impute the part of) an instrument to qualifying thought, 3 and the 
part of an agent to pure sensation. Therefore (your theory that in the absolu¬ 
tely particular essence of existence there is an immanent objectivity and an 
immanent instrumentality, cannot be saved). Our criticism stands. 

But perhaps (the Hiuayanist will, to a certain extent, concede this point 65 . 9 . 
about the agent, because he also maintains) that there is altogether 4 no real 
agent, since, according to Scripture, all elements 5 (into which existence is 
analysed represent separate momentary flashes, there is between them) no 
Soul 6 (or agent, or continuant stuff). Indeed (impersonal) motions and (pro¬ 
cesses) are clearly going on (in nature) without any conscious agent. 

Madhyamika. You have quite misunderstood the Scriptural tea- 65. 10 . 
ching about the (separate momentary elements of existence). Neither do 
(these separate elements really) exist. We have made this clear in our 
«Introduction into the Madhyamika System)). 7 

XL. Vindication of Phenomenal Reality. 

Logician. Further, it is also possible (to explain the fact that the expres- 66. 1 . 
sion svalaksana «the thing in itself», «the thing characterized only by its own 
self» does not involve any possessive relation by assuming that the relation 
is merely verbal). A relation (or characterization) 8 is possible even when there 
is no real characteristic beyond the characterized, e. g., when we speak 
about the body of a statue and the head of Rahu, although there is nothing 
in the statue besides its body, and nothing in Rahu beyond just a head. Is 

agent etc. But between two independent activities, as e. g., cooking rice and weaving cloth there 
can be no single agent in common. 

1 jiiana = savikalpdka-jnana — artha-viSesa-paricchitti. 

2 rijnana — citta — wanas — artha - mdtra -paricchitti = nirvikalpaka - jiiana — satta - 
mdtra -p ra dor Sana. 

3 jndnasya. 4 mrvatlid-dblidrdt. 

5 s arva-dharmah. 

6 anatmanah, the dtman in this context covers our notions of Soul ami nf substance, 
cp. M. vr., p. 437. 4. 

7 e. g., Ma(1 h y. avat., VI. GS ff. 

* viScsana-viSesya-bhdva. 


150 


appendix: candrakIrtis comment on RELATIVITY, I 


151 


NIRVANA 

it not just the same as when we use the expression «solidity is the exclusive 
essence of solid bodies»? (We use the possessive expression) although there 
is nothing which could he calied a solid body over and above this exclusive 
essence, (sc. the sense-datum of resistance). 1 

66. 3. Madhyamika. It is not so! Both cases are not comparable. Indeed the 
words «body» and «liead*> are used in connection with other features (usually) 
coexisting with them, e. g., brains etc. 2 (in the head), hands etc. (with the 
body). Therefore if a representation arises 3 whose object is suggested by these 
words taken by themselves, we naturally expect to find the usually coexi¬ 
sting parts also. The questions,«whose is the body?**, «whose is the head?»,(natu¬ 
rally suggest themselves). And if someone is desirous to indicate that (in the 
present case) the usual appurtenances are absent, 4 he repudiates the expec¬ 
tations (of his interlocutor) by using words according to their conventional 
meaning in life, where they suggest such (really existing) appurtenances. 5 
But in the (other) case no relation (or characterization) at all is possible, 
because there altogether are no solid bodies 6 over and above (the sense- 
datum) of resistance. 7 

66. 9. Logician. Non-Buddhists 8 assume a separate reality of substance 9 (and 

1 Lit., p. 66.1—3. «Further also, it may be that in «the body of a statue», «the head of 
Rahu**,even if there is no characteristic beyond a body and a head, there is a relation of characte¬ 
ristic and characterized; just so in «the proper characteristic (essence) of earths, although there 

• is no earth beyond the proper characteristic, there will be (this relation)*). 

2 buddliyddi. 

3 buddhy-vpajananah for upajata-buddhih, or °dlambana-buddhy-upajananah (sc. 
purusuh). 

4 Read p. 66.6, viSesanantara-sambandha, and in the Tib. khyad-par-gzhan. 

5 Lit., p. 66. 3—7. «Indeed, since the words «body** and «head» are used in association 
( sapeksatd-prairttau ) with other coexisting things, thoughts etc., hands etc., (a man) who pro¬ 
duces a thought intent upon only the words body and head is always (eva) in expectation of the 
coexisting other things, «wbose the body**, «whose the head**? And another (man), wishing to 
discard the connection with other appurtenances, cuts off the expectation of his interlocutor 
(prativaktuh) by (availing himself of expressions) suggestive (dhvanind) of the (non existing) 
appurtenances of the statue and of Rahu, (expressions) which agree with their import in every¬ 
day life. This is natural. But here...**. Prati-kartuh = na vastutah kartuh , the «supposed 
agent** of the possessive relation, or the counterpart of such relation, pratikartuh = pratiyo- 
ginah , (the expectation) «of the counterpart**. 

6 prthivyadi. 7 kathinyadi. 

* tirthika. 

2 laksya. C. assails the doctrine of the absolute sva-laksana on the ground that thera 
must be a laksya behind the laksana and this remembers the realistic doctrine of the Vaisesikas 
about a relation of inherence (samavdya) between substance and quality, a relation which no 

Buddhist has ever admitted to be real. The suggestion of the Logician is evidently ironical, it is a 


quality). (Are you not inclined), in order to do them pleasure, 1 to assert 
that the use of adjectives in speech 2 is quite all right, (that it corresponds 
to a real relation)? 

Madhyamika. No, indeed, (for you) it is not admissible to intro- 67 . 1 . 
duce into your system such categories as have been imagined by non-Buddhists 
on very poor grounds, or else you will be obliged equally to admit (their 
number) of additional sources of cognition 3 and other things also! 

The Logician. But (is not our example of a merely verbal relation 67. 3. 
just the same as the generally admitted among Buddhists fact of) the nomi¬ 
nal 4 personal identity 5 (in every individual’s life)? 

Madhyamika. (No, it is not the same!) Your example refers to an 67. 2 . 
(expression, not to a theory). The (possessive) relation as a mode of expressing 
one self in every-day conversation, without enquiring into its reality, exists. 

(In speaking) there is a possessor of a body. The statue (we say), possesses 
its own body. And there is a Rahu, the possessor of a head which is his pos¬ 
session, (but in speech only). This your example proves nothing! 6 

Logician. However there is here nothing else than a mere body and 67. 6. 
a mere head, (no possessors of them), they are the only objects apprehen¬ 
ded. The example is quite all right! 

jeer at the fact that the Madhyamika prefers the realistic logic of the Naiyayiks and rejects the 
reforms of the Buddhist logicians. 

1 tad-anurodhena . 

2 viSesana-abhidhana. 

3 C. admits the four pramanas of the Naiyayikas, cp. below, text p. 75, with the proviso that 
they will not help in the cognition of the Absolute. He here answers the gibe of the Logician with a 
counter gibe. He apparently wishes to say, «I can admit the realistic logic without forsaking my 
transcendental doctrine, but you cannot. For you the acceptance of the Naiyayika doctrine about 
the sources of our knowledge (pramdna) would mean that you would be obliged to give up your 
doctrine about the double aspect of existence, your two sources of knowledge, your «thing in 
itself**, in fact all your epistemology**. 

4 prajnapli, a cheda is needed after prajnaptivat. 

5 pudgala, the personality is different at every moment, its identity is a mental con¬ 
struction, it Is an entity purely nominal ( prajnapti-sat — Sabda-mdtram). 

6 Lit.,p. 67.3—5. ((Moreoverlike the nominal entity (pr«jnq?»tt)ofapersonetc.?Becausethere 
exists the characteristic, being a part of usual conversation, well known without pondering, (the 
characteristic) of the statue, the possessor ( upadatr ) of the possession of its own body ( sva-Safira), 
and because Rahu, the possessor of the possession of a head, exists, this example is not suitable ». 
Although it incidentally happens that there is no real possessive relation, nevertheless the expres¬ 
sion is not wrong, since in other cases the relation exists. The relation of substance and quality 
can be condemned on other, philosophical, grounds, not on the ground of an inadequate 
expression. 



152 NIRVANA 

67. 7. Madhvamika. It is not at all so! Your example is taken from com¬ 
mon conversation, (it refers only to what holds good in a conversation) in 
which there is no philosophic investigation of reality and the usual catego¬ 
ries are accepted as real without scrutiny. 1 (Quite different is the case when 
the relation of substance and its appurtenance is philosophically considered). 

67. 8. The notion of a substance, 2 indeed, when critically examined, contains nothing 
real over and above the corresponding sense-data. Nevertheless the conven¬ 
tional thinking of common life (assumes) it to exist. It imputes it to the (under¬ 
lying reality) of the groups 3 (of sense-data and mental phenomena). But your 
example does not mean that the same applies to the statue and to Balm. 4 

67. 10 . That there is thus no substance 5 in solid bodies 6 over and above the 
quality (orsense-datum) of resistance 7 is proved by philosophical criticism. 8 
(It is true) that a quality 9 (cannot be imagined) without the support of some 
substance, but this is just (what we call) «the surfaced 0 (or phenomenal 
reality). (Substance and quality are correlative terms), our Master (Nagar- 
juna) has established their reality 11 (in that sense), i. e., as a reality of 
mutual correlation, 12 (none of them is real separately). 

67. 12 . The Madhy amika (continues). This point is of capital importance, it must 
necessarily be conceded. 13 If it is not conceded, (viz. if it is not admitted that 
phenomenal means relative), it will prove impossible to separate the pheno- 

1 Lit., p. 67.7—8. «Itis not so, since in common-life-conversation there is no investigation 
of reality ( itthamvicara ) going on and the categories of common life exist without scrutiny ». 

2 atvian, cp. anatman = 12 ayatana — sense data and the mind, but no substance, citma- 
gabdo’yam svabhava-Sabda-parydyah, M. vr., p. 437. 4. 

3 slcandhn. 

4 Lit. p. 67.9. a There is no such establishing of the example (on the score) that the same 
applies to the torso and to Rahu ». 

5 laksya. 

6 prthivyadi. 

7 kathinyadi. 

s vicarymanam ruisti 

9 laksana. 

10 samvrtir eva iti. 

11 siddhi. 

12 Lit., p. 67.11—12. ^Nevertheless the Master has established the reality (siddhim) (sc.of the 
phenomenal world, of the samvrli) by the reality (siddhya) of them both in as much as they are 
mutually dependent upon one another#. The idea of C. is that the <fthinginitsetf»(st*alo7isuno)is 
r.r> exception to the law of Universal Relativity. The phenomenal is here an equivalent of the re¬ 
lative. In the example of the body and the statue or Rahil and his head there is uo mutual inter¬ 
dependence of two phenomenal realities, but simply a wrong verbal expression. 

13 "Lit., p. 67.12 . a Of all necessity (ca avadhdram) this must be admitted so! » it ss a j.oir.t cl' 
capital importance that the world as it is conceived phenomenally and Relativity are equivalents. 


APPENDIX! CANDRAKIRtTs COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 153 

meual from what is logically consistent 1 (and therefore real); and then every 
thing will be absolute reality, 2 (since there will be no difference); there will be 
no phenomenal reality at all. You must not indeed think that the «body of a 68. 1 
statue» and similar (relations) are the only case where a thing, upon investi¬ 
gation, reveals itself as (merely verbal and) non existing. We will prove (in our 
fourth chapter) 3 that colour, feeling and other (fundamental sense-data) are 
likewise (relational constructions and) are impossible (by themselves). Does 
it mean that we must deny their phenomenal reality, just as we deny even 
the phenomenal reality of, e. g., a (separate) body in the statue? 

This is impossible. Therefore (your vindication of the absolute, rela- 68. 3 
tionless «thing in itsell'»and the example adduced to illustrate it) is wrong. 4 

1 From these words we must conclude that whatsoever is for C. logically consistent [yad 
yad upupnnnam ) represents not phenomenal, but absolute reality (na tat samvriih). But since 
nothing short of the whole is logically consistent and real (cp. the definition of reality, above 
p. 41), all particular objects are relative and logic dealing with them condemned. 

2 tattvam eva. 

3 skandha-piariksd. 

4 This is a brilliant piece of very subtle dialectics about the conception of a «thing in 
itself». C.’s aim is to prove that it is also relational, since it is «a thing# characterized 
by «itself» and contrasted with a thing characterized not by itself, but by «non-self». 
Dignaga tries to prove by an example that the supposed relation is merely an inadequate 
expression. C. begins by criticisingthe example. The relation, says he (gudhabhisandhih), between, 
e. g., the elements of a personality ( pudgalci ) and the personality itself is not the same as the 
relation between the body of a statue and its possessor. In the first case we have a possessive 
relation, the identity reveals itself on philosophic examination, in the second there is no relation 
at all, but only a wrong expression. C. now discloses his aim (svcibhiprayam udghdtayati) and 
vindicates the phenomenal reality of the relation of substance and quality, and in the same time he 
vindicates, upon Kantian lines,the necessity of assuming a transcendental reality which however 
he imagines on monistic lines. The body, or bodily frame of a statue, is but an irregular and 
perversive manner of speaking, (it means as much as «the statue of a statue » would mean). There 
is no real possessive relation. But in such expressions as the « resistance of solid bodies» or «the 
elements of a personality)) there is a real possessive relation as far as phenomenal reality goes and 
its categories of substance and quality are regarded. It is not until philosophical analysis ( vicara ) 
has condemned this relation as involved in contradictions and logically untenable ( anupapanna) 
that we are obliged to reject it as ultimately unreal, whether reality be defined as efficiency ( artha - 
kriyd-kdra), or as independent ( anapeksa ) existence in itself ( sva-bhdva , sva-laksana). But empiri¬ 
cally there is absolutely nothing cognizable which would not involve this relation. The «thing in 
itself# (svalaktiana) which by Dignaga is supposed to represent the absolute reality, outside 
every kind of relation, C. holds equally to involve a double relation, first of all, a moment of objec¬ 
tive reality corresponding to the moment of pure sensation, and then the relation of «the thing# 
to its characteristic «in itself#, since this characteristic has a meaning only if contrasted with, 
or relative to, the thing «not in itself#, i. e., the general, the universal. The general and the 
extreme particular are thus correlative terms, the one is no more absolute than the other. This 
n■-..•i-rbsoleto, this being relative (paruspara-aj.iksa), means the same as being phenomenal 
sainrrti). If we do not accept that, there will be no line of demarcation between the phenomenal 


154 


NIRVANA 


68. 5 . The Logician. Now, what is the use of such cavilling? (There is a 
general agreement between us). Indeed I do not in the least maintain that 
all our familiar conceptions of cognition and cognizable represent (absolute) 
truth. (I also deny the ultimate reality of the categories of substance and 
quality), but by this my epistemology 1 (I claim to have) established (upon a 
logical foundation) that condition (of the external world) which humanity at 
large believes to be real. 2 

68. 7. Madhyamika. It is for me to ask you, what is the use of (your) sophi¬ 

stry? You only explain (the origin) of some (perverse) expressions current in 
common life! As to phenomenal reality, leave it alone, albeit its existence and 
shape is founded on mere confusion! It nevertheless is useful for accumulating 
those fundamental virtues which bring Final Deliverance to those who strive 
after it. 3 (It has some value only) as long as the philosophic comprehension 
of the absolute reality is not attained. But you, by your wrong logic, destroy 

69 . i. (the foundation) of this phenomenal reality. The refinement of your intellect 

is led the wrong way, so far as the difference between what is absolutely real 
and what is only conventionally real is concerned. You are (apparently) 
establishing phenomenalism upon a logical basis in one point (by assuming 
the underlying «thing in itself®), but in the same time you are under¬ 
mining it by your wrong logic (in all other points). 4 

69. 2 . Now I come with a theory which really explains the importance of 

and the absolutely real. C. thus maintains that he has both a phenomenal reality ( samvrti ) and 
a transcendental one ( sdn-vrta ); whereas Dignaga, in admitting the absolute reality of the 
«thing in itselfo, undermines this line of demarcation and has, as a matter of fact, no phenome¬ 
nal reality at all.—It would be of some interest to compare this doctrine of a «thing in itself ^ ( sva - 
laksana) with the doctrine of Kant. The argument that if we do not admit any absolute reality, 
then the phenomenal will cease to be phenomenal and will itself become absolute (tattvam eva syat, 
na samvrtih) is quite the same as with Kant, as well as the conception that the thing in itself is a 
«non-representable x». Kant is fully aware that his conception of a ((thing in itself» is relative, it 
is, in his words, «acorrelatum to the unity of the manifold in sensuous intuition » (Critique of 
Pure Reason, transl. by Max Muller, p. 204). For Candrakirti «being correlative» means 
ohaving no reality in itself ( svabhavena)» , he thus charges the thing in itself with being also 
phenomenal, and he maintains that there is no other phenomenality than relativity. 

1 amuna nydyena. 2 lokhprasiddih. 

3 This is the Madhyamika method of saving the moral law under phenomenalism. The 
phenomenal world is not real, but useful, since by accumulating merit and knowledge (both are 
inseparable) in it, we cognize its unreality. As far as I can see, this means that the phenomenal 
world, although unreal, is nevertheless partly real. Whether this method is a better one than 
the construction of a «categorical imperative» in a phenomenal surrounding, must be left for 
the specialists to decide. 

4 Perhaps to read anyuyato 'nyato ndsayati. 


appendix: candeakirti’s comment on relativity, i 155 

empirical reality. I take my stand on our usual (unsophisticated conceptions), 
and then I set forth a series of arguments of which every one is intended 
to destroy some particular usual conception of mankind. By this method, 

I thoroughly undermine the usual views. It is only you that 1, like a vene¬ 
rable authority, am keeping back from neglecting the rules of usual decent 
behaviour, (i. e., of logic), but I do not (undermine these rules, i. e. I do not 
deny) their empirical reality. 1 

Therefore, if (it is true that you are also taking your stand upon) empi- 69. 5. 
rical reality 2 (in assuming your two essences, the strictly particular aud the 
universal), you are obliged to admit the existence of a stuff' which is charac¬ 
terized by these essences themselves. Our criticism thus stands, (i. e., the cri¬ 
ticism of the conception of an ultimate particular is not refuted). However, if 
we take our stand on transcendental (absolute) reality, then indeed we will 
deny the (separate) existence of a characterized substance. But then we will 
also deny both your essences, and both your sources of knowledge. 

And moreover (you maintain that speech is not a source of knowledge 69. 8. 
and that the meaning of our words is purely negative), 3 you do not admit 

1 Lit., p. 68.7—69.2 «We will also say the same! Wbatfor is this subtlety, which intro¬ 
duces us into an expression of common life? Let stand, first of all, yonder «surface» (samvrti) 
which has reached an existence of its individuality (dtma-bhdva) through logical inconsistency 
(« paryasa', it is a cause of accumulating the fundamental virtues which bring salvation to those 
who are desirous of Deliverance, (let it stand), until the knowledge of the Absolute ( tattva-adhi- 
gama ) is reached. But you, by your perversely sharp understanding of the division between 
phenomenal and absolute realities, after having introduced consistency (upapatti) into some 
points (Icvacit), you destroy (this division) by wrong logic (anydyatah). But here I (come), because 
I know how to establish phenomenalism (samvrti-satya), taking my stand just on the philosophy 
(paksa) of common sense (laukika), I (take) one argument (upapatty-antaram) which is adduced 
for the critique ( nirakarana ) of phenomenal reality and refute it by another (parallel) argument; 
like a mentor (loka-trddha) I call to order (nivartayami) just yourself, (whenever) you set aside 
the rules of decency (dcara) (accepted) in the world, [second sense, (dike an ancient authority 
(on logic, known throughout) the world, I am only refuting you whenever you depart from the 
ground of common sense ( lokdcara )], but I do not deny phenomenal reality ]». Thus Candra¬ 
kirti maintains 1) that the phenomenal world aud the world of Relativity are equivalents and 
2) since logic is in any case doomed as a means of cognizing the Absolute, he prefers simple real¬ 
istic logic to a transcendental logical doctrine. 

2 Cp. above, text p. 58. 14, transl. p. 140. 

3 According to the Indian grammarians and realistic logicans, a sentence contains an 
expression of an action associated with an agent and factors (karaka), or circumstances. This theory 
of speech the Madhyamika accepts with the aforesaid proviso. But the school of Dignaga have 
a special theory of their own about the meaning of words according to which words express only 
relations, or mutual negation (apoha = paraspara-parihdra = anya-vyavrtti = vyavaccheda = 

= 2 )ariccheda) between point-instants. Reality is even characterized as that what can never be 



APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


157 


15 6 NIRVANA 

that analysis of our speech which implies (the reality) of actions, factors 
and their connection. This indeed is a very great disaster! (When you speak) 
you make use of these very words which express actions, factors and their con¬ 
nection, but you yourself do not admit the reality of their meaning, of these 
actions, these agents etc. Alas! your attitude 1 is influenced by mere desires. 

69. li. And if, as we have shown, the duality of every thing cognizable is a 
moot point, then we must agree with those who admit other sources of 
knowledge (besides sensation and thought), as e. g., Revelation etc., (since 
these sources of knowledge are not devised with a view strictly to agree 
with the duality of everything cognizable), the particular and the universal. 

XLI. The Definition of sense perception. 

69. 13. Madhyamika. Further (your theory of an extreme particular as the 
«thing in itself») is wrong, because your definition 2 (of sense-perception, 
through which it is supposed to be apprehended is deficient). It is too narrow, 
it does not cover such every-day expressions as «the jar is a perception)), 
(i. e., the physical object before us is perceived) and these (usual) expressions 
of the ordinary man 3 should likewise be taken into acount. Therefore (your 
definition) is wrong. 

expressed in speech {paramdrtha-sat = svalaksana—pratyaksa = nirvilcalpaka = anablrilapya) 
The Miidhyajnika here hints at this theory and sets forth the argument that if speech could 
express nothing real, nothing positive, no actions, agents etc., then it would he impossible for 
people to enter into conversation. This remark is of course more of a glib gibe and unfair, since 
the Madhyamika’s own ultimate reality is also inexpressible in speech ( nisprapanca = anabhi- 
lapya = anupdkhya, prapanca —vdk). But Candraklrti thinks that no improvement in the 
logic of the Realists is needed, no critical theory of cognition, no «thing in itself» and no 
negative theory of speech ( apoha ). The logic, of the Naiyayikas can be accepted wholesale for the 
phenomenalaspectoftheworld,andforthe Absolutenologicatall is needed. The school of Dignaga, 
as well as the Hinayanists, can maintain that they also admit a double aspect of life, one on the 
surface (samvrti) and one ultimate (paramartha) or concealed ( samrrta ), cp. Ab. kosa, V.12, but C. 
is persuaded that his vindication of an empirical reality has a greater force. The Madhyamikas 
are the inventors of the doctrine of a double «truth» which they probably contrasted with the 
«four truths# of the Hinayana, cp. Madhy.s., XXIV. 8. This is also partly the reason why the 
Madhyamikas, and their followers the Vedantins, deem it permissible freely to use tbe arguments 
of the Naiyayiks when combating Buddhist Idealism,cp.above p.38n.3. At Sribar§a’s time,when 
the enemy is no more the Buddhist, but the Naiyiiyik, this attitude changes. 

1 Read pravrttita. C. is here playing with the double meaning of icclm, «desire» aud 
«tenet >>. «Your behaviour is bound (by such theories as are) merely (fantastical) desires », i.e. you 
are uot acting in accordance with your tenets, if speech is only apoha you ought not to speak at all«. 

2 The definition here alluded to is Dignaga’s definition, «sense-perception is quite free 
from all synthetic operation of thought (7 tdpandpodhr^. cp X >'ey n bindu. p. 6. 15. 

3 an-drya , tbe non-Saint. The Buddhist Saint, l;c:::g a pl.il or who has < hanged all 
usual habits of thought, directly realizes that what lie perceives are only momentary sense-data, 


The Logician. It might have been (wrong, but for the following con- 70. 1. 
siderations). Perceived are directly the sense data, e.g., a patch of dark 
colour etc. They make up the physical object, the jar. Sense perception, as 
a source of knowledge, distinguishes (only that). (But tbe cognition of the 
physical object which is a mental construction resulting from sense-perception)is 
likewise called sense-perception by a metaphor. Such metaphors we find inScrip- 
ture, e. g, when it is stated that «the advent of Buddhas is a weal», (instead of 
stating that it 'produces weal). We impute to the cause what really belongs 
to the effect. Just so, by a (converse) metaphor, from the cause to the 
effect, we say that (the physical object), the jar, is perceived, while only its 
causes, the sense data, are really perceived. 1 

Madhyamika. To assume a (natural) metaphor in such cases (as the 70 . s. 
perception of a jar) is impossible. (Quite different is the case of the advent 
of a Buddha). Indeed a birth, (i.e. the process of a birth), is held in ordinary 
life as the reverse of pleasure. (It is not the blissful Quiescence of the Forces 
of life). It is essentially produced through the cooperation of a plurality of 
biotic forces. 2 It is a cause of very much pain. (By itself) it is anything 
but a weal. Nevertheless it is (here) called a weal. There is a contradiction. 3 
In such cases we assume a metaphor. (The advent of a Buddha, although 
also painful by itself, is nevertheless a weal, because it produces the weal of 
Quiescence in Nirvana). The case is different with a perceived jar. We have 
no fcuch separate thing as an invisible jar which could he called perceived 
metaphorically. 

The Logician. (On the contrary!) Just because there is no jar over 70. 8 . 
and above the corresponding sense-data, it is convenient to maintain that 
its perceptibility is a metaphor. 

Madhyamika. If you take it so, the metaphor is still less possible, 70 . 8—9. 
because the object which you metaphorically endow (with perceptibility) does 

the remainder is construction. Dignaga’s definition may be a right description of his percep¬ 
tion, but will not cover the usual view. 

1 Lit., p. 70.1-3.« But let it be! The blue etc., the substratum of the jar, are evident, since they 
are being determined by perceptive cognitiou. Hence just as by imputing the effect to the cause 
it is said that the birth of Buddha is agreeable, thus the jar, although its causes are tbe evi¬ 
dent blue etc., by imputing the cause to the effect, is called a perception)). 

2 samskrta-laksana-svabhava. «it has the essence of the forces of lifea, about tbe four forces 
( samskara ) which are called saniskrta-laksana cp. my Central Conception, p. 39. There is no 
other weal for tbe Buddhist as the Quiescence i. e. extinction of all life in an Absolute. 

3 asambaddha eva. 



70. 10. 


71. 1. 


71. 3. 


71. 6. 


158 NIRVANA 

not exist at all. You cannot speak about the sharpness of the horns on the 
head of the donkey even metaphorically. 1 Moreover if you assume that the jar 
which is a part of our every-day experience is perceived by us in a metapho¬ 
rical sense, because there is no such jar over and above the sense-datum of a 
dark patch of colour etc., then (you are bound to take the next step and 
condemn this patch of dark colour as well), since it also does not exist over 
and above the sense-datum of something resistent. 2 Then, please, assume 
that the patch of dark colour is also perceived in a metaphorical sense! 
This has been expressed in the following verse, 3 — 

Just as there is no jar 
Beyond its colour, 

Just so there is no colour 
Beyond resistance. 4 

Therefore this and similar usual expressions are not covered by your 
definition of perception. It is quite deficient, (since it does not cover the 
whole of its subject matter). Now, from the transcendental point of view, 5 
we equally condemn the perception of (the physical object), the jar, as well as 
the perception of (the sense data), blue etc. On the contrary, from the empi¬ 
rical view' of every-day life, we must admit that the jar is perceived. This 
has been expressed in one of the four hundred verses (of Aryadeva) in the 
following manner. 

A transcendantalist 6 will never say — 

«We see (a patch) of colour, not a jar», 

Or «a jar is present (before us)». 

In following just this line of argument 

1 Lit., p. 70.9. «Because there is no substratum for what is being metaphored». In the first 
case the really existing sense-data were the substratum, and the physical object jar superimposed 
upon them. It was answered that you cannot superimpose a thing you nowhere have perceived. 
In the second the relation has been reversed and it is supposed that the non-existing jar is the 
substratum upon which the sense-data are superimposed. This is still less possible. 

3 Lit., 70.11 ((there is no blue etc. beyond earth etc.». 

3 Catuhsataka, XIV.14. 

4 Lit., p. 71.2. «Just so there is no colour beyond wind etc.». Earth, wind etc. are the 4 
fundamental elements of Matter ( maha-lhuta) which are cognized exclusively by touch, (spastavya- 
dyatana), thus colour (rupn-ayatana) is here reduced to a tactile phenomenon. Cp.the contention 
of modern empiricism which reduces our notion of Matter to sense-data and the sense-data to the 
one fundamental sensation of resistance. About Matter offering resistance ( sapratighatva) to 
sight, cp. Ah. Kosabh. ad I. 29. 

5 lattva-vid-apeksaya. 0 taltva-vid. 


appendix: candrakirti’s comment on relativity, i 159 

His sovereign mind will equally deny 
The soft, the fragrant and the sweet. 1 

There is however (another explanation of what perception really means). 71 . 10 . 
The word perception simply means a thing which is not beyond the range 
of our senses, (it does not mean its cognition through our senses). An object 
which is present and faces us is thus called a perception. 2 Jars, patches of 
blue colour and similar physical objects are called perceptions when they are 
not beyond the range of sight. A perception thus means an object which 
has been approached 3 by our senses. The corresponding definite cognition is 
(also) called perception (by a metaphor), because it is the cause which makes the 
object evident, just as we speak of a «straw fire» or «husk fire» (metapho¬ 
rically, instead of saying fire producing burning straw or burning husk). 

There is a philosopher 4 who has given the following interpretation of 72 . 1 . 
the term perception. (Perception is that kind of knowledge which) exists in 
close connenction with each sense faculty. (This could also mean that sense 
knowledge is a knowledge about the senses, a knowledge whose objects are 
the senses). This interpretation is wrong, because sense-perception is not a 
knowledge about the senses, it is a knowledge about the object 5 of (the 
senses). (If his interpretation were correct, we would speak not of sense 
perception), but of «object -perception)) or of «thing-perception». 

Be it as the case may be, we find in (the Abhidharmakosa) the 72 . 4 . 
following explanation. Sensation 6 is produced by a double cause, (the sense 
faculty and its object). Nevertheless it receives its name only through (one 
of its causes, the organ) in which the corresponding sense faculty is 
lodged, because sensation changes in degree, according to the changes by 

1 Catuhsataka, XIII. 1—2. 

2 The origin of this definition— pratyaksam aparoksani ((perception is the object not 
beyond our ken», can he traced in the Brh. ar. Upanisad, III. 4. 1 and III.5.1. It is adopted in 
the later scholastic Vedanta, cp. Vedanta-paribhaga, p. 12 (Bombay 1900, Venkatesvar). It 
is also mentiontioned by Udayana, Parisuddhi, p. G47 (B. I.). It seems probable that the Madh- 
yamikas have borrowed it from the Vedantins. To the Madhyamikas it suggested the omni¬ 
presence of Buddha’s dharma-kaya , just as to the Vedantins it suggested the omnipresence of 
/iparoksam brahma cognized by mystic intuition. Cp. above, p. 45. 

3 Lit., p. 71.10-11. «By meaning «in it the sense is approached», the perceptibility of 
jars, blue etc., not being beyond the ken, is established ». 

4 The definition of Prasastapada is here alluded to, cp. Prasastp., p. 186.12. The 
etymological explanation of the Naiyayikas does not differ materially, cp. Nyavavart., p. 30.4. 
Nyayabindut., p. 6. 4, makes a difference between the etymology and the real meaning. 

5 visaya-visaya. 6 vijnana. 



160 


APPENDIX: OANDRAKlHTI’S COMMENT OX RELATIVITY, I 


161 


NIRVANA 

which the faculty may be affected. 1 To sharp or feeble faculties correspond 
(sharp or feeble) sensations. We then have visual and other sensations. Thus, 
although a perception changes with every object, 2 nevertheless it receives 
its name according to the place where it is lodged. It exists as lodged in 
different sense organs, it is thus sense-perception, (not object-perception). 
It is customary to name a thing by its specific cause, e. g., the sound «of 
a drum» (although it is also the sound of the sticks), the sprout «of barley» 
(although it is also the sprout of the soil etc.). 

72 . 8. Madhyamika. There is no analogy between (the example of the sound 

of a drum) and the above mentioned (designation of sense-perception instead 
of object-perception). If sensation be specified according to its object, (one 
could specify) our sensations as colour-sensations etc. (But we could not 
specify in this way) all the six kinds of sensations, since mental (or intel¬ 
lectual) sensation (is a sixth kind of sensation) which is apprehending the 

73 . l. same object simultaneously (with the external sense). Indeed, if we include in 

the term sensation all its six varieties, beginning with the visual ones (and 
including the intellectual ones), we might be quite uncertain what to think 
when someone would mention the term (visual) sensation. (We will not know) 
whether it means only the sensation produced by the external sense, or it 
is meant to include the corresponding internal sensation, (the mental reaction) 4 

73. 2 . also. But if we specify sensations according to (the organ) in which they are 
lodged, although mental sensation can refer to (the same) object to which 
visual and other sensations (likewise refer), nevertheless their mutual distinc¬ 
tion will, in that case, be clearly established. (If they were called accor¬ 
ding to their object, since the object can be the same when different sensa¬ 
tions are meant, confusion would arise). 

73. 4. However, in this case you are merely concerned with giving a defini¬ 
tion of what the sources of our knowledge are. You accordingly assume that 
sense-knowledge is simply that kind of knowledge where all constructive thought 
is brushed aside, (it is pure passive sensation). 5 Just the contrast with thought 

1 Ab. Kosa, I. 45. 

2 Lit., p. 72.5—7. «Thus although it exists with reference to every object, nevertheless it 
will be (sense) perception, because, existing as lodged in every sense-organ, sensation is desi¬ 
gnated by its residence ». 

3 niladi-vijnana. ± mdnasn. 

5 kalpanapodha is the celebrated definition of Dignaga discussed almo t in every 

Indian philosophical work. It makes a difference between the first moment in every perception 


is in your opinion its characteristic. No purpose is served by naming (its 
varieties) according to their specific causes. 1 Now, the number of the sources 
of our knowledge (exactly) corresponds to the number of the cognized (cate¬ 
gories of existence). You have established the character of both your sources 73 . 6. 
of knowledge in strict correspondence with the double character of the 
cognizable. (To this strict correspondence) they owe their existence and their 
shape. You should, therefore, remain always faithful to your principle of de¬ 
signating cognitiou only according to its object. To name it according to 
the organ of sense would serve no purpose (from your standpoint). 2 

However (the Logician may vindicate his interpretation by the follow- 73. 8 
ing consideration). The word sense-perception is generally known to everyone. 

The word object-perception is not used as a designation of what we here have in 
ourmnid. For this reason we adhere to the interpretation that the term sense- 
perception means perception (through the sense-organs), through the place 
where the sensations are lodged, (it does not mean the perceived object). 

The Madhyamika answers. (This is true), the word perception is very 74. i. 
well known in common life, and we, (not you), are using it just in what seuse 
it is used in common life. 3 (Your) interpretationisma.de with utter disregard 
ot what is established as real in common life. Generally known (in your 
interpretation) is only the utter disregard of what is (really) generally known, 

it is then pure sensation, it is passive, involving absolutely no thought-construction. But the next step, 
which is also perception, represents the construction of an image by synthetic thought (vikalpenn 
anugamyate). The distinction has a great importance for Dignaga, because bethinks that in this 
pure sensation, this, so to say, oreine Sinnlichkeit», the «pure object » (SuddJw-artlia), the «thing 
in itself» (svalaksana) reveals itself to our consciousness. Itisinteresting to compare the controversy 
between Eberhard and Kant on a similar question. Eberhard assumed that he was opposing 
Kant when he maintained that the ((thing in itself» reveals itself in our sensations (Emfindungen ), 
but Kant conceded the point, «nun ist das eben (viz. dass die Dingean sick der Sinnlichkeitihren 
Stoff geben) die bestimdige Bekauptung der Kritik», cp. Ueber eine Entdeckung, nach der 
etc., p. 35 (Kirchmann). 

1 Lit.. 73.4—6. «But here, with a view to express the essence of the sources of cognition 
( pramana), tbeabsence of synthesis (kalpana) alone is admitted as perception, because the pecu¬ 
liarity of this (mode of cognition) is found (in its difference) from constructive (dichotomizing, 
vikalpaka ) cognitiou; by naming it according to its special (cause) no usefulness is indicated)). 

2 Lit., p. 73.6—8. «And since the existence of the number of the sources of cognition is 
dependent upon the objects of cognition, and because the essence of (such) two sources of cogni¬ 
tion has been established which have attained their shape ( atmabhava) and existence ( satta ) 
exclusively by conforming to the (double) form of the cognizable, the designation through the 
sense-organ helps nothing; thus in every respect the designation just by the object is the 
right one». 

3 pratyaksa means also an object «evident)), ((present .». 


U 



162 


A I-'PENDIXI CANDliAKIKTl’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY. I 


163 


NIKVANA 

because (in your interpretation, as pure sensation), it would not even mean 
perception. 1 

74. 3. And moreover, since you give to the term a generalizing sense (of 
what is present in all sensations), the case (of a single moment) of 
visual sensation, which is produced by a single moment of the faculty of 
vision, will not be covered (by your definition). And then, if a single moment 
of perception will thus (according to this definition) not be perception, 
neither will a number of them be perception. 2 

74. c. Now, you maintain that sense*perception is only that kind of cognition 

which is quite free from any participation in it of constructive thought. 
However with such (pure sensation alone) you will not be able to converse 
with your fellow beings. Nevertheless you pretend to analyse the course 
which cognition and its object take in common life. It follows that that sort 
of sense-knowledge which you assume (sc. pure sensation) is quite useless. 

74 . 8. Madhyamika. (You are also vindicating your theory of perception by 
referring to Scripture where it is stated that) «a man, having a visual sen¬ 
sation (of a patch of blue colour) apprehends blue, but does not know that 
it is blue», (the definite knowledge is produced by a subsequent operation of 
contrasting blue with not blue). 3 (But in our opinion this scriptural delive- 

1 Lit., p. 74.3. «...well known could be (your) distortion ( tiraskara j of the term «well 
known » and therefore it would not be thus sense-perception». The pratyaksa in Dignaga’s and 
Dharmaklrti’s interpretation, meaning as it does a moment of pure, undifferentiated sensation, 
represents, indeed, something quite unknown in common life. The divergence between the com¬ 
mon idea of perception and Dignaga’s conception of pure sensation is much more considerable 
than the divergence between it and the Madhyamika-Vedanta definition of perception as the 
thing perceived, since the Sanskrit term for perception pratyaksa is a word very commonly used 
in the sense of a thing present, evident, perceived. Dharmottara himself calls that kind of 
pure perception which is imagined by Buddhists something «hardly existing» asat-Jcalpa, 
cp. Ryaya-bindut., p. 16. 6. This retort of the Madhyamika is, nevertheless, not quite fair, be¬ 
cause the follower of Dignaga, when maintaining that perception is not the object, but its cogni¬ 
tion, does not refer to pure sensation, but to perceptive cognition which includes a moment of 
sensation. 

2 Lit., p. 74.3-4. «And there will be no perception-character (pratyaksatva) of one 
visual sensation (caksur-vijfianasya) possessing an underlying (aSrayasya) single moment of the 
sense-faculty (indriya-ksana), because of the absence of the meaning of generalization (vipsa)». 

3 This very important text from an unknown agama is mentioned already by Dignaga 

in his Pramana-samuccaya-vrtti. I. 4, as a quotation from the abhidharma ( chos-mnon-pa-las ) 

in support of his theory. This could prove that Dignaga’s theory of pure sensation was fore¬ 

shadowed in previous Sautrantika works. Kamalasila examines it at length in his Nyaya-bindu- 

purva-paksa-sankgipti (Bstan-hgyur, Mdo CXI, f. 112 ff). Vasubandhu’s definition of 
pratyaksa is quite different, cp. Pramana-samuccaya I, 15, and Nyiiyavart, p. 42. 


ranee is not meant to give any definition of sense-perception. It only is 
meant to notify that the sensations of the five external sense-organs (alone, 
without the participation of a conscious element), remain unconscious. Sensa¬ 
tion which is absolutely bare of every element of (synthetic) thought 
cannot be maintained to represent perception, even on the basis of Scrip¬ 
ture. This would be wrong. 

Therefore from the empirical, 1 (not from the transcendental), point of 75 . 2 . 
view, everything without exception is called present, 2 (i. e., a perception), 
when it is directly perceived (by the senses), whether it be (your strictly) 
particular essence or the general essence or the thing 3 (possessing these both 
essences). A perception is thus determined (as meaning) the object of per¬ 
ception together with its cognition. 4 The double moon and similar illusions 
will not be sense - perceptions, if compared with the cognitions of a man 
with a normal capacity of vision, but for the man suffering from ophtalmia 
it will be just Ms sense-perception. 

As regads cognition of objects lying beyond the range of our senses, it 75 . g. 
is produced by a (perceived) mark which is invariably concomitant with them. 

It is called inference. 

The words of specially qualified persous who directly perceive trans- 75 . 6. 
cendental things 5 are called Scripture. 

If something that has never been experienced is cognized (through a 75 . 7 . 
description), so far as it has been declared to be similar (to another thing 
which has been experienced by us) — this is called analogy, e. g., when we 
are told that a gayal whom we have never seen is (some animal) similar to 
a bull. 

By these four methods of cognition is our knowledge of objects deter- 75 . 9 . 
mined (and our actions guided) in common life. 6 

(But if we are then asked on what transcendental basis these four 75 . 10 . 
methods of usual cognition repose, we will be obliged to confess) that their 
reality is relative. 7 The cognizable things exist so far as cognitions exist and 
(vice versa ), cognitions exist so far as the cognizable objects exist. 

1 loke. 2 aparoksa. 3 laksya. 

4 jnanena saha , according to Dignaga pratyaksa, when pure ( Suddha ) is not jnana, but 
Dharmaklrti brings it under the head of samyag-jnana, cp. Tatparyat., p. 102. 17. 

5 atindriyartha. 

B These are exactly the four sources of knowledge admitted by the Realists, the Naiyayikas. 

7 parasparapeksaya siddha — Sunya, 

U* 


104 


NIK YANA 


But 1 iu no case is there any independent (absolute) reality 2 either of our 
cognitions, nor of the objects cognized. Therefore let us be satisfied with the 
usual (view of the phenomenal world), just as it is cognized by us from 
experience. 3 

Enough of this discussion! 

Let us revert to our subject matter. 

The Sublime Buddhas have also preached their doctrine in adapting it 
just to the habits of thought of common humanity. 4 

XLII. The Hinayana theory of Causation examined. 

6 . i. From our correligionists 5 (the Hinayanists) we receive regarding this 
(our denial of causation) the following reply. 6 We agree with you, (they say), 

1 Here Candrakirti winds up this remarkable controversy with Dignaga by admitting 
realistic logic in the empirical field, but not in the transcendental, and by rejecting Dignaga’s 
reform which, although professing to be a logic of common sense ( laukika ), aimed at establishing 
a transcendental reality of a «thing in itself». For describing the fact that phenomenal reality 
is established iD his system on a firm basis, lie uses two words, it is satya «a truth®, and it is 
siddha , «estblished as a reality)). However it is a «surface truth» (samvrtisatya) and it is 
« established as a relative reality» (paraspardpeksayd siddha), not absolutely ( na ta 
svabhavena). Dignaga retorts that he has also two realities, the relative reality of all our con¬ 
ceptions and the absolute reality of the «thing in itself®. Indeed the followers of Aryasanga 
and Digniiga are frequently characterized as being also Madhyamikas (i. e., relativists) because 
they adhere to the doctrine that all our conceptions have merely a relative value (paratantra). 
But Candrakirti insists that Dignaga’s «thing in itself» is also relative, that he has thus 
failed to grasp the real profound meaning of the doctrine of the two realities, the Relativity is 
the « surface » of the Absolute, it has its real stand as such a surface. Therefore in chap. XXV. 9 
and XXV.20 Nagarjuna will emphatically assert the essential identity of the Absolute and ihe 
Phenomenal, of Nirvana and Samsara, cp. translation below p. 200. The Absolute of Nagarjuna 
and Candrakirti has thus a certain similarity with the ev xai 7rav of Parmenides, whereas the 
«thing in itself® of Dignaga has some points of similarity with the Hoc Aliquid ( = kinxeid 
idam ) of Aristotle. The Madhyamika view can be clearly realized out of the following 
equations, 

1) samvrti (surface) == paraspardpeksd (relativity) — loka = laukika-vyavaslhd — pra- 
pafica (pluralism) — pratitya-samutpdda (dependently-together-origination) — sunyatd — nih- 
svabfxavatd — samsara — Dharma-kaya — the manifested world — omnipraesentia Dei phae- 
nomenon, 

2 ) samvrta (« under the surface))) = anapeksa (non-relative) — paramdrtha (absolute) — 
nis-prapatica (non-plural) = anirvacaniya — advaita (monistic) — pratitya-samutpdda (i. e., 
sdmvrtah pratitya-samutpadah) — Sunyata (i. e. sdmvrtd Sunyata) — sasvabhavata — lattva 
— tathdta = dharmatd — nirvana — Dharma-kaya — the world sub specie aeternitatis. 

2 svdbhdviki siddhih. 

3 yathadrstam = drstam anatikramya. 

4 laukikam darSanam, «philosophy of common sense® as opposed to darsanaa real philosopy®. 

5 svuyuthya. 

6 About the general idea of Causality ( pratitya-samutpdda ) in Hinayana cp. above p. 39. 
About its special application to the evolution of life in 12 consecutive stages, cp. 0. Rosenberg, 


165 


appendix: candrakirti 5 s comment on RELATIVITY, I 

that entities cannot arise out of themselves, so far the production of a thing 
(already existing) out of its own self is useless. That entities cannot arise out 
of both sources (i. e., out of a preexisting stuff and separate agents) is also 
true, since one half (of this solution) is invalidated (by our denial of a pre¬ 
existing substance). 

The (last) eventuality, (viz. that every thing exists at random), without 76. 2 . 
any causal link at all, is absolutely poor. It is quite right to dismiss it 
(without much consideration). But if you also maintain that neither are 
existent things caused by something separate from them, this we do not 
admit. The Buddha has specified that existing things have causes producing 
them, (and that these causes are substantially) different (from the thing pro¬ 
duced). 

(The Hinayanists maintain), 

II. Four (can be) the conditions 76. r>. 

(Of every thing produced), 

Its cause, its object, its foregoing moment, 

Its most decisive factor. 1 
There is no fifth condition. 

Among them the cause is what «turns out». 2 Such is the definition. The- 77 . 1 . 
refore, if one entity turns out the other, i. e., if their mutual position is 
similar to that of a seed (versus a sprout), 3 it is called its cause, (this is the 
first condition, the cause in a general sense). If something, when being pro¬ 
duced, is intent (upon something else, as e. g., a sensation which is always 
intent upon an object), the latter is called its objective condition. 

The foregoing condition for the production of a result is the evanes- 77. 2—3. 

Problems, ch. XVI, my Central Conception, p. 28 n., and above p. 134. The schools of Hinayana 
were moreover engaged in classification of the varieties of coordination between the separate 
momentary elements in which existence had been split. They thus established different pratyayas 
of the pratitya-samutpdda. The classification into four varieties here mentioned belongs to the 
sehool of the Sarvastivadins. It has been supplemented by a further classification into 6 different 
hetus, whichprobablyislaterthan Nagarj una, sinceit is not mentioned by him.The Pali school had 
devised a classification into 21 pratyayas. The full theory of the Sarvastivadins is given in Ab. 

Kosa, II. 50 ff. Pratyaya when contrasted with hetu means condition in general, and hetu cause 
(special). Otherwise both terms are very often used as synonyms. All the very interesting details 
of their connotation can be realized only through a careful study of the abhidharma. 

1 ddhipateya — adhipati-pratyaya. 2 nircartaka. 

3 The seed is the adhipati-pratyaya — kdrana-hetu = asadharana-ldrana of the sprout, 
cp. p. 86.17, here it exemplifies a. condition in general. 


1 66 NIRVANA 

cence of its (material) cause as e. g., the foregoing destruction of the seed 
is a conditon for the production of the sprout. 

77. 4. The decisive (or predominant) condition is (that decisive fact) which 
being (efficient) the result (inevitably) appears. Such are the four kinds of 
(possible) conditions. 

77. 5. If there be other circumstances, previous, contemporaneous or posterior 
to an event, they are all to be included in one of these categories. A Supreme 
Deity and similar (transcendental) conditions do not exist. Therefore the 
author puts a limit, «there is no other, fifth, kind of condition)). Entities 
arise under these conditions, conditions which are not identical with the 
thing produced. In this sense there is a production (or coordination) with 
things other (than the thing produced). 

77. 8. We answer. Neither are entities produced out of (or coordinated with) 

conditions which are (substantially) separate from them. 

III. In these conditions we can find 
No self-existence of the entities. 

Where self-existence is deficient, 

Relational existence also lacks. 

78. 3. If the produced entities 1 had any preexsistence 2 at all, in (their own) 

causes and (conditions) which are something different from (these entities them¬ 
selves)'— whether in all the complex of them or in some of them separa¬ 
tely or both in all of them and in every one of them, or (even if they 
existed) somewhere outside the complex of their causes and conditions, — 
then alone could they appear out of them. But that is not so. They do not 
preexist. If they did, they would have been perceived, and their (new) 
production would have been useless. 

78. 6. Therefore the conditions and (causes) of an entity do not contain any real 

existence 3 (of the result). If they do not contain its real existence, neither do 
they contain its relational existence. 4 Existence, relation, production 5 (are 
synonyms). Production out of something extraneous means relation 6 to it, 
(some kind of preexistence in it). This is impossible. Therefore it is wrong 

1 bhavanam karyandm. 2 utpadat purvam sattvam. 

s svabhavah. 4 parabhavah. 

5 bhavanam bhava utpadah. li bhava , cp. in karya-kdrana-bhdva. 


APPENDIX*. CANDRAKlRTl’s COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 


167 


to maintain that entities can be produced out of conditions which are diffe¬ 
rent from them. 

(But then the Hinayanist would maintain that) the produced entities, 78. 9. 
such as a sprout etc., do not really exist in their causes, such as seeds etc., as long 
as the latter have not undergone any change. (But when they are changed 
the result appears). Otherwise the latter would appear without any cause 
altogether. (This is what they call their relation to other entities which are 
their causes). 

But in what sense 1 are we to understand the «otherness» 2 of causes 78. n. 
(and conditions). When both Maitra and his help - mate are present, (we 
can assert that) they are two separate entities which depend upon one ano¬ 
ther (in producing a piece of work together). But this kind of coexistence is 
not found between a seed and a sprout. Therefore when results do not pos¬ 
sess such separate existence of their own, their relation, the «otherness»(of 
the sprout) in regard to the seed, is absent. The designation of it as «other» 
becomes (meaningless) and this alone makes production out of something 
extraneous impossible. 

(The Hinayanist’s appeal to Scripture betrays) his utter ignorance of 78. 13—14. 
its real intention. Never did the Buddhas preach something contrary to 
reason. 3 What the real aim of their doctrine is we have indicated above, 

(we have namely indicated that the doctrine of causality refers to the phe¬ 
nomenal world). 4 

XLIII. The existence of separate energies denied. 

When the philosopher who maintains the origination (of entities out 79. i. 
of other entities which are) their causes, has been thus dismissed, another one 
sets forth a theory of origination through (special) energies. 5 The organ of 
vision, colours and the other causes (of the visual sensation) are not produ¬ 
cing it directly. They are called causes because they call forth an energy 6 
(capable) of producing sensation. This energy 7 then (actually) produces 
(visual) sensation. Thus the causes, as separate entities, do not produce sen¬ 
sation. Its (real) producer 8 is a (corresponding) energy, an energy inherent 

1 kimapeksa. 2 paratva. 3 yukti-viruddha. 4 Cp. above text, p. 54. 10. 

6 Nagiirjuna avails himself of the term kriyd ( — jani-krijd) in the sense of energy or 
function. Later it is replaced by the term vyapdra which is also used by Candrakirti, 
cp. p. 329.16. 

'* jani-kriya. 


kriya. 


* irijnana-janila. 



169 


11)8 NIRVANA 

in the causes 1 and creative 2 of sensation. Analogous is the (physical) energy 
of heat 3 which produces, e. g., cooked rice. 

We answer, 

IV. No energies in causes, 

Nor energies outside them. 

No causes without energies, 

Nor causes that possess them. 

79 . 7 . If an energy (producing sensation does really exist) it must be asso¬ 
ciated with such causes as the organ of vision etc. But this is impossible. 
Why? Because (we will then be asked) whether this assumed energy is sup¬ 
posed to appear when the sensation already exists or before it or simultane¬ 
ously with it? (The first alternative must be rejected). If the sensation is 
already produced, the energy is useless. The energy (is supposed) to produce 
something. But if it is already produced, what has the energy to do? This has 
been expressed in our «Madhyamika Introduction)) thus, — 4 

The second birth of something born 
Should never be admitted, etc. 

«). 12 . Neither is the existence of an energy to be assumed (in the causes) 
previously (to the sensation) produced. This we have expressed (in the same 
work) thus, — 5 

This energy cannot take shape, 

As long as the result 6 is absent. 

so. i. Neither is (the existence of an energy just at the moment of) produc¬ 
tion possible, because a thing is either produced or not yet produced, there 
is no existence between (these two moments). It has been said — 

What is being produced is not produced, 

Because ’tis only half-produced. 

Or else all things without exception 
Would nascent always be. 7 

1 pratyayavati. 2 vijnana-jani-kriya. 3 Read paci-kriya. 

4 M. av., VI. 8. 5 Ibid., VI. 19, cp‘ M. vr., p. 545. 

c kartra-vina, lit. « without the makers, sc. without the result as maker or shaper of the 
energy. The future vijnana is here envisaged as the shaper ( karma-lcaraka ) of its own producer. 

7 Lit., p. 80. 3-4. « Because the nascent is half-born the nascent is not born. Otherwies 
the condition of being nascent would attach ( prasajyate) just to everything)). 


APPENDIX! CANDRAK1E'ITS COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, I 

Since this (assumed) energy cannot be located iu any one of the three so. 5. 
times (past, present and future), it does not exist altogether. (Nagarjuna) 
therefore says, 

No energies in causes. 

We have commented upon this point in our «Madhyamika Intro¬ 
duction)) when explaining that, 

Without something characterized 

There can be no characteristic feature, etc . 1 

Indeed the (non-existing) son of a barren woman cannot be charac¬ 
terized as the possessor of a cow, (since he neither did nor does nor will 
exist). (The non-existing energy cannot appertain to a cause). 

But then an energy might perhaps exist (alone) without being tliepos- 80. 9 . 
sesion of a cause? This is also impossible, 

No energy outside the causes. 

If there is no energy in the causes, there neither can be any so. 10. 
outside them, (it would then be) an uncaused energy. If there is no (separate) 
cloth beside the threads (composing it), this does not mean that the cloth 
preexists (somewhere else), in some straw 7 . 2 Consequently no energy producing 
entities does really exist. 

If this is the case, if it is impossible to assume energies, then perhaps so. 13. 
the causes (alone, without possessing any energies will be sufficient) for the 
production of entities? It is answered, 

No causes without energies. so. 15. 

If energies do not exist, then the causes will be bereft of energy, they 
will not be efficient, they will not be causes. How then will they produce 
something? 

But (if causes really) produce something, they must be necessarily so. 17. 
possessors of energy! 

1 Ibid. VI. 57 The possessive relation is here represented in an inverted manner. Instead 
of speaking of causes or objects possessing energies, the author speaks of energies possessing 
causes (pratyayarati kriya), he means «belonging to causes». 

- vlrana. 


81. 2 

81. 3 

si. e. 

81. 8 

81. 9 

81. 11 

82. 1 


170 NIRVANA 

To this it is answered, 

Nor causes are there that possess them. 

The 1 existence of energies is thus denied. (It then becomes clear) that 
causes cannot be possessors of (non-existing) energies. 

What has been here said about an energy producing sensation, 
equally applies to the energy of heat 2 and other (physical energies). Thus 
the word «production)) is itself devoid of any meaning. 

XLIV. Causation is not Coordination. 

To this the (Hlnayanist) replies. We are not in the least affected by 
your examination of the question whether the causes are possessors of energy 
(or not. We are satisfied with establishing the fact) that entities, such as 
sensation, arise in a certain coordination with (other entities), 3 e. g., the 
organ of vision etc. (This is all what we mean, when we assert that the 
existence of an organ of vision etc. are the conditions under which a visual 
sensation etc. can arise). 

(Nagarjuna) now states that (this coordinational theory of causation) 
is also wrong, 

Y. Let those facts be causes 

With whom coordinated other facts arise, 

Non-causes will they be 

So far the other facts have not arisen. 

If sensation is an entity whose origination is coordinated with a faculty 
of vision and other (conditions), and these coordinates (are called causes), is 
it not evident that up to the moment when this so called «result®, the sen¬ 
sation, has really arisen, what can the organs etc. represent but non- 
causes? They are (as good as) non-causes. That is the idea of (Nagarjuna). 
And nothing can be produced out of its non-causes, e.#., oil cannot be 
pressed out of sand corns. 

But the following objection is then raised. They begin by being non¬ 
causes, but they are afterwards converted into causes by combining with 

1 Lit., p. 81. 2. aThe word «not» is the connection with the subject-matter, (i. e., the 
negation must he taken out of the preceding sentence). The word «uta» puts emphasise 

2 Read paci-kriyd. 3 pratyaydn pratitya. 


appendix: candrakTrtTs comment on relativity, i 171 

some other (concomitant) conditions. This also won’t do! Because this con¬ 
comitant condition, concomitant with something which is not yet a condition, 
can be considered as a condition only if the other fact is (really) a condition. 

We are in this case faced by the same difficulty as before. Therefore this 
explanation cannot be accepted. 

An organ of vision and (an object) are here assumed to represent the 82. 4 
causes producing (visual) sensation. But are they the causes of an existing 
sensation or are they the causes of a sensation not yet existing? It is 
anyhow an impossibility. (Nagarjuna) says, 

VI. Neither non-Ens, nor Eus 
Can have a cause. 

Why? 

If non-Ens, whose the cause? 

If Ens, whatfor the cause? 

Non-Ens, i.e., a non-existing thing, how could it have a cause? (Its S 2 . 9 
cause is perhaps) so called in anticipation? (It will produce the result at 
some future occasion). No! 

Referring to a future fact 
We give a name anticipating, 

But never will this future come 
Without a force that (latently) is present. 1 

The incongruities 2 (resulting from assuming latent forces) have been 
indicated above. 3 

But if a thing is really existent, if it is present, if it has taken shape, 
it. is absolutely useless to imagine some causes producing it. 

XLV. The cause-condition 

After having represented that conditions 4 in general are not really causes, 33. i 
since they have no capacity to produce effects, (Nagarjuna) now proceeds (to 

1 M. av., VI. 58. Lit. aThcre is for it no futurity without a force ». 

2 dosa. 3 Cp. above, p. 167 ff. 

4 It would have been strictly correct to translate pratyaya « condition» or «coordinate» 
and «hetu-pratyaya» «cause-condition» or simply ffcause». But adhipati-pratyaya is even more 
of a cause than hetu-pratyaya which, therefore, is sometimes called sohakari-pratyaya (cp. Sar- 
vadars. p.39.Poona 1924). Only the alambana and samanantara-pratynyas can be distinguished 
as « conditions ». It is therefore impossible always to distinguish between these two terms. Yaso- 
rnitra accordingly says, ad Ab. Kosa, II. 50, hetundm capiatyaydndm cako viSesali? nn knsc.it. 


172 NIK VAN A 

consider their varieties separately and) to show that none of them singly is 
(really) a cause. 

83. 3. The following objection is raised (by the Hlnayanist). If you are right 
(he says), there can be no conditions at all. But (the notion of) a condition is very 
well established, since we have a definition of its essence. The definition of 
the cause-condition 1 which is here accepted, is the following one. A cause 
is what «turns out». If something be altogether a non-Ens, the definition 
of its essence) could never be given, it would be as though (some one were 
to teach us about the essence of the non-existing) son of a barren woman. 

83. ?>. We answer. The producing condition e., the cause), would exist if 

its essence were something real. (But this is not the case), since, 

8?,. 7 . VII. Neither an Ens, nor a non-Ens, 

Nor any Ens-non-Ens, 

No element is really «turned out». 

How can we then assume 

The possibility of a producing cause? 

83. 9. Producing means creative. 2 If an element which can be produced 

would really be produced, then a creative cause would produce it. But it is 
not being (really) produced, since there is altogether no such thing that 
needs to be produced, whether Ens or non-Ens or (somerhing including 
both) Ens and non-Ens. 

83. to. Indeed Ens is not produced because it exists. Neither is non-Ens, 
since it does not exist. Nor Ens-non-Ens, since such mutually contra¬ 
dicting (characteristics) cannot exist in one thing, and because, if they did, they 

1 hetu-pratyaya, the first of the four pratyayas. This classification of conditions into four 
varieties is not what to our requirements should be a strictly systematic classification, all members 
are not exclusive of one another. Thus the general condition is contrasted with the special one 
(■ adhipati ), but it includes the two others which are only its varieties. It also embraces 5 
causes of the fteftt-classification, 1) sabhaga-hetu, relation of homogeneity between the preced¬ 
ing and the following moments of the same thing, producing the illusion of its duration, or moral 
homogeneity among the subsequent elements of a personality. This hettt-classification is also un- 
systematical, because the sixth class, the kdrana-hetu has two varieties, the efficient and the 
non-efficient one ( nus-bcas , nus-med), the first is the same as the predominant condition adhi- 
pati-pratyaya or asadharana-karana, the second is an expression of the dependence of a given 
point-instant upon the condition of the whole Universe ( sarve dharmah) cp. above p. 41 n. 6. 
2-3) sahabhu and samprayukta-ketu , relations of coexistence according to which some elements of 
Matter and Mind never appear alone, but always together, 4) vipaka-hetu which is another name 
for karma and b)sarvatraga-hetu, moral homogeneity among coexisting elements. Cp. Ah. Kosa,II. 50 ff. 

2 Lit., what «turns out.» {,nirrarlaka). 


appendix: candkakIkti’s comment on relativity, i 173 

would be subject to both the above strictures together. So it is that, since 
there is no production of effects (from the Monist’s point of view), neither are 
there any creative causes. 

Cosequently the argument that causes must exist because their essence 83. 13. 
(or function) has been defined does not hold good iu the present case. 

XLVI. The object, a condition of mental phenomena. 

The author now proceeds to deny the (second condition), the condition 83. 14 . 
consisting in the fact that (every mental phenomenon) has an objective 
counterpart (upon which it is intent). 

VIII. A (mental) Ens is reckoned as an element, 

Separately from its objective (counterpart). 

Now if it (begins)by having no objective counterpart, 

How can it get one afterwards? 

What are the elements 1 of existence which are here in (the Hma : 84. 3. 
yanist’s system) characterized as possessors of an objective counterpart? 2 
Consciousness, (i.e., pure, indefinite sensation) 3 and definite mental pheno¬ 
mena. 4 Such are the words of Scripture. When consciousness (is awakened), 
or definite mental phenomena produced, they are intent 5 upon some object 
(which transcends them), whether it be a patch of colour or some other object 
corresponding (to the sensation). These are then called the objective con¬ 
ditions 6 (of those mental elements). 

(It is now asked), is this objective condition imagined (for sen- 84. 4. 
sation) already existing, or for sensation not yet produced? In the first case 
the objective condition becomes useless. Indeed the objective conditon is 
assumed in order to account for the production of this element, 7 (sensation). But 
this element then really exists before the objective (cause has begun to operate). 

Indeed in this case the element (consciousness) would be established as 84. r>. 
existing by itself, separately from ist objective cause. Why would we then 
imagine it influenced by an (external) object? 

Thus consciousness and similar elements would appear as existent 84. 7. 
and real, separately from their objective counterparts. Then it would simply 
he your fancy to call them possessors of au objective counterpart. 8 They 
would have altogether no (real) relation to objects. 

1 dkarma. 2 salambana. :t citta. 4 caittn. 

6 alambanena utpadyante. 6 alambana-pratyaya. 7 dharma. * salambana. 


174 


Nil,’VAN A 

84. 9. Now (let us examine the other alternative). We then imagine that a sensa¬ 

tion not yet existing has already an object. This is also impossible. Because 
an element which has been entered into the system of elements separately 
from its objective counterpert is, in any case, an existing element. But (to 
imagine) an unexisting element combining with an object (is quite impossible). 1 

85. l. The (first) sentence (of the above verse) must be supplemented thus — 

«you call possessor of an object » a (mental) Ens which (in the system) is 
reckoned as an element separately from its object. 

(The second sentence of the verse contains a question), 

Now if it begins by having no objective counterpart 
How can it get one afterwards? 

85. 4. This is the reason expressed in the form of a question. 2 The 

meaning is the following one. If an element cannot exist without being 
intent upon an object, if it is not real, wherefrom will then the object appear? 
If the object-maker 3 is absent, neither can the object exist. 

85. g. But then how are we to understand (the Scriptural) evidence that 

mind and mental phenomena must have an object? The question is trivial! 4 
(Yes they have an object), if the rule be considered (from the empirical 
standpoint) of contingent reality, not (from the transcendental standpoint.) 
of absolute reality. 

XLVII. The causa materialis denied. 

85. 7. (Nagarjuna) next proceeds to destroy the notion of an immediately 
preceding (moment of a chain of homogeneous momentary existences which 
by the Hinayanist is reckoned as a special) condition. 5 He says, 

IX. If (separate) elements do not exist, 

Nor is it possible for them to disappear. 

There is no moment which immediately precedes. 
And if it disappears, how can it be a cause? 

1 Lit., p. 84.9-10. «This also is impossible, (because it is stated in the aphorism) — ((with¬ 
out an object really... etc (an existing element is taught (in the system)». Indeed the non-existing has 
no combination with the object». 

2 Lit., p. 85. 4. «The word atha for a question. Why? — for the reason». 

3 alatnbanaka. 4 adosa. 

5 This condition corresponds roughly to the samavayi-karana of the Nyaya-Vaise§ika, 
it represents the upadana, the substratum of every appearing element. In the realistic systems 
the causa materialis is the continuant substance in the new production. But all Buddhists deny 


appendix: candi;aki rti’s comment on relativity, i 175 

The 1 definition of the immediately preceding (homogeneous) condition 86. 4. 
is here (in the Hinayana) the following one. The immediately preceding 
destruction of the (material) cause is a condition of the production of the 
result. The following must be considered. When (in a monistic system) all 
entities, 2 all (supposed) results, (are viewed) as non-produced, 3 as e. g., 
a sprout (is not considered as a new origination), 4 then (it is clear that from 
this standpoint) the disappearance of the cause, the seed (in its last moment), 
is impossible. In this case, there is no disappearance of the (material) 
cause, and therefore how can there be (a moment representing) the im¬ 
mediately preceding condition for the production of the sprout? 

But (the Hinayanist) maintains that (all existence being a chain of 86. 7. 
discrete moments) the disappearance of the seed must have happened before 
the result has appeared. However if the seed is destroyed, converted into 
non-existence, what is then (supposed to represent) a cause of the sprout? 

Or what is the cause that has destroyed the seed? Both are without a 
cause. (This is expressed in the words), 

And if it disappears, how can it be a cause? 

The word «and» refers to a non-produced (sprout). 5 Indeed, since it is as- 86. 9 . 
sumed that the sprout is not yet produced at (the moment) when the 
seed has already disappeared, both these events (the disappearing of the seed 
and the appearing of the sprout) are without a cause. For this reason an immedi¬ 
ately foregoing separate momentary (existence as a cause) is an impossibility. 

Another explanation of this verse is the following one. 86. io. 

(In the first aphorism of this treatise, viz.— 

There absolutely are no things, 

Nowhere and none, that arise anew), 

the existence of continuant substances and reduce them to chains of discrete moments, every 
preceding moment representing the upadana of the following one. The preceding moment 
is supposed to have vanished when the next one appears. 

1 Precedes a grammatical explanation. Lit., p. 86.1-3. « Here, in the. last half of the verse, 
the quarters must be transposed. Moreover the word «and» is at the wrong place, it should 
stand after the word niruddhe. The reading will then be, «if it has disappeared, how is it a 
cause? Therefore «the foregoing)) is not admissible)). It has been thus expressed for the sake of 
versification ». 

2 dharma. 3 i. e. existing sub specie aeternitotis 

4 but as a mode of the unique substance (tathdtd = dharmakdya) of the Universe. 

5 It is the habit of Indian commentaries to interpret the particle «and» as an indication 
of some additional circumstance. 


170 NIRVANA 

Neither out of themselves, nor out of non-self, 

Nor out of both, nor at random, 

(the notion) of «origination)) has been cleared away (altogether). 

(The present aphorism simply) refers to that (general denial and 
draws the consequence that —) 

If (separate) elements never appear, 

Nor is it possible for them to disappear. 

There is no moment which immediately precedes . 1 

86 . 14. As to the explanation (of the last sentence of the aphorism, viz.) 

And if it disappears, how can it be a cause? 
it remains then just the same as before. 

XLVI1I. The special cause also denied. 

so. 17. (Nagarjuna) now goes on to deny the existence of a predominant 

condition 2 and says, 

X. If entities are relative , 3 

They have no real existence. 

The formula «this being, that appears» 

Then loses every meaning. 

87. i. The definition of the predominant condition 4 is here in (Hlnay ana) the follow¬ 

ing one. A predominant condition is that(special) fact which beingpresent the re- 

1 i. e., there is no momentary existence which immediately disappears in order to make 
room for the next moment 

2 This variety of causation is probably the precursor of the nimitta-karana , asadhdrana- 
karana, sadhakatama karana or karana of the Nyaya-Vaise?ika. The eye, t. g., is the adhi- 
pati-pratyaya of a visual sensation. But it cannot be identified with our causa effieiens 
because such a conception has, strictly speaking, no place in the Buddhist system. Causation 
in the world-process is imagined as quite impersonal, the separate bits of reality are following 
oue another automatically. Karma itself is a separate element, it is not personal in theory. All 
results are therefore automatical, the natural outflow ( nisyanda-phala) of conditions. Some 
results are very characteristically called « anthropomorphic » [purusa-kara-phala — purusena 
iva Jcrta), they are also conceived as automatical, but only appearing as though they were 
produced by a conscious will. Cf. Ab. Kosa, II. 5G ff. 

3 nihsvabhava — sunya. 

4 adhipati-pra tyaya. 


appendix: candrakIetis comment on RELATIVITY, I 


177 


suit (inevitably) appears. But since all separate entities 1 (from the Monist’s 
point of view) have only a relative origination 2 and no real (independent) 
existence, 3 the (definition of causation expressed in the words «this being, 
that appea,rs» then loses every meaning). What is indeed the meaning of the 
word «this» which is supposed to point to a cause, and what the meaning of 
the word «that» which is supposed to point to its result? It is true, a defi¬ 
nition is given, but Causality is not thereby established. 4 

(The Hlnayanist) makes the following objection. After having observed 87. 4. 
that a piece of cloth is produced out of threads, we conclude that the 
existence of threads etc. is a necessary condition for the existence of a piece 
of cloth. 

We answer. (From the standpoint of transcendental reality) it is just 87. 5. 
the production of such separate results as cloth etc. that is ultimately 5 
denied. How can we then admit that their supposed conditions are really 
causes? That the production of such results as cloth etc. is (ultimately) 
unreal, this Nagarjuna makes clear in the following words, 

XI. Neither singly in anyone of these conditions, 87 . 7.’ 

Nor together in all of them 
Does the (supposed) result reside. 

How can you out of them extract, 

What in them never did exist? 

The cloth, indeed, does not exist neither in the threads, nor in the 87. 9. 
weavers brush, nor in his loom, nor in the shuttle, nor in the pins or other 
causes taken singly. We do not perceive in them (any cloth). Moreover 
from a plurality of causes a plurality of effects would be expected. And 
since the cloth does not exist in any one of its parts taken singly, it 
neither does exist in all of them, in the threads etc., taken together. 

(If we would admit that every single cause contributes its part to the 87. n. 
general result), we would be obliged to admit that one result is produced 

1 bhavdndm. 

2 praiitya-samutpannatva = Sunyaid. 

3 svabhdva-abhdva -= Sunyata. 

4 Lit., p. 87. 1-3. « Since there is non-existence of self-existence of the entities because 
of their Dependently-together-origination, wherefrom that which is pointed to by «this» as a 
cause, wherefrom that which is pointed to by «tbat» a9 a result? Therefore, albeit from a 
definition, there is no establishment of conditions*. 

,-varupatah. 


12 


87. 11. 

87. 13. 


88 . 3 . 


88 . 5 . 


88 . 6 . 
88 . 7 . 

88 . 9 . 

88 . 10 . 


1/8 NIRVANA 

piece-weal. Therefore since there are really no results, neither can the 
existence of causes as separate entities 1 he admitted. 

XII. Supposing from these causes does appear 
What never did existinthem. 

This is what (the Hlnayanist) maintains. 

Out of non-causes then 
W T hy does it not appear? 

The result does not preexist in those things which (admittedly) are 
not its causes. (And we have seen that it neither does preexist in those 
things which admittedly are its causes). Why then is a piece of cloth never 
produced out of straw and other things which admittedly are not its causes? 
From the standpoint of ultimate reality 2 we then deny the production of 
results altogether. 

(The Hlnayanist) makes here the following objection. If the result were 
really one thing and its causes something separate, then we would under¬ 
stand your solicitude about the question whether the result preexists in the 
causes (or not)? But the result is not something outside its causes. On the 
contrary, it includes them in itself, (the presence of the whole complex of 
all the causes of a given event is equivalent to the production of the latter). 
(Nagarjuna) says, 

XIII. The result a cause - possessor, 

But causes not even self-possessors. 

How can result be cause-possessor, 

If of non-self-possessors it be a result. 

You maintain that there is a possessive relation between a result and 
its causes, i. e., that the result is simply a modification 3 of its causes. This 
is wrong, because these (supposed) causes do not possess their own selves, 
i. e., they are no real causes. 4 

It is asserted that a piece of cloth consists of threads. The cloth then could 
be (a reality) if the threads themseves had ultimate reality. 5 But they 

1 svabJidvatah. 2 svarupatah — tattvatah. 

3 pratyaya-vikdrah. 4 apratyaya-svabhdvah. 

5 svabhava-siddlia. 


appendix: candrakIrtfs comment on relativity, i 179 

consist of parts. 1 They are themselves modifications of their own parts, they 
are no ultimate realities. 2 Therefore what is the use of maintaining that the 
result designated as a cloth consists of threads, when these threads themselves 
are no ultimate realities, 3 they are not «self possessors)). 4 This has been 
expressed (in the following aphorism), 

Cloth is existent in its threads, 

The threads again in something else. 

How cau these threads, unreal themselves, 

Produce reality in something else? 5 

XIY. There is therefore no cause-possessor, so. 

Nor is there a result without a cause. 

Nor causes are there, nor non-causes, 

If (altogether) no results. 

Therefore there is no cause-possessing result. Then perhaps there may 89. 
be a result without causes? No, there is no result outside its (material) 
cause. If the (reality) of a piece of cloth is not (sufficiently explained by) the 
reality of its component threads, this does not mean that it will be ex¬ 
plained any better by the reality <>f the straw (of which mats are made). 6 

(The Hlnayanist) objects. Let us admit (for the sake of argument) 89. 
that there are no results (i. e., no production and no preexistence of sup¬ 
posed results)! 7 There is however a regularity 8 (in the phenomenal world 

1 amSumnya, possessing particles or filaments. 2 asvabhava-siddha. 

3 aswzbhava. 4 asvayatnmaya. 

5 This is against the Vaise§ika view that the reality of the whole is conditioned by the 
reality of the parts in which the whole is supposed to inhere, the atoms being the ultimate, 
eternal reality. For the Madhyamikas atoms will be relative realities, constructed realities 
(samvrti ). For the identification of this stanza cf. M. de la V. P.’s note in his ed. 

6 Lit., p. 89.9. «If there is no cloth consisting of threads how can there be one con¬ 
sisting of tara»a-straw»? 

7 The theory of ■ the non existence or the non-pre-existence of the result in its causes 
(ma bhut phalam = asat-phulam — asat-karyam) is also admitted by the Vaise§ikas, but they 
admit a new creation (arambha) of the results by the causes. The illnayauists have substituted 
for & notion of efficient causality (utpadn) a notion of coordination (pratitya-samutpada) and 
converted efficient causes (hetu, karana), into conditions or coordinates (pratyaya). At the same 
time they have here converted every entity, every durable object, into a series of discrete mo¬ 
mentary existences following one anoiher with strict regularity. They have thus replaced cau¬ 
sality by a regularity or uniformity in nature (pratyaya-niyama). The Mahayanist rejects 
this theory from the standpoint of absolute reality, but this does not prevent him to accept 
the realistic view for phenomenal reality, cp. above p. 163. 

* niyama. 


12* 


180 


NIRVANA 


according to which some facts appear asj coordinated and others are not so 
coordinated. You yourself admit it. Indeed you ask us the following ques¬ 
tion: if there are no results (produced by causes and if all existence con¬ 
sists of discrete moments following one another) why is it that (certain 
facts) appear only after those with which they are (serially) coordinated, 
why is it that they do not appear with the same evidence 1 after facts with 
which they are not (serially) coordinated? (By putting this question you 
implicitly admit a strict regularity in the phenomenal world). If the (sup¬ 
posed) results, called a cloth or a mat, were not existent, their coordinates, 
tlie threads and the straw, would never have been called causes. In this 
sense we (the Hlnayanists) maintain the reality of results. 2 

89. 13 . We answer. There would have been a (real) result, if conditions and 

non-conditions themselves(really)existed. We would then distinguish that, given 
a certain result, such and such facts are its conditions, such and such facts 
are not its conditions. But if we critically examine 3 these (conceptions, they 
reveal themselves) as non real. Therefore, 

No causes are there, no non-causes, 

Since (altogether) no result. 4 

Thus we couclude that there is no coordination 5 among separate 
entities, when considered from the transcendental point of view. 0 

90 . 3. Accordingly it is stated in the Arva-Ratnakara-sutra, 7 

90 . 4 . Where the adept of Relativity 8 himself is lost, 

What (vanishes) like a bird’s flight in air, 

What independently nowhere exists, 

Will never be a cause producing something! 

1 abhipravartate — abhimukham pravartate. 

‘ Lit., p. 89. 10-12. «Here he says, let there be no result, but there is a regularity of 
conditions and non-conditions. Accordingly you say «if a non-existent result appears after its 
conditions, after its non-conditions also why does it not evidently appear » ? And if the result 
called cloth or mat does not exist, the conditionality of the conditions, of the threads or the 
straw, is impossible)). 

3 vicaryamana. 

4 Lit., p. 90.1. «Cau8es and non-causes is a ( dvandva ) compound)). 

5 samulpatti =pratitya-samutpdda. The first chapter thus winds up with a rejection of 
the Hlnayanistic pratitya-samutpdda. 

G svabhdvatah = tattvatah. 

7 Cp. L. Feer, Index du Kandjour, p. 248. 

$ siinya-vid. cp. Tib. 


APPENDIX! CANDRAKlRTI’S comment ON RELATIVITY, I 181 

What independently at all does not exist, oo. 6 . 

How can it have a cause , 1 without itself existing. 

Without itself existing, how can it be efficient ? 2 
Such is Causality as taught by Buddha. 

All (supposed) forces 3 are (like) mountains , 4 90. s. 

They are (immovable) and firmly seated, 

Not changing, never suffering, (ever) quiescent 
Unconscious 5 are they like aerial Space. 

Just as a mountain can be never shaken 90. io. 

So Liotionless are all the elements 0 (of nature). 

They never go and never come! 

Thus (should we understand) these elements 
Revealed by the Victorious (Buddha) 

And moreover, 91. 1. 

This one Reality (eternal ) 7 

Has been revealed by the Victorious (Buddha), 

The lion of this mankind: 

It is not born, it does not live , 3 
It does not die, does not decay. 

And merged 9 in it are all the beings! 

If something has no essence in itself, 91. 6 . 

How can it then receive an essence from without ? 10 

1 para-paccayah, possibly as bahuvrlhi. 

2 Lit. «give birth to something else». 

3 sarva-dharma = sarve samskardh , the totality of all the active elements of existence 

4 or « motionless », acala. 

5 ajanaka Tib. ses-pa-med-pa does not mean that dharma-kaya is an unconscious ma¬ 
terialistic principle, but that no individual things are cognized, since they are lost in the all-em¬ 
bracing whole, cp. 185 n. 3. 

6 dharma. 

7 dharma evidently in the sense of dharma~kdya = dharmatd — tathdtd. But the mean¬ 
ing of dharma «the doctrine of Buddha» is also suggested. 

* upapadyt, here probably in the sense of sthita as a member of the series utpddo , 
sthiti, jara , anityata. 

9 niveSayi — Tib. bkod-pa = aamniveHa « arrangement)), i. e.. the whole is an arrangement 
of parts, the parts disappear in the whole. 

10 para-bhdvatu. 


182 


NIRVANA 


There are, therefore, no things internal, 

There also are no things external. 

But everywhere is present our Lord. 1 

91 . 6. This (absolute) condition 2 of Quiescence 

(Where every individual disappears), 

Has been revealed by the real Buddha. s 
There is in it no (individual) life whatever. 

There you will stroll 4 from birth delivered! 

You will then be yourself the Saviour, 

And you will save the hosts of living beings! 

There is no other Path discernable whatever. 

There you will live, from birth 5 delivered, 

And free yourself, deliver many beings! 
etc. 

Finished the ((Examination of Causality» the first chapter of the «Clear 
worded» Comment upon Relativity, the work of the venerable Master Can- 
draklrti. 

1 Lit.. 91. 4-5. « With whom some self-existence is not found, through something it is not 
reached as other-existence, it is not being reached neither from within, nor from without, in it is 
the Lord inherent». natha — dharma-ldya ; nivelayi in the same sense as in 91.2. 

2 The term yati signifying the six kinds of worldly existence is here applied to Nirvana 
which is not a gati, but the ultimate aim of all gatis. 

3 The term su-gata is here evidently being interpreted as the man who has entered the 
« best yati», i. e., who is lost in the Absolute. 

4 voharasl is here also used pointedly for a condition which is the negation of vya- 
xahara . hut. at the same time the ultimate aim of all vyavahdra. 

5 gati. 


CHAPTER XXV 


EXAMINATION OF NIRVANA 


I. The HInayanistic Nirvana rejected. 


On this (subject Nagarjuna) says, f>m 

I. If everything is relative, 1 

No (real) origination, no (real) annihilation, 

How is Nirvana then conceived? 

Through what deliverance. 2 through what annihilation? 3 

With regard to this point the Buddha has taught that personalities 4 
who have lived a pure life and have been initiated into Buddha’s religion, 5 
who have acquired a knowledge of (ontology, i. e.,) of the elements of 
existence as taught in that religion, 6 can attain a double kind of Nirvana, 
a Nirvana at lifetime, (being an annihilation) with some residual substratum, 
and a (final) Nirvana, (being an annihilation) without any residue. 

(The first) of them is conceived as something attainable by a complete 519 
deliverance 7 from the whole catalogue of the defiling elements, 8 e. g., the 
illusion (of personal identity), 9 desires 10 etc. etc. A substratum is what 
underlies (all these defiling agencies), it is (the inveterate instinct^ of cheris- 


1 Sunya. 2 prahana. 

2 nirodha. 4 pudgala. 

1 tathdgata-Sdsana-pratipanna. 

6 dharma-anu-dharma-pratipatti-yukta] noteworthy the use of the term dharma in its 

two chief significations side by side, the first dharma refers to the doctrine, or religion, the 

second to the 75 elements of existence, or ontology. 

7 prahana. * kle$a-gana. 

9 avidya. 10 rdgadi. 


184 


nirvana 


I 


appendix: candrakTrti\s comment on relativity, xxv 185 


liing one’s own life. 1 The word «residual substratum)) thus refers to that foun¬ 
dation of our belief in personal identity 2 which is represented by the ultimate 
elements of our mundane existence, 3 which are systematized in five different 
groups. A residue is what is left. A substratum is left (in a partial Nirvana). 
It exists with a residual substratum, hence its name. 

519 . li. "What is the thing (in which there still is a residue of personal ieeling)? 

It is Nirvana. It is a residue consistiug of the pure elements 4 of existence 
alone, delivered from the illusion of an abiding personality 5 and other 
stealthy defilers. 0 a state comparable to that of a town in which all criminal 
gangs have been executed. This is a Nirvana at lifetime with some residue 
(of personal feeling). 

520 . i. A Nirvana in which even these purified elements themselves are absent is 

termed (final Nirvana), a Nirvana without any residue (of personal feeling), 
because of the idea that here 7 the residue (of personal feeling) is gone, (it is 
impersonal). It is a state comparable to that of a destroyed town, a town 
which, after all the criminal gangs have been executed, has been itself also 
annihilated. It has been said about this (Nirvana), 

520. 4 . The body has collapsed, 

Ideas 8 gone, all feelings vanished. 

All energies 9 quiescent. 

And consciousness 10 (itself) extinct. 

520 . 6. And likewise, 

With his body still at life, 

(The Saint) enjoys some feeling, 

1 dtma-sneha. 2 dtma-prajnapti. 

3 updddna-skandhdh — sasrava-dharmdh, the elements of mundane existence as contrasted 
with the elements composing the Saint and the Buddha; skandha can be translated as « element» 
and as agroup of elements)) because three skandhas ( vedana , samjnd, vijndna ) contain one dharma 
each, rupa-skandha contains 10 dharmas , and samskdra-skandha the remaining 59 ones, except 
the eternal ones asamskrta, not included in this classification at all; skandha is also a group in the 
sense of containing past, present future etc. dharmas , cf. my Central Conception, p. 6. 

4 skandha-mdtraka = anasrava-dharmah. 

5 sat-kdya-drsti. 6 klesa-taskara. 

7 nir-upadhi-Sesa is thus an adhikarana-sddhana madhyanva-pada-lopin composite word 
implying that when all the elements of life are gone there still remains something lifeless t« 
what there has formerly been life, cp. below p. 525. 6. 

* hdu-Ses = sarnjnd. 9 hdu-byed — samska.ro. 

1° mam-par-§es-pa — vijndna . 


But in Nirvana consciousness 1 is gone, 2 
Just as a light (when totally extinct). 

This (lifeless) Nirvana, whit-out any residue, is attained through an 
extinction of all elements of life. 3 

(The Mahayanist). Now. how are we to understand the possibility of 520. 10 
this double Nirvana? 

(The Hlnayanist). (Nirvana is only possible) through the annhilation 
of desires 4 and all (active) elements (producing life). 5 If everything is rela¬ 
tive, 0 if nothing (really) originates, nothing (really) disappears, where is the 
source of illusion and desires, 7 where all the elements 8 which must vanish, in 
order that Nirvana should take place ? It is therefore clear that (separate) 
entities must really exist 9 (in order that something should really vanish). 

1 cetah = vijndna-skandha. 

2 vimoksah — nivrttih, cp. p. 525. 7. 

3 skandhdnam nirodhdt. These two Nirvanas are well known in European science since 
the time of Childers. Of them only the second is the real and final Nirvana, it is defined by 
Childers, according to the Pali school, as annihilation of all the skandhas. But the classification 
of existence as skandhas does not include nirodlia or asamskrta-dharma. The Sarvastivadins and 
Vaibhasikas, as we have seen, assume this nirodha to represent a separate reality — satya , 
vastu, dharma , it is a lifeless dharma-svabhdva as contrasted with the living dharma-laksana = 
samskdrdh. The Mahayanist, from his higher, monistic point of view, brushes both these 
Nirvanas aside. But there cannot be the slightest doubt that Nagarjuna accepts their contin¬ 
gent reality. He thus has three Nirvanas. The first represents the world sub specie aeternitatis, 
it is defined below, XXV. 9. The second is the condition of the Mahayanistic Saint, the arya, the 
bodhisattva. The third corresponds to his disappearance in final Nirvana. The first alone is ulti¬ 
mately real, the two others are immanent in it, they are not separately (svabhdvatah) real. To 
these three Nirvanas the Yogacaras have added a fourth one, called by them apratistlrita- 
nirvana « altruistic » Nirvana, it represents the pure condition of their eternal Conscious Principle, 
that principle which they have inherited from the Sautrantikas and the latter from earlier schools 
with similar theistic tendencies, the Vatslputrlyas and the MahUsanghikas, cp. above p. 30 and 
J. Masuda, Der Idealismus der Yogacara Schule,p.52 ff. (Heidelberg, 1926) According to conse¬ 
quent Mahayanism this fourth Nirvana should be also regarded as merely an aspect of the first, 
but this question appears never to have been finally decided, at least among some of the fol¬ 
lowers of that school. It is a moot point among the Tibetans, even now, whether the Absolute 
of an author like Dharmaklrti represents a Conscious Principle (Ses-pa) or Impersonal 
Eternity (rtag-pa). According to the early Yogacaras the dharma-kdya is divided into svabhdva- 
kdya ( no-bo-did-sku ) and jiidna-kdya ( je-Ses-kyi-sJcu ), the first is the motionless ( nitya ) sub¬ 
stance of the Universe, the second is anitya , i. e., changing, living. 

4 Mesa. 5 skandha. 

6 sunya. 7 kleSdh = avidyd-trsne. 

s skandhdh. 

skandhdnam = sarnskrta-dharmandm = samskdrdndm. 

9 bhavanam svabhdvah, «non relative, absolute existence*). 


1 


521. 1. 


521. 4. 


521. 8. 


521. 10. 


521. 12. 


186 NIRVANA 

To this the following aphorism is an answer, 

II. Should everything be absolutely real, 1 
No (real) creation, no (real) destruction. 

How is Nirvana then conceived? 

Through what deliverance, through what annihilation ? 

If the defiling elements, 2 or all the elements in general, 3 are indepen¬ 
dent entities, existing in themselves, 4 since it is impossible for them to be 
deprived of their own reality, how can they be annihilated, in order that 
through this annihilation Nirvana should be reached? Therefore Nirvana is 
equally impossible from the standpoint of the Realists. 5 But the Rela¬ 
tivists 0 do nut admit a Nirvana consisting in annihilation of all elements 
in general, nor do they admit a (partial Nirvana) consisting in an anihilation 
of the defiling elements alone. Therefore they are not responsible for the 
just mentioned incongruity. 7 The Relativists, in consequence, can never be 
accused (of assuming a kmd of Nirvana which is logically impossible). 

II. The Mahayanistic Nirvana, what? 

If, to be sure, the Relativists admit neither a Nirvana consisting in the 
extinction of illusion and desire, 8 nor a Nirvana consisting in the extinction 
of all elements of life, what is then their idea of Nirvana? (The following 
aphorism) gives the answer, 

III. What neither is released, nor is it ever reached, 

What neither is annihilation, nor is it eternality, 

What never disappears, nor has it been created, 

This is Nirvana (World’s Unity, the Unexpressible). 

That (undefinable essence) which can neither be extinguished, as e. g., 
a desire, nor can it be attained, as e. g., a reward for renunciation; which 
neither can be annihilated, as e. g., all the (active) elements of our life, 9 nor 

1 aSunya. 2 kleSa. 

3 skandha. * svabhavenavyavasthita. 

■’ svabhdva-vadin. 6 sunyala-vadin. 

7 tesam ayam adotali. * kleSa = avidyd-trsne. 

skandhddhat. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKlRTl’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 187 

is it everlasting, 1 as a non-relative 2 (absolute principle); which cannot 
really 3 disappear, nor can it be created; (that something) which consists in 
the Quiescence 4 of all Plurality, 5 that is Nirvana. 

Now, if the Universe is really such (a Unity), if it is no Plurality, 6 521 . 14 . 
how is it then that our imagination has built up defilers 7 (i. e., an illusion 
of personal identity and desires) through a suppression of which Nirvana is 
supposed to be attained? Or how is it that our imagination has built up sepa¬ 
rate elements through the annihilation of which Nirvana reveals itself? 

As long as these constructions of our imagination 8 exist, Nirvana cannot be 
reached, since it is reached just through a suppression of all Plurality. 

(The Hlnayanist objects). Be that as the case may be, let us admit 522 . 3 . 
that neither the defiling elements, nor the elements in general exist when 
Nirvana is reached.. However they must exist on this side of Nirvana, (i. e., 
before Nirvana is reached). In that case Nirvana will be possible through 
their total annihilation. 

We answer. You are haunted 9 (by illusion), get rid of it! 522. 4. 

For a (real Ens) which exists as an independent entity 10 can never be 
converted into a non-entity. Therefore those who are really desirous to attain 
Nirvana must first of all get rid (of this imagined Plurality). Indeed (Nagar- 
juna himself) will state (that there is no line of demarcation, with the Pheno¬ 
menal world on this side and the Absolute on the other), 

Where is the limit of Nirvana, 

’T is also there the limit of Samsara, 

There is between (no line of demarcation), 

No slightest shade of difference (between them). 11 

Thus it should be realized that nothing is really suppressed in Nirvana, 
and nothing really annihilated. Nirvana consists merely in the suppression 

1 Sdsvata « beginningless ». 

2 aSunyavat , as the svalaksaua of the Yogacaras, the Nirvana of the Hlnayanists, the 
pradhana of the Sankhyas etc. etc. They are all asunya in that sense that their adepts suppose 
them to be absolute, non-relative. 

3 svnbhavatah. 4 upasama. 

5 sarva-prapaiicu. 0 nisprapanca. 

7 kksa-kcdpand. * kalpanah. 

[i grdlia. 10 svabhdvato vidyarndna. 

»» XXV. 20. 



188 


nirvana 


of absolutely all the (false) constructions of our imagination. This has been 
stated by the Buddha himself (in the following words), 

522. 11. Real ultimate elements 1 can never be annihilated, 

The things that in this world do not exist. 

They never did at alL exist. 

Those who imagine existence along w r ith non-existence 
Will never realize phenomenal 2 (Plurality's) Quiescence. 

522 . 15. The meaning of this stanza is the following one. In the Absolute, 3 i. e., 

in that principle which is final Nirvana 4 without any residue (of phenomenal 
life altogether), all elements of existence have vanished, because (all of them), 
whether they be called defilers, 5 or the creative power of life, 6 or individual 
existences, 7 or groups of elements, they have all totally vanished. This all systems 
of philosophy 8 admit, (i. e., that the Absolute is a negation of the Plenomenal). 

523. l. Now, these elements which do not exist there, in the Absolute, they 
really do not exist at all; they are like that kind of terror which is expe¬ 
rienced when, in the dark, a rope is mistaken for a snake and which dissipates 
as soon as a light (is brought in). These elements (of our life), called illusion 
and desire, their creative force and the (consequent) individual lives, 9 have no 
real existence in the absolute sense, 10 even at any time in the phenomenal 
condition of life. 11 Indeed, the rope which in the dark has been mistaken for 
the serpent, is not really in itself a serpent, since it is not apprehended by 
sight and touch, whether in the light or in the darkness, (as a real serpent 
would necessarily be). 

How is it then that it is called phenomenal reality? 12 

523 . 5 . We answer. Obsessed by the unreal devil of their «Ego» and their «Mine» 

the obtuse men and common worldlings imagine that they really perceive 
separate entities which in reality do not exist, just as the ophtalmic sees 
Before himself hair, flies and other (objects which never did exist). It has 
therefore been said, 

523 . 9 . Those who imagine existence aloug with non-existence 

Will never realize phenomenal Pluraty’s Quiescence. 

1 dharmdh. - duhkha — samsdra, cp. p 523.13. 

3 nirvrtii. 4 nirvdna-dhdtu. 

5 klesa. fi karma. 

7 janma. % sarva-mdinah. 

9 kleSa-karma-janmadi . 10 tattvaiah. 

11 sarnsdra-avasthdydm. 12 samsdra. 


appendix: candrakIrtps comment on relativity, xxv 189 

Those who assert existence, (the Realists) who imagine that there is 523. 9. 
a real existence of (separate) entities , 1 are (the followers of) Jaimini, 
Kanada, Kapila and others up to the (realistic Buddhists), the Vai- 
bhasikas . 2 

Those who deny (future) existence are the Materialists 3 who are firmly 523 . 10 . 
rpotedin a destiny leading them to hell. The others are (the Sautrantikas) 
who deny the existence of the past and the future , 4 deny the existence of such a 
separate element as the moral character of the individual , 5 deny the existence 
of forces which are neither physical nor mental , 6 but admit the reality of all 
other separate elements. Or they are (the Yogacaras, the Idealists) who 
deny the existence of individual things so far as they represent logical con¬ 
structions of our thought , 7 but admit I. their contingent, reality so far they 
obey to causal laws , 6 and 2 . their final reality (so far they are merged into 
the universal Whole).’’ 

The phenomenal world , 10 or the phenomenal life , 11 will never reach final 523 . 12 . 
Quiescence neither for the Realists , 12 nor for the Negativists . 13 (nor for partial 
Realists). Indeed, 

A man, suspecting he has taken poison. 524. 1. 

Faints even when there is no poison in his stomach. 

Swayed by (the care) of Ego and of <.<Mine». 

Eternally lie comes and dies, 

Without real knowledge 14 ’bout this Ego . 15 

1 bhdva-sadbhdva-kalpandvantah. 

2 It is noteworthy that the Sautrantikas are uot mentioned among the Realists, it is 
just because they are half-realists. In addition to what has been said above, p. 29 ff., about the 
position of the Sautrantikas, it must be mentioned that Bodhidharma and many others cha¬ 
racterized this school as Mahayanistic because of its moral philosophy. But their opinion was 
rejected, since the founders of the two main schools of the Mahayana, i. e., Nagarjuna and 
Aryiisanga. did not share it (Cp. Lean - skya-hu-tuk - tu, Grub-mthah. trans. by 
M. Gorsky, Ms. Mus. As. Petr.). The total silence about Vedanta is also to be noted. 

3 ndstika, they deny retribution, moral responsibility, cp. p. 28. 

4 Cp. Central Concep-tion, p. 42. 

3 avijnapti to be corrected from vijhapti , p. 523.11, cp. ibid., p. 6, 7, 99. 

6 viprayukta-samskdra — rupa-citta-viptayukta-sumskdra, cp. ibid., p. 21. 

7 pari-kalpita-svabhava, cp. Tritnsika, p. 39, and above p. 33. 

8 paratantra, cp. ibid. 9 parinispanna , cp. ibid. 

10 duhkha =-panca-updddna-skandhdh. 

11 samsdra. 12 astimdin. 

13 ndstivddin. 

14 bday-der-hdiL-ies-yau-day — tad-dtma-samjhd. 

13 from the Tib. 


190 


Therefore it should be known, that nothing is suppressed in Nirvana 
and nothing annihilated. The essence of Nirvana consists merely in the 
extinction of all constructions of our productive imagination . 1 
Accordingly we find it stated in the Ratnavali . 2 

Nor is Nirvana non-existence. 

How can such an idea 3 come to you? 

We call Nirvana the cessation 

Of every thought of non-existence and existence. 


III. Nirvana not an Ens. 

The following aphorisms are directed against those who not being able 
to realize that Nirvana is simply the limit of all constructions (of our pro¬ 
ductive imagination) continue to imagine a kind of Nirvana which either 
represents reality or non-reality or both or neither. 

IV. Nirvana, first of all, is not a kind of Ens, 

It would then have decay and death. 

There altogether is no Ens 

Which is not subject to decay and death. 

There are indeed philosophers who have a preconceived idea 4 that 
Nirvana must be something positive. 5 The following is their line of argument. 
According to our system, 6 they say, there is a positive thing which represents 
a barrier, 7 a definite limit 8 for the existence of a stream 9 of defiling elements, 
creative actions and (consequent) existences. 10 It is comparable to a dam 
checking a stream of water. This is Nirvana. We know from experience 11 
that a thing 12 without having a reality of its own 13 could not be efficient 14 
in that way. 

(The Sautrantika objects). It has been declared that absolute indiffe- 

1 sarva-kalpand-ksaya. 

2 Ratnavali or Ratna-malika , a work ascribed to Nagarjuna. 

3 bhdva) id. 4 abhinivista. 

5 bhdva. 8 iha. 

7 nirodhatmakah padarthah. s niyata-rodha = nirodha — nirvana. 

9 mntdna. 10 lde&a- karma -janmo. 

11 drSyate. 12 dharma. 

IS vidyamdna-svabhdva. u Jcdrya-kdrvn. 


APPENDIX! CANDRAKlRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 191 

rence, 1 the extinction of desires which are associated with enjoying life, 2 that 
this kind of blank, 3 is Nirvana. What (in itself) is a mere Extinction 4 cannot 
be envisaged as (a kind of) Ens. 5 It has been just declared, 

But in Nirvana consciousness itself is gone. 

Just as a light (when totally extinct). 

To regard the extinction of the light of a lamp as a (kind) of Ens is 
logically impossible. 6 

(The Vaibhasika) answers. Your interpretation of the words «ex tine- 525 . 
tion of desire», as meaning «extinct desire» is wrong. (The right interpre¬ 
tation is the following one). «That thing in which desire is extiuct» (is called 
extinction of desire). It can then be asserted that when that ultimate entity 7 
which is called Nirvana is present, it means that every desire (and conscious¬ 
ness) are extinct (at final Nirvana). (The extinction) of the light of a lamp 
is a mere example. And even this example must be underwood (as an illu¬ 
stration of tfie idea) that consciousness is quite extinct s in something that 
(continues to) exist. 

Our Master (Nagarjuna) now examines (the consequences of the theory) 525 . 
which determines Nirvana, as a kind of existence. Nirvana is not a positive 
thing (he says). Why? Since it would follow that it must possess the charac¬ 
teristics of decay and death, because every existence is invariably connected 
with decay and death. He means, it would not then be Nirvana, (the Abso¬ 
lute), since like our life 9 it would be subject to decay and death. 

In order to make sure this very point, that every life is iuvariably 525 . 
connected 10 with the marks of decay and death, the Master says, «there is 
no existence without decay and death». Indeed, that thing which is without 
decay and death is not at all an Ens, it is a mirage, as e. g., flowers in 
the sky. They never decay and never die, (hence they do not exist). 

1 viraga. 

2 nandirdga-sahagatd trsna. 

3 nirodha. 

4 ksaya-matram. 

5 bhdva. 

6 nopapadyate. 

7 dharma. 

* vimoksa. 

9 vijhanddi = skandhdh. 

10 Read avyabhicaritdm. 


1S2 NIRVANA 

525. 18. Moreover, 

V. If Nirvana is Ens, 

It is produced by causes. 

Nowhere and none the entity exists 
Which would not be produced by causes. 

526. 3 . (Thesis). If Nirvana is (a kind) of Ens, it would then be produced from 
causes. 

(Reason). Because it is an Ens. 

(Example). Just as consciousness and the other (elements of our life). 

The contraposition 1 (of the major premise will result in the following 
sentence): What is not produced by causes does not exist, like the horns on 
the head of a donkey. Pointing to this the author says, 

Nowhere and none the entity is found 
Which would not be produced by causes. 

526. 6 . The word «nowhere » refers to location, the place or the time. It might 
be also taken (as referring to) a philosophic system. The word «none» refers 
to the located thing, whether it be an object of the external world or a 
mental phenomenon. 

526. s. Moreover, 

VI. If Nirvana is Ens 

How can it lack substratum? 

There whatsoever is no Ens 
Without any substratum. 

526.ii. If, in your opinion. Nirvana is a positive entity, it must repose on a 
substratum, it must have a root in the totality of its own causes. 
But such a definitely located 2 Nirvana is accepted by nobody. On the con¬ 
trary, Nirvana (is the Absolute), it does not repose on any substratum. 
Therefore, if Nirvana is an Ens, how can it be an Ens without any 
substratum? Indeed, 

526. 13. (Thesis). (Nirvana) cannot exist without substratum. 

(Reason). Because it is an Ens. 


vyatireka. 


2 upadaya. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 193 

(Example). Just as consciousness and other (elements of existence). 

The contraposition of the major premise is further adduced as a reason, 

There whatsoever is no Ens 
Without any substratum. 

IV. Nirvana is not a non-Ens. 

(The Sautrantika) nowsuggests. If Nirvana is not an Ens, because of 527. 1. 
the incogruity 1 which has been elicited, it must be a non-Ens, since it con¬ 
sists merely in the fact that the defiling elements and (their consequence), 
the individual existences, are stopped. We answer. This is also impossible, 
because (the following has been declared), 

VII. If Nirvana is not an Ens, 

Will it then be a non-Ens? 

Wherever there is absence of an Ens, 

There neither is a non-Ens. 

If it is not admitted that Nirvana is an Ens, if (the thesis) «Nirvana 527. 5. 
is an Ens» is rejected, then perhaps Nirvana might be a non-Ens? (The 
author’s) idea is that it neither can be a non-Ens. 

If it be maintained that Nirvana is the absence of defiling elements and 
individual existences (produced by them), 2 then (it would result) that the 
impermanence of these defiling elements and personal existences is Nirvana. 

Indeed, the cessation of these defiling agencies and the end of personal exi¬ 
stences (can be envisaged as) nothing but their own character of imperma¬ 
nence. (They always have an end). Thus it will follow that impermanence 
is Nirvana. And this cannot be admitted, since in that case (Final Deliverance) 
will be attained automatically, 3 (the teaching of a Path towards Salvation, 
would be useless). Hence this is quite inadmissible! 

Moreover, 527. 10. 

VIII. Now, if Nirvana is a non-Ens, 

How can it then be independent? 

1 dosa-prasanga. 

2 kJeSa-janmanor abhavah. 

3 ayatnena. 


13 


194 


NIRVANA 


For sure an independent non-Ens 
Is nowhere to be found. 

527. 13. A non-Ens, whether it be here the impermanence (or cessation of some¬ 

thing), is constructed in our thought (and expressed in speech ) 1 as (a characteri¬ 
stic) appertaining to some positive counterpart. 2 (Absolute non-existence indeed) 
is similar to the non-existence of horns on the head of a donkey It is not known 
to be impermanent. We imagine 3 a characterized thing as relative 4 to some 
characteristic, and (vice versa ) a characteristic as being relative to some¬ 
thing characterized. The work of characterization 5 being thus relational , 0 
what is impermanence (or cessation) without an entity characterized by 
it? Non-existence must therefore be imagined along with a counterpart . 7 
Therefore, if Nirvana is a non-Ens, how can it be an absolute 8 Nirvana? 

528. 3. (This argument might be formulated as follows), 

(Thesis). Nirvana can be a non-Ens only as relative to some positive 
counterpart. 

(Reason). Because it is a non-Ens. 

(Example). Just as the destruction (of a jar is relative to this jar). 

In order to make this clear it is added, 

For sure, an absolute 8 non-Ens 
Is nowhere to be found. 

528. 5. (An objection is raised). If indeed it is maintained that an absolute 
non-Ens is impossible, then, e. g., the negation of a son of a barren woman 
must also be related 9 to a positive counterpart (in the shape of a real 
son of a barren woman). 

528. 6 . (Answer) Who has established that the son of a barren woman etc. 
is a non-Ens? Just the contrary has been said above , 10 

If sometting is not settled as an Ens 
Neither can it be settled as a non-Ens. 

What people call a non-Ens 
Is nothing but a change in Ens. 

1 prajiiapyate. fi pa rn spar a - apelcsika. 

2 bhavam updddya. 7 updddya. 

3 prajiiapyate. s anupaddya. 

4 aSritya. ! ' updddya abhdvali. 

5 laksya-laksana-pravrtti. 10 XV. 5. 


appendix: candrakIrtus comment on relativity, xxv 195 


Thus the son of a barren woman is not (really) a non-Ens, (a nega- 528. 9. 
tion as something real). It has indeed been declared that, 

The empty space, the horns of asses, 

The sons of barren women 
Are spoken of as non-Ens. 

The same refers to all imagined Ens , 1 

But this should be understood as a mere denial of the possibility to ima- 528. 12. 
gine them as real, not as conceiving them as a negation, because positive 
(counterparts to which they could be related) do not exist. The «son of 
a barren woman» are mere words. They do not correspond to any reality 
which could be cognized, which could either be an Ens or a non-Ens. How 
can a thing whose concrete reality has never been experienced be imagined 
either as existing or as not existing , 2 Therefore it should be known that 
the son of a barren woman is not a real negation. Thus it is settled, there 
can be no non-Ens without a positive counterpart . 3 

V. Nirvana is this world viewed sub specie aeternitatis. 

It is now asked, if NirvSina is neither Ens nor is it non-Ens, what is 528 . 17. 
it indeed? We answer. The godlike Buddhas have made about this point 
the following declaration, 

IX. Coordinated here or caused 4 are (separate things), 

We call this -world phenomenal. 

But just the same is called Nirvana, 

When viewed without Causality, without Coordination. 

1 bhdvesu Tcalpana. 

2 Buddhist logic has established a very detailed and thorough theory of negation, where 
it is proved that every negative judgment is founded on a negative experience, on a pos¬ 
sible perception which has not happened ( anupalabdhi ), it is therefore always related to some 
positive substratum, cp. Nyayabindu, II. 26 IF. 

3 anupaddya, this kind of upadana is termed in the Nyaya system a pratiyogin. This 
realistic system admits absolute nou-existence (atyanta-abham) and relative non-existfnce 
(anyonya-abhdva). 

4 From the Buddhist point of view the terms pratltya « relative to a cause# and updddya 
«relative to a substratum# are equivalents. The realistic Vaisegika system imagines that the 
substratum ( upadana) is a cause ( samavdyi-karana ) really producing (arambhaka) the result. In 
Hinayana the real existence of a durable substratum, of a stuff or substance, is denied aud the 

13* 



196 


NIRVANA 

529. 3 . (The phenomenal world) is here the run of life, hither and thither, the 
come and go of life, the concatenation of births and deaths. This phenomenal 
world is imagined as existing in the sense that (its separate entities) are 
dependent upon a complex of causes and'conditions , 1 (they are relatively 
real) as, e. g., the long (is real) as far as there is something short (with 
which it is contrasted). Sometimes they are imagined as produced by causes, 
e. g. the light (is supposed to be produced) by the lamp, the sprout (is con¬ 
ceived as produced) by a seed etc. But in any case, whether it be only ima¬ 
gined as relatively coordinated, or whether they be considered as produced 
by causes, when the continuity of birth and death has ceased, when there 
are neither relations nor causality, this (same world as motionless and eter¬ 
nal) is then called Nirvana . 2 Now, the mere cessation (of aspect) can neither 
be considered as an Eus, nor as a non-Ens. Thus it is that Nirvana is nei¬ 
ther an Ens, nor a non-Ens. 

529. 9 . Another (interpretation of this aphorism is also possible; it 
would then intimate that the manner of conceiving Nirvana by the Hl- 
nayanists is much the same, although they aver that their Nirvana is 
an Ens) 

They indeed maintain (either, like the Sarvastivadins, that there is in 
the Universe no abiding central principle 3 at all, that the world-process consists) 

duration of an object is converted into an uninterrupted sequence of momentary flashes without 
any substratum, every preceding moment is the substratum ( upadana-bhuta) of every following 
one. Cause and effect are thus declared to be correlated concepts, just as the long is correlated 
with the short (dirgha-hrasva-vat), causation is replaced by coordination, and the causes con¬ 
verted into coordinates. Nagarjuna here says that whether we, with the Vaisegikas, imagine 
causation as a production of one thing by the other (pratitya), or wether we, with the Hlnayanists, 
imagine mere coordination (updddya), there nevertheless is a Whole (sv xai itiv) in which these 
causes and coordinates are merged. Otherwise, pratitya as a part of the term pratitya-samut- 
pada refers also to causation in the sense of coordination, it then is synonymous with updddya , 
but here both terms are contrasted from a special view-point. 

1 hetu-pratynya-samagri. Since among the Lotus we must include the karanu-hetu, cp. 
above p. 41 n. 6, the state of the whole Universe with respect to a given point-instant is inclu¬ 
ded in the totality of its causes and conditions. 

2 Lit., p. 529. 5-7. «In any case whether it be established that it is imagined prajfiap - 
yate) as coordinated {upadayn), or produced as caused (pratitya), in any case the non operation 
(apravrtti) of this duration of a lineage of births and deaths, whether as non-caused or as nou- 
coordinated, is established as the Nirvana ». The non-operation or cessation of an imagined con¬ 
struction (prajnapti — kalpana) i3 nothing but a change of aspect, Nirvana is thus the Universe 
sub specie aeternit atis. 

3 The anatman principle is an equivalent of samskdrah samsaranti, cp. my Central Concep¬ 
tion p. 25, 52 etc. 


appendix: candrakIrti’s comment on relativity, xxv 197 


in the evolution 1 of coordinated energies. 2 (They maintain that this world 
in which every momentary) origination and (every) destruction, obeys, in 
-every case, to causal laws, 3 when these causal laws have ceased to operate, 4 
when all energies are extinct, 5 is called Nirvana. 6 

Or they (like the Vatsiputrivas) maintain (that there is such a central 
principle, termed by them) «personality» 7 which migrates (out of one existence 
into an other). It escapes definition. 8 It neither is the eternal (Soul of 
the Brahmans), nor is it momentary 9 (like the energies of the Buddhists). 
(Phenomenal life consists) in its coming and going, 10 dependent every time 
upon a changing substratum 11 (of elements). It then evolves obeying to causal 
laws. 12 

This very (principle) which evolves on the basis of changing elements, 13 530. 
when the time comes 14 for it to assume no new substratum 15 and its evolution 
stopps, 16 is said (to have entered) Nirvana. 17 

1 samsaranti. 

2 sam-skarah — sambhuya-karinah. It would be incorrect to surmise that samskdra- 
skandha is alone meant, although the chief samskdra, karma or cctana, the elan vital, the 
biotic force which arranges the coordination of all other elements, is first of all meant. But redana 
aud samjiid are samskdras, and vijnana aud rupa are, accorlingto the rules of the 12 membered 
pratitya-samutpada, always included iu every life. From this whole passage it appears clearly 
that the Buddhist conception of samskdra and samskrtatva is but an other name for pratitya - 
samutpannatva, cp. ibid. p. 28. 

3 pratitya pratitya ya utpadaS ca. 

4 apra itya. 5 apravartamanah. 

6 This absolutely lifeless something representing the picture of the Universe in which all 
energies are extinct reminds us, to a certain extent, of the final condition of the Universe as re¬ 
presented by modern science according to the law of entropy, cp. above p. 26. 

7 pudgala. 8 avdcya,. 

n anitya. 10 djavamjavibhdva. 

11 tad tad upadanam aSritya. 

12 updddya pravartate—pratitya pravartate, sc. it obeys to the laws of causation or ct>- 
ordination. The theory of the Vatslputrlyas about an abiding personality (pudgala), 
which they nevertheless do not consider as a reality (dharma) or a Soul (atman), is exposed 
with detailed argumentation by Vasubandhu, Ab. Kosa, XI and above p. 31. n. 1. 

13 updddya updddya pravartamanah. 14 idanim. 

15 anupadaya. 

10 apravartamanah 

17 Lit., p. 529. 9 — 530.2. a Otherwise, those who have the tenet that the forces (sam- 
skarah) are migrating, for them it is said that in-every-case-coordinated origination and destruc¬ 
tion is Nirvana when going on without coordination. But for those for whom the personality 
(pudgala) is migrating, for them this (personality), being undefinable as to whether it is eternal 
or non-eternal, possesses a coming and going when reposing on different substratums, it is then 
going on upon a substratum; this very (personality) which is going on (pravartamana) upon 
•different substratums is now called Nirvaua when it no more is going on npon a snbstratum». 



198 


NIK VAN A 


Now, whether it be coordinated energies 1 alone, or (some central prin¬ 
ciple like the one called) «personality», 2 it is clear that the mere fact of 
their evolution being stopped can neither be characterized as an Ens, nor 
as a non-Ens. 3 

And further, 

X. The Buddha has declared 

That Ens and non-Ens should be both rejected. 
Neither as Ens nor as a non-Ens 
Nirvana therefore is conceived. 

On this point it is stated in Scripture, «0 Brethren, those who seek 
an escape out of this (phenomenal) existence in (a kind of new) existence 4 
or in annihilation 5 they have no true knowledges Both should be rejected, 
the craving for (eternal) life and the craving for (eternal) death. But this 
Nirvana (is the only thing) which the Buddha has characterized as the thing 
not to be rejected. On the contrary, (he has declared it to be the only thing) 
desirable. 6 But if Nirvana would have been (eternal) existence 7 or (eternal) 
death, 8 it also would have been rejectable. However it is not rejectable. 

Neither as Ens nor as a non-Ens 
Nirvana therefore is conceived. 

VI. Nirvana is not both Ens and non-Ens together. 

There are some (Vaibhasikas) who assume a double character in Nir¬ 
vana. It is a non-Ens so far it is the place in which the defiling elements 
and the elements of existence in general are extinct. But in istelf (this 
lifeless place) is an Ens. 9 The author now proceeds to state that such double 
Nirvana is impossible. 

1 sawskarah. 2 pudgala. 

3 This clearly is an answer to those Hlnayanists wh<j maintain that their Nirvana is am 

Ens (vastu, dharma). 

4 bhara. 5 vibhava. 

6 aprahatacya. 7 bhava. 

* ahhava. 

9 This is the Vaibhagika view about the reality of Nirvana with but a little change in- 

its formulation. It is here examined once more in order to fill up the schema of the quadri- 

lemma. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTI’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 199 


XI. If Nirvana were both Ens and non-Ens, 

Final Deliverance would be also both, 

Reality and unreality together. 

This never could be possible. 

If Nirvana had the double character of being both an Ens and a non- 531. 3 . 
Ens, then Final Deliverance would be both a reality and an uureality. 

It would then follow that the presence 1 of the energies 2 (of life) and 
their extinction, both represent Final Deliverance. However a Final Delive¬ 
rance (from phenomenal life) and the energies (of phenomenal life) cannot be 
the same . 3 Therefore, says the author, this is impossible. 

And further, 531. 6 . 

XII. If Nirvana were both Ens and non-Ens, 

Nirvana could not be uncaused. 

Indeed the Ens and the non-Ens 
Are both dependent on causation. 

If Nirvana would have the double character of au Ens ajid a non-Ens, 531. 9. 
it would be then dependent, it would be relative to the totality of its causes 
and conditions , 4 it would not be the Absolute . 5 Why? Because both these 
Ens and non-Ens are conditioned . 6 Considering that the Ens is the counter¬ 
part 7 of the non-Ens and (vice versa) the non-Ens is the counterpart of 
the Ens, both Ens and non-Ens 8 are necessarily dependent existences. They 
are not absolute . 9 (If Nirvana were not the absolute), it could then be 
(partly) an Ens and (partly) a non-Ens. But it is not so. Therefore this is 
impossible. 

1 atma-labha. 

2 samskara. 

3 Probably the Vaibhagika theory about the dharma-svabhava is here alluded to. Ac¬ 
cording to this theory some lifeless residue of the samskaras or dharmas remains in Nirvana, 
but there manifestation (dharma-laksana) is stopped for ever. We would then have in Nir¬ 
vana samskaras somehow existing and non-existing at the same time, cp. my Central Conception, 
pp. 42, 95. 

4 hetu-pratyaya-samagrxm upadaya... bhavnt. 

5 anupadaya (sat) = paramarthasat. 

0 upadaya — praiitya = sdpeksika — Sunya. 

1 upadaya — sdpeksika = sapratiyogitaka. 

* Read bhavaS cdbhdcaS ca. 

9 anupadaya - (sat) = paramarthasat. 


200 


NIRVANA 


5 Si. 13 . And farther, 

XIII. How can Nirvana represent 

An Ens and a non-Ens together. 

Nirvana is indeed uncaused, 1 

Both Ens and non-Ens are productions. 2 

532 . i. An Ens is caused, since it is produced by the totality of its causes and 
conditions. 3 A non-Ens is likewise caused, 4 since 1 . it arises as the counter¬ 
part 5 of an Ens, and 2. because it has been declared (in Scripture) that 
decay and death, are consequent upon a birth. 6 Thus if Nirvana were essen¬ 
tially an Ens or a non-Ens it could not be uncaused, it w r ould be necessarily 
caused. However it is not admitted to be caused. Therefore Nirvana cannot 
be both Ens and non-Ens together. 

532 . 5. Let it be so. Let Nirvana itself not be Ens and non-Ens together. 
Perhaps it may be the place where Ens and non-Ens are found together 
However this is also impossible. Why? Because, 

XIV. How can Nirvana represent 

(The place) of Ens and of non-Ens together? 

As light and darkness (in one spot) 

They cannot simultaneously be present. 

532 . 9 . Since Ens and non-Ens are mutually incompatible, they cannot possibly 

exist together in one place, in Nirvana. Therefore it is said, 

How can Nirvana represent 

(The place) of Ens and non-Ens together? 

(The interrogation) means that this is absolutely impossible. 

1 asamskrtam = na krtam. 

2 samskrta = krtaka. 

3 hetu-pratyaya-samagrx-sambhuta. 

4 samskrta. 

5 praiitya = upadaya — pratiyogin. 

6 This simple statement that non-existence is dependent upon previous existence is here 
given the form of a Scriptural evidence, because it corresponds to the two last members of the 
I 2-membered pratitya-samutpada, stating that death follows upon a birth. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKlRTI’S comment on RELATIVITY, XXV 201 

VII. Nor is Nirvana a negation of both Ens and non-Ens together. 

The author now proceeds (to consider the fourth part of the quadri- 532. 11. 
lemma, and) indicates (the incongruity) of assuming that Nirvana is a nega¬ 
tion of both Ens and non-Ens. He says, 

XV. If it were clear indeed 

What an Ens means and what a non-Ens, 

We could then understand the doctrine 
About Nirvana being neither Ens nor non-Ens. 

The judgment 1 that Nirvana is not an Ens would be possible, if (we 593. 1. 
knew) that there is a real Ens, then by its negation (Nirvana would be 
determined). If (we knew) that there is a real non-Ens, then by its nega¬ 
tion we would also understand what (the judgment means) that Nirvana is 
not an Ens. But since (we neither know) what an Ens nor a non-Ens really 
are, we can neither (understand) their negations . 2 Therefore (the result at 
which we are arrived, viz.) that Nirvana is neither an Ens nor a non-Ens, 
even this negative (result, cannot be accepted as logically) consistent . 3 This 
also must be rejected. 

And moreover, 533. 5. 

XVI. If Nirvana is neither Ens, nor is it non-Ens, 

Who can then really understand 
This doctrine which proclaims at once 
Negation of them both together. 

1 kolpand = yojana. 

2 From thi3 and the following aphorisms it results that the fourth part of the quadrilemma, 
viz. that Nirvana is neither Ens nor is it non-Ens, represents the solution favoured by the 
Madhyamika. Indeed since Ens (in aphorism IV.) and non-Ens (in aphorism VIII.) are con¬ 
ceived empirically, as referring to such entities which conform to causal laws, it is evident that 
transcendental or absolute existence which is contrasted with both these Ens and non-Ens, 
can be nothing but their simultaneous negation. Since this kind of reality cannot be expressed 
in terms of our language, since it is anirvdeya, the fourth part of the quadrilemma is likewise 
denied, but in terms which are altogether different from those used in denying the three first 
parts of the quadrilemma. This especially appears from the comment upon aphorism XVI. It is 
explicitly stated above, under aphorism IX, comment p. 530. 3, that both in the Hinayanistic 
and in the Mahayanistic conception Nirvana is neither an Ens nor a nou-Ens, since it is 
transcendental and unexpressible in terms of human language. 

8 nopapadyate. 


533 . 8. 


533 . 9 . 


533 . 10 . 


202 NIRVANA 

If it is imagined 1 that this Nirvana neither has the essence of a non- 
Ens, nor has it (the essence) of an Ens, where is the man (to understand this)? 
Who indeed can understand, who can grasp, who can proclaim the doctrine 
that Nirvana represents such a double negation? 

(But if there is nobody to understand this here, in this world), perhaps 
there, in Nirvana, someone exists who is capable) to realize 2 it? Or is this 
also impossible? If you admit it, you will be also obliged to admit the exi¬ 
stence of an (eternal) Soul 3 in Nirvana. But this you do not admit, since the 
existence of a Soul, (or consciousness) without any substratum , 4 (independent 
from causal laws) you do not admit. 

But if there is nobody (in the Nirvana-world, if Nirvana is altogether 
impersonal), by whom will it then be realized that there really is a Nirvana 
of such description? If it is answered that those who remain in the pheno¬ 
menal world 6 shall coguize it, we will ask, shall they cognize it empiri¬ 
cally 7 or metaphysically . 8 If you imagine that they will cognize Nirvana 
empirically, this is impossible. Why? Because empirical consciousness ap¬ 
prehends (separate) objects . 9 (But Nirvana is the whole). There are no sepa¬ 
rate objects in Nirvana. Therefore, first of all, it cannot be cognized by 

1 kalpyate. 

2 pratipaitd. 

3 dtman. 

4 nirupadana — asamslcrta — paramarthasat. 

5 samsdrinah—prthagjand aryaS ca. 

6 samsd r arasthil dh—prthagjand dr yds ca. 

7 vijnanena. 

* jnanena. vijnana as vijnana-skandha is contrasted in Hinayana with samjfta. The first 
means pure sensation, and even something still more primitive, potential sensation, since sensation is 
spar&a. Sainjnd, as we have seen above, text p. 65. 5. can be replaced by jnana. We have then a 
contrast between vijnana aud jnana, the first meaning undeveloped and the second—developed 
cognition. The relation between these two terms is here, to a certain extent, similar to what it is 
in the Bhavadgita, whereas the early Upani?ads make no difference between them, cp. Bph. 3. 
9. 2 8, Tait. 2. 5.1, 3. 5. I, Katha 3. 13, Tait. 2. 1. 1. In Buddhism, however, vijnana is not empi¬ 
rical cognition, but sensation, ind jnana , as is quite clear from the context, means transcenden¬ 
tal, or absolute knowledge, sarva-prapanca-atita. The Tibetans usually translate this kind of 
jnana not by their ordinary Ses-pa, but by ye-Ses, i. e. «highest knowledge*. Vijnana again, in 
this context, does not mean pure sensation, but empirical knowledge, knowledge founded upon 
pure sensation. 

9 The definition nimittalambana or nimittagrahin , or nimitta-udgrahanam is given to 
samjnd, and not to vijAana, whose definition is prativijAaptih, cp. my Central Conception, 
p. 16. But here this difference does not matter, since both vijnana aud samjnd are equally 
nimitta-grahin when contrasted with the transcendental or direct knowledge of the absolute; 
nimitta has here the meaning of «a mark», or «a particular object», nimitta-udgrahanam 
means abstraction, or synthesis. 


appendix: candrakIrti’s comment on relativity, xxv 203 

empirical consciousness. But neither can it be cognized by transcendental 
knowledge . 1 Why? Because transcendental knowledge should be a knowledge 533. 15, 
of universal Relativity . 2 This is (the absolute knowledge), which is essen¬ 
tially (eternal), beginningless . 3 How can this knowledge which is itself unde- 
finable 4 grasp (the definite judgment) «Nirvana is negation of both Ens and 
non-Ens». Indeed the essence 5 of absolute knowledge is such that it escapes 
every formulation . 6 

Therefore (the doctrine that) Nirvana is neither a non-Ens nor an Ens 
(at once) can he realized by no one. No one can realize it, no one can grasp 
it, no one can proclaim it, consequently it is (logically) impossible . 7 

VIII. The real Buddha, what? 

The author now proceeds to state that just as all the parts of the qua- 534. 3. 
drilemma are unapplicable to Nirvana, just so are they unapplicable to the 
Buddha who enters Nirvana. He says, 

XVII. What is the Buddha after his Nirvana? 

Does he exist, or does he not exist? 

Or both or neither? 

We never will conceive. 

Indeed it has been already stated 8 — 

That o.ne who firmly is convinced, 

That Buddha (during lifetime) did exist, 

Will be convinced that after death 
The Buddha cannot be existing. 

1 jildncna. 

2 Sunyata-dlamhana, it is clear that the absolute Reality ( samvrta-Sunyatd ) is here meant 
which underlies the Universe of Relativity ( samvrti-iunyatd ), cp. p. 164 n. 

3 anuipddam eva, «quite beginningless», it is also the knowledge of the Universe in 
which there is no causality (anuipdda). This knowledge is also called Omniscience, sarvajAatd= 
sarva-dkdrajnatd = Sunyatd-jndnam = praj Aa-pdra tn ita. 

* avidyamana-svarupa , i. e. its character, svarupa , is not to be found among our human 
kinds of knowledge. 

5 rupa — svarupa. 

6 sarva-prapanca-atita, (prapaAco vak, cp. M. vr, p. 373.9). 

7 na yujgate = nopapadyatc. 

* Translated according to the version in XXII. 13, p. 447. 



204 NIRVANA 

534. 10. Thus it is that we cannot imagine 1 what has happened after the com¬ 

plete extinction 2 of the Buddha, does he then exist, or does he not exist 
(after Nirvana)? Since both these solutions are unimaginable singly, they cannot 
be right both at once, neither is the negation of them both, therefore, ima¬ 
ginable. 

534. 12. Not alone are all these four solutions unimaginable with regard to 
Buddha after his demise, but (his real existence before Nirvana is equally 
unimaginable). 

XVIII. What is the Buddha then at lifetime? 

Does he exist or does he not exist? 

Or both or neither? 

We never will conceive. 

535. l. This is beyond our understanding, beyond our concepts. It has 

been shown in the chapter devoted to the examination of Buddliahood . 3 

1 nohyate = na kalpyate. 

? nirodha. 

3 Ch. XXII. This chapter begins by stating that the Buddha is neither contained in the 
elements (skandha) of a personality, nor is he something apart from them (XX. 1 — 2). It is the 
old formula of the VatsTputrlyas and, probably, of all the early sects who have favoured the 
idea of a superhuman Buddha. If the Buddha consisted of elements (skandha) he would be 
anatma (XX. 3). On this occasion Candrakirti remarks that the term dtmin in this context is 
a synonym of substance, a real, independent or absolute substance (atma-sabdo'ynm svabhava- 
iabda-paryayah). If he were not Self-existent, he could not be the Buddha, since Buddha means 
Self-existent, tathdtgata — existent in reality, in absolute reality. He is then characterized as 
Mnya and nis-prapanca, the Inexpressible. Those who would attempt to give him a conceptual 
definition (prapancayanti) are incapable of contemplating him by mystic intuition (na, paSyanti 
tathdgatam) (XX. 10). The Reality, or Substantiality (svabhdva) of the real Buddha (tathagata) 
is just the same as the real substance of the world (tathagato yatsvabhavas tatsvabhavam idam 
jagat). And just as the (phenomenal) world is unreal (nihsvabhava), the personal Buddha is un¬ 
real just in the same degree (XXII. 16). Candrakirti adds that the unreality or relativity of 
the phenomenal world has been established in the first chapter of this work. It is thus clear 
that Buddha is regarded in a pantheistic light as Dens sive substantia. This is the strictly mo¬ 
nistic stand-point of consequent Mahayanism. The conception of the Buddha is here quite the 
same as the conception of God (iSvara) in the Suddha-adcaitn system of Sankara. The Yo- 
gacara school has, in this point as in others, deviated from strict Mahayanism. Just as it had 
established four kinds of Nirvana, instead of the former three (cp. above p. 185), it has also 
four kinds of Buddhas or four Bodies of Buddhas and four kinds of absolute knowledge (bodhi). 
Here Buddha abiding in « altruistic » (apratisthita) Nirvana appears as a real God, the personified 
Wisdom and Love. His Spirit is not that unique substance, undifferentiated into subject and 
object which is the essence of dharma-ldya or tathdta, but it is a living and sympathizing Spirit 
which distinguishes subject, object and the separate things of the pluriverse by pratyaveksana- 
jhana . The constructions of the early Yogacara school regarding Nirvana, Buddha and Bodhi 


appendix: candrakIrits comment on relativity, xxv 205 

IX. Ultimate Identity of the Phenomenal and the Absolute. 

Just for this reason, (since both are equally inconceivable), 

XIX. There is no difference at all 

Between Nirvana and Samsara, 

There is no difference at all 
Between Samsara and Nirvana. 

Since it is impressible to imagine a (real) Buddha living in this world 535. 4. 
nor (to deny it), and since it is equally impossible to imagine a (real) 

Buddha after his Nirvana nor (to deny it), just for this reason there is no 
difference at all between the Phenomenal world and the Absolute. On ana¬ 
lysis they reveal themselves as being just the same in their essence . 1 For 
this very reason we can now understand the words of the Buddha w r hen he 
spoke, «0 Brethren! this phenomenal world 2 consisting of birth, decay and 
death has no under limit)). This is just because there is no difference between 
the Phenomenal and the Absolute. Indeed, 

XX. What makes the limit of Nirvana, 

Is also then the limit of Samsara. 

Between the two we cannot find 
The slightest shade of difference. 

The phenomenal world being (in its real essence) nothing but the Ab- 535. ik 
solute , 3 it is impossible to imagine neither its beginning, nor its end. 

X. The antinomies. 

But not alone that, (the 4 antinomies established by the Buddha 
are insoluble for the same reason). 

are extremely artificial and evidently the product of a compromise between strict Monism and 
the theistic tendencies of the school, cp. Yinitadeva’s comment upon the closing passage of 
Santanantara-siddhi (B. B.) where he seem3 not to be at one with Dharmaklrti, cp. also 
J. Masuda, op. cit. p. 57 ff. 

1 rupa — svarupa. 

2 samsara. 

3 nirvana. 


536. 3. 


536. 4. 


536. 8. 


536. 10. 


536. 12. 


536. 14. 


206 NIRVANA 

XXI. (Insoluble are antinomic) views 

Regarding the existence beyond Nirvana, 
Regarding the extinction of this world, 

Regarding its beginning. 1 

All the theories (about these questions) are inconsistent 2 (antinomies). 
Since the phenomenal world and the Absolute, are naturally merged qui¬ 
escent 3 (in the Unity of the Whole). 

By the indication 4 contained in the words «after Nirvana» four theo¬ 
ries are embraced, viz. 1. the Buddha exists after death; 2. after death the 
Buddha does not exist; 3. after death the Buddha exists and does not exist 
(both at once); 4. after death the Buddha neither exists, nor does he not 
exist. These four theories are professed regarding Nirvana. 

The theories regarding the end of the world, are the following ones; 
1. the world has a limit; 2. the world has no limit; 3. the world has and 
has not a limit; 4. the world neither has, nor has not a limit. Those four 
theories exist regarding the upper limit (i. e., the end) of the world. 

Not being able to know something about our future life or about the 
future of the living world, we imagine that the life of the world will be 
stopped. This (theory) establishes a limit to the living world. Similarly the 
theory that the living world will have no end is produced by an expectation 
of a future life. Those who partly expect it and partly do not expect it pro¬ 
fess a double theory. Those who deny both profess the theory that the world- 
process neither has, nor has not any limit. 

Regarding the beginning of the world there are likewise four theories. 
1. It is eternal (i. e., it has no beginning); 2. it has a beginning; 3. it both 
has and has not a beginning; 4. it neither has, nor has not a beginning. 

The theory that the world is beginningless 5 is based upon the view 
that we ourselves, or the living world, previously existed. The opposite view 
leads to the theory about the world having a beginning. Those who are 
both convinced and not convinced of it will profess the theory that the world 

1 Lit. p. 536. 1—2. The theories (drstayah) «beyond final extinction [nirodha)», «end etc », 
« eternal etc.# are directed ( samdSrita ) towards Nirvana, the upper limit and the under limit#. 

2 nopapadyante. 

3 prakrti-Santatvat , cp. above p. 35. 

4 vpalaksana. 

s SaHvata means here, as appears from the context eternal in the sense of beginningless. 


APPENDIX: CANDRAKIRTl’S COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 207 

is both eternal and non-eternal. Those who neither are convinced, nor are 
they unconvinced will profess the theory that the world is neither eternal, 
nor is it non-eternal. 

How are the antinomies 1 to be solved ? 2 If any one of these attri¬ 
butes 3 (by which the world is characterized as finite, infinite etc.) possessed 
absolute reality in itself , 4 we would then understand what its affirmation 
or negation 5 meaus. But since we have established that there is no differ¬ 
ence between the phenomenal world (as constructed according to those 
ideas) and the Absolute 7 (underlying it), therefore (no one of these attri¬ 
butes has ultimate reality, indeed—), 

XXII. Since everything is relative , 8 (we do not know) 

What is finite and what is infinite, 

What means finite and infinite at once, 

What means negation of both issues, 

XXIII. What is identity, and what is difference , 9 
What is eternity, w r hat non-eternity , 10 
What means eternity and non-eternity together, 
What means negation of both issues? 

1 dr stay ah — avyakrta-vastuni. 

2 katham yujyanle. 

3 paddrtha — artha = dharma means «any object#, «everytliing»; it contains here an al¬ 
lusion to the following sunyesu sarvadharmesu , but the predicates of fiuiteness, infinity, identity, 
otherness, etc., are more particularly aimed at, they are also dharmas. 

4 kaScit svnbhavah. 

b bhavabhaca-kalpana — bhdvdbhdva-yojana; kalpana. in this context means as much as 
our judgment. 

6 Lit., p. 537.1-2. «How are these views possible? If anything whatever possessed 
some self-subsistence, by arranging it with existence and non-existence these views would be 
(possible)#. 

7 This identity must evidently be understood in that sense that the Unity of the Absolute 
is the reality underlying the mirage of plurality. 

* Sunya. 

8 This refers to the question of identity between the Ego and the body, it is usually for¬ 
mulated as a dilemma, whereas the antinomies regarding the end and the beginning of existence, 
as well as the question about existence after Nirvana are formulated in the familiar Indian me¬ 
thod of a quadrilemma. Thus the consecrated traditional number of 14 insoluble points ( avyakrta- 
vastuni] | concerning the four antinomies is arrived at. In XXYII. 4 ff. the question of personal 
identity between the present Ego, the past and the future one, is examined in detail with the 
result that there is neither identity nor otherness. 

10 or «without beginning# (SaSvata). 


537. 1 


537. 3 



208 NIRVANA 

587. 7 . These fourteen points which (by the Buddha) "were declared insoluble, 
will never be solved, 1 because (we do not know) what reality in itself is. 2 
But those who imagine (some kind) of absolute reality, 3 and, by either exclu¬ 
ding or asserting 4 it, establish these (dogmatical) theories, they are influ¬ 
enced by a preconceived bias 5 It prevents them from entering the right Path, 
leading to the city of Nirvapa, and binds them to the turmoil of phenome¬ 
nal existence. This should be noted. 

XI. Conclusion. 

537 . ii. An objection is raised. If this is so (will it not be possible to maintain 
that) Nirvana has been denied by the Buddha? Will not his doctrine be 
absolutely useless, (this doctrine which) establishes corresponding antidotes 
for every kind of worldly career in order to enable mankind to reach Nir¬ 
vana. (It has been established by the Buddha) who watches the infinite hosts 
of living beings iu their worldly career, who unmistakably knows the real in¬ 
tentions of all the living world, who is quite given up to his feeling of Great 
Commiseration, wdio cherishes the denizens of all the three spheres of exi- 
537 . 14 . stence as only a unique son is cherished! We answ r er. This criticism would 
be right, if there w r ere any absolutely real 8 doctrine, or if there were any 
(absolutely real) beings wdiich would attend to this law, or if there were any 
absolutely real teacher, a divine Buddha. But (since in a monistic Universe 
that does not exist, we are not hit by your accusation)! 

538. 3. XXIV. Our bliss consists in the cessation of all thought, 

In the quiescence of Plurality. 

To nobody and nowhere no doctrine (about separate 

elements) 7 

By Buddha ever has heen preached! 

1 naiva jujyante. 

2 asati bhaca-svarupe, lit. «because they are not selfsubsistent things». Here again we 
must point out a remarkable analogy between Indian and European philosophy with respect 
to the doctrine of antinomies and their solution. Kant thought that «these questions naturally 
suggest themselves to the human mind and he inevitably must encounter them», and the expla¬ 
nation he sought in the fact that the objects of the phenomenal world are not «sellsubsistent 
things», cp Critique of Pure Reason (transl. by Max Mueller), p. 400. 

3 bhava-starupam adhyaropya. 4 tad-vigama-avigamatah. 

5 abhiuiviSate. 0 svabhata-rupa. 

7 dharma is here used in both senses, a doctrine about dharmas. Not a single one of the 
Hinayanistic dharmas (elements of existence) has been taught by the real Buddha, since on 
p. 539. 1—2 it is stated that neither a defiling ( samkleSika ) element i. e., ignorance and desire. 


APPENDIX: OANDR AKIrTI’8 COMMENT ON RELATIVITY, XXV 209 

In this case how can the reproach made above affect us! Our view 1 is 538. 5. 
that Nirvana represents Quiescence, i. e., the non-applicability 2 of all the 
variety of names 3 and (non-existence of) particular objects. 4 This very Quie¬ 
scence, so far it is the natural (genuine) quiescence (of the world), is called bliss. 

The Quiescence of Plurality is also a bliss because of the cessation of speach or 
because oX the cessation of thought. It is also a bliss because, by putting and end 
to all defiling agencies, all individual existences 5 are stopped. It is also a bliss 
because, by quenching all defiling forces, all instinct (and habits of thought) 6 
have been extirpated without residue. It is also a bliss because, since all 
the objects of knowledge have died away, knowledge itself has also died. 

When the divine Buddhas have entered blissful Nirvana in which all 538. 9. 
Plurality has vanished, they are like regal swans soaring in the sky without 
any support, 7 they are hovering in the wind produced by their (two) wings, 8 
the wing of accumulated virtue 9 and the wing of accumulated wisdom, 10 or 
they are hovering in the wind of Space, (that Space which) is the Void. 11 
Then (from this elevation), all separate objects having become undistingui- 
shable, 12 the Buddhas have not preached, neither about the defiling elements 13 
(of life), nor about its purifying elements, 14 neither in the divine worlds, nor in 
the human world, neither to gods, nor to men. This should be realized. 

nor a purifying one ( vaiyavadanika ), i. e., prajnd and samddhi, has been taught by the real 
Buddha, i. e. by the Buddha conceived as Dharma-kaya, the Cosmos. The whole catalogue of the 
dharmas is evidently meant, and their relativity and unreality from the transcendental point of 
view. But since Hinayana is Pluralism, i. e., a doctrine about the elements, a Dharma about the 
dharmas , dharmanudharma, both meanings are so interwoven that in many contexts both 
will apply. On p. 537. 13 the general meaning is evidently intended. 

1 iha. 

2 apravrtti. 

3 prapaiica, prapanco vdJc. 

4 nimitta. 

5 janman. 

6 vdsand, explained as purvam jhdnam, but conceived as a cosmical Force, transcendental 
illusion. 

7 asthdna-yogena. 

s paksa-pata , the meaning of bias or, fervour, towards a special doctrine is equally here 
intended. 

9 punya-tambhara. 

10 jnana-sambhara. 

11 akimcana, an allusion to the doctrine of &unyata\ the lofty Bodhisattva is hovering in 
the regions of Relativity, which is here poeticaily compared with the Void (smbhdvo-Sungaa). 

12 sarva-nimitta-anupalambha. 

13 samkleSika-dharma. 

14 vaiyavadanika-dharma. 


14 



210 


NIRVANA 


539. 3. Accordingly it has been declared in the Arya-tathagata-guhya. 
«The night when, 0 Santamati, the Buddha has reached the highest abso¬ 
lute enlightment, the night he was about to pass into Final Nirvana, at that 
occasion the Buddha did not pronounce even one syllable, he has not spo¬ 
ken, nor does he speak, nor will he speak. But since all living beings, accor¬ 
ding to the intensity of their religions fervour , 1 appear as different characters 2 
with different aims , 3 they imagine 4 the Buddha proferring on different occa¬ 
sions a variety of discourses. On separate occasions it occurs to them «this 
Buddha teaches us about such a topic », 5 «we listen to his teaching about 
this topicw. But the (real) Buddha 6 is never engaged in thought-construction, 
in thought-division. 0 Santamati, the Buddha is averse to all plurality which 
is produced by our habits of thought , 7 (that Plurality which is the cause) of an en¬ 
tanglement of thought constructions 8 and of the dismemberment 9 (of the world’s 
Unity ). 10 

689 . io. Indeed, 

Unspeakable, unpronounceable are all (elements), 

Relational , 11 quiescent, pure! 

Those are (real) Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 12 
Who realize them in this (their pure condition). 

539. 13 . But if the Buddha has preached no doctrine (of separate elements) no¬ 
where and to nobody, how is it then that we hear abdut his various discour¬ 
ses, constituting the Scriptures? 

539. 14. We answer. Mankind is plunged in the slumber of ignorance, they 

1 yathadhimuktah. 

2 vividha-dhatu, dhatu evidently in the sense of gotra. 

3 (t rividha)-a$aya. 4 samjananti. 

s or element, dharma. 6 i. e. Dharma-Kdya. 

7 vasana = pwrvam jnanam. 8 kalpand = yojana. 

9 vikalpa = dvaidhikarana. 

10 This is a purely Mahayanistic doctrine, viz. that Buddha, as soon as he became a real 
Buddha, did not speak, because human speech is not adapted to express, and human knowledge 
incapable t<j realize conceptually, that unique Substance of the Universe with which Buddha 
himself is identified as dharma-kaya and which appears directly to the intuition of the mystic. 
The logical value of the tenets sarvajno na vaktd and asarvajho vaktd is analysed with much 
subtlety by Dharmottara in the Nyayabiudut., p. 66.19 ff. and by Vacaspatimisra in the 
Nyayakanika, p. 110.16 and 112.21 ff. M. de la V. P., p. 366 n. 1 of his edition, thinks that 
this doctrine is in glaring contradiction with what -is repeatedly stated in the Pali Canon. 
No wonder, since Mahayana is Monism and Ilinayana Pluralism. Spinoza can hardly be ex¬ 
pected to agree with Aristotle! 

11 §unya. 


12 kumura-=jina-putra. 


appendix: candrakIrtts comment on RELATIVITY, XXV 211 

are as though in a dream, they have a wealth of constructive imagination . 1 
It occurs to them «this Buddha, this Lord over all gods, demons and 
human beings in all the three worlds, teaches us about this topic». 

Accordingly it has been said by Buddha, 539. 10. 

The Buddha is but a reflexion 
Of the pure, passionless principle. 

He is not real, he is not the Buddha, 

’Tis a reflexion that all creatures see. 

This is likewise explained at length in the chapter about the «Secret 540. 5 . 
meaning of the Buddha's words». 

Since there is thus no (separate) teaching about (separate) elements, 
for the sake of reaching Nirvana, how is it then possible to maintain that 
(a kind of) Nirvana exists, because the discourses 2 about the elements 3 of 
existence really exist. Therefore it is established that ("this kind of) Nirvana 
does not really exist. Accordingly it has been said by Buddha, 

«The Ruler of the World has said 540. 8 . 

That (this) Nirvana is not (real) Nirvana : 

A knot by empty space entwined 
By empty space has been untied!» 

And moreover, «Those who imagine that something can appear and 540. 10. 
disappear, for them, 0 Blessed one, the (real) Buddha has not (yet) appeared! 

Those, 0 Blessed one, who seek a realistic 4 (definite) Nirvana, they never 
will escape out of the world-migrations! For what reason? Because, 0 Blessed 
one, Nirvana is the merger 5 of all particular signs , 6 the quiescence of every 
motion and commotion ! 7 Ignorant indeed, 0 Blessed one, are all those 
men who having become recluses in the name of a doctrine and discipline 
by them imagined , 8 are seeking for a realistic Nirvana and have thus 
fallen down into a false doctrine which is not Buddhist. (They think to 

1 sva-vikalpa-aMyudaya. 

2 The reading of the Mss. deSananam is perhaps to be retained (mabhidheya-bahutvatv). 

3 dharma. 

4 bhavatah — 8va-bhdvatah f i. e. not that Nirvana which is immanent to the Universe. 

5 praSama. 7 sarva-injita-saviinjita. 

6 sarva-nimittdnnm. 8 srdkhydfa 



212 


NIRVANA 


win Nirvana is the same) as to get oil out of oil-seeds or butter out of 
milk! I declare, o Blessed one, that those who seek Nirvana in the fact that 
separate elements of life will be absolutely extinct, 1 (I declare) that they are 
not better than the most selfconceited gentiles». 

4i. 3 . «A Master of Yoga, 2 o Blessed one, the man thoroughly trained (in yoga) 
does not (really) produce something (new), nor does he suppress something 
(existing), 3 nor will he admit that something, some real element, 4 can be 
attained, or seized by absolute knowledge, 5 etc.». 

Finished the Examination of Nirvana, the 25th Chapter in the Com¬ 
ment upon Relativity, composed by the venerable Master Candraklrti. 

1 'parinirvrta — parito niruddha. 

2 Yogacara , here in the general sense of a Mahayanist, not in the sense of a Master of 
the Yogacara school. 

3 as the Hlnayanist teaching about yoga-samadhi assumes, cp. above, p. 14, and Central 
Conception, p. 51. 

4 here dharma refers to the phalas attained by mdrga. 

s abliisamoya = prajha-paramita. 


INDICES 

1. PROPER NAMES 

2. SANSCRIT WORKS 

3. SANSCRIT AND PALI WORDS 

4. TIBETAN WORDS 

5. MONGOLIAN WORDS 

6 . SUBJECTS 


7. TECHNICAL TERMS 




1. Proper Names. 


Aksayamati, 126. 

Akutobhaya, 105. 

D’Alembert, 40. 

Anesaki, M., 6, 29, 39, 48. 

Aristotle, 42, 43, 164, 210. 

Aryadeva, 31, 47, 66, 67, 95, 158. 

Aryasanga (Asanga), 31, 32, 34, 35, 66, 67, 90, 
164, 189. 

Asvaghosa, 31, 32, 67. 

Aung, 134. 

Avalokitavrata, 66. 

Avenarius, 40. 

Bain, 43. 

Baldwin, 53. 

Baradiin, B., 36. 

Barth, A., 37, 51, 68. 

Beck, 6, 57. 

Bergson, 18, 51, 54. 

Bhasarvajna, 59. 

Bhaskara, 142. 

Bhavaviveka (Bhavya,) 66, 67, 82, 87, 88, 89, 
94, 96, 97, 98, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 
118, 120, 122. 

Bodhidharma, 189. 

Bradley, 52, 54- 
Bruno, G., 53. 

Buddhaghoga, 66. 

Buddhapalita, 67, 87, 88, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 
100, 101 102, 103, 105, 120, 121, 122. 
BQhler, 1. 

Buraouf, 31, 131, 145. 

Bu-ston, 66. 

Candraklrti, 28, 35, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 49, 66, 
67, 85, 96, 115, 141, 150, 151, 152, 153, 
154, 155, 156, 164, 167, 182, 204, 

212 . 

Childers, 185. 

Comte, 40. 

Cusanus, Nicolaus, 53. 


Dahlman, 4. 

Dasgupta, S. N, 15, 54. 

Descartes, 19. 

Deussen, 38, 91. 

Devasarman, 66. 

Dharmakirti, 35, 61, 114, 162, 163,185, 205. 
Dharmapala, 32. 

Dharmottara, 162, 210. 

Dignaga, 24, 31, 32, 35, 45, 61, 66, 67, 108. 
109, 111, 112, 114, 119,135,1 37, 140, 141, 
142, 146, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 164. 

Drdhasaya, 128. 

Eberhard, 161. 

Eisler, 40. 

Epicurus, 15. 

Faddegon, 58, 60. 

Franke, 0., 21, 42. 

Freud, Sigm., 26. 

Garbe, 135. 

Gaudapada, 57. 

Glasenapp, H. v., 57. 

Gorsky, V., 189. 

Gotama, 59. 

Grote, G., 43. 

Grflnwedel, A., 36. 

Gunamati, 66. 

GunasrI, 66. 

Harivarman, 24. 

Heiler, 6, 15, 18, 19, 28. 

Hegel, 53, 54. 

Heracleitus, 52. 

Hinayana, 80, 31, 33, 46, 52, 109, 110, 115, 
123, 184, 164, 165, 175, 176, 202. 
Hlnayanist, 112, 113, 124, 134, 177, 178, 179, 
180, 183, 185, 187, 

Jacob, 124. 

Jacobi, 2, 6, 20, 37, 52, 57, 60. 

Jaimini, 189. 

Jayanta, 54, 55, 59. 

15 



— 216 — 


— 217 — 



Kamalaslla, 162. 

Kanada, 189. 

Kant, 18, 21, 107, 153. 154, 161, 208. 

Kapila, 189. 

Kasyapa, 128. 

Katyayana, 126. 

Keith, 6, 21, 23, 37, 52, 57, 134, 135. 

Kern, 31, 37, 47. 

Kirfel, 12. 

Kuhn, Ernst, 42. 

Kumaralabha, 21. 

Kumarila, 37. 

Ladd, 110. 

Law, B. C., 3, 12. 

Lcan-skya-hu-tuk-tu, 189. 

Lehman, 6. 

Leibnitz, 19. 

Levi, Sylvain, 32, 35. 

Mach, E-, 40. 

Madhavacarya, 123, 124. 

Madhyamika, 38, 46, pass. 
Madhyamika-Prasangika, 34, 67. 
Madhyamika-Svantantrika, 34, 67. 
Mahabhadanta, 25. 

Mahasanghikas, 28, 185. 

Mahayana, 34, 46, 51, 62, pass. 

Mahayanist, pass. 

Maitreya-Asanga, 17, 34. 

ManjusrI, 22, 131. 

Masson Oursel, 2. 

Masuda, J., 30. 

Mlmamsaka, 19. 

Mimaqisa, 110. 

Mailer, Max, 21, 154. 

Nanda, 32. 

KagSrjuna, 35, 37, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 
53, 65, 66, 67, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 92, 
96, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 111, 112, 

113, 124, 126, 127, 140, 141, 142, 145, 152, 
164, 165, 170, 171, 174, 177, 178, 183, 185, 
187, 189, 190, 191, 196. 
tfaiyayika, 26, 90, 140, 141, 151, 159, 163. 
Nyaya-Vaisegika, 110, 116, 174, 176. 
Oldenberg, 21, 22. 

Otto, R., 28. 

Parmenides, 52, 140, 164. 

Panini, 23, 84, 142. 

Patanjali, 5, 16, 84. 

Prasastapada, 17, 159. 

Rahu, 149, 150, 151. 

Rhys Davids, T. W., 15, 55. 


Rhys Davids, Mrs. C., 16, 56. 

Rosenberg, 0., 8, 14, 15, 24, 27, 29, 36, 123, 
134, 164. 

Russel, Bertrand, 19, 40, 49, 52. 

Santa mati, 210. 

Sanghabhadra, 29. 

Sankara, 22, 38, 39, 51, 91, 204. 

Sankhya, 32, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 
105, 106, 107, 116, 117, 138, 139. 

Sariputra, 127. 

Sarvastivadin, 23, 27, 165, 185, 196. 
Sautrantika, 29, 30, 46, 50, 114, 162, 189, 
190. 

Svatantrikas, 116. 

Schayer, 35, 84. 

Schiefner, 32. 

Schopenhauer, 52. 

Senart, 4, 6, 51. 

Socrates, 100. 

Soderblom, 6. 

Spinoza, 41, 53, 91, 210. 

Spottiswoode, W., 142. 

Sriharga, 38, 60, 156. 

Srilabha, 7, 14, 25, 86, 87 
Sthiramati, 32, 34, 66, 67. 

Subhuti, 130. 

Suzuki, 22, 32, 39, 83, 84. 

Takakusu, 6. 

Taranatha, 32. 

Tsibikoff, 17. 

Tson-kha-pa, 17. 

Tucci, 31. 

Tuxen, 20. 

Udayana, 31, 159. 

Uddyotakara, 55. 

Upali, 133. 

Yacaspatimisra, 38, 55, 90, 135, 142, 210. 
Yaibhagika, 189, 191, 198, 199. 

Vaisegika, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 109, 110, 
120, 121, 139, 150, 179, 195, 196. 

Vaidya, P. L., 47. 

Yallfee Poussin, 1, 6, 12, 13, 14, 17, 20, 21, 28, 
24, 25, 27, 29, 33, 87, 42, 54, 68, 83, 84, 
123, 124, 210. 

Vasubandhu, 8, 21, 22, 24, 25, 32, 33, 66, 67, 
86, 88, 89, 162, 197. 

Vasumitra, 25, 30. 

Vatsiputriya, 12, 31, 61, 185, 197, 204. 
Vatsyayana, 20, 64, 55, 57. 

Vijnanavada, 24, 62. 

Vimalakirti, 22 


Vinltadeva. 205. Yamakami Sogen, 24. 32, 39. 

Wach, I., 37. Yasomitra, 8, 88, 171. 

Walleser, M., 37, 39, 51, 52. , Yogacara, 16, 31, 32, 34, 37, 189, 204, 212. 

Wassilief, (BaciuteB), 30,31, 32.66,67,105,129. Zeno, 52, 67, 140. 

Woods, H. 6. 


2. Sanscrit Works. 


Akutobhaya, 66. 

Akgara-sataka, 66. 

Abhidharma-kosa, 32, 33, ,57, 159, pass. 
Abhisamayalankara, 17. 

Agta-sahasrika-prajna-paramita-sutra, 124, 145. 
Arya-tathagata-guhya, 210. 
Arya-Ratnakara-sutra, 180. 

Katha-vatthu, 15. 

Khuddaka, 21. 

Catuhsataka, 95, 158, 159. 
Tattvarthadhigama-sutra, 57. 

Tarkajvala, 82. 

Trimsika, 32, 34, 47, 55, 116, 124, 189. 
Naigadhiya, 59, 60. 

Nyayakanika, 167. 

Nyayakandali, 59, 60. 

Nyaya-tatparya-dlpika, 59, 60. 
Nyayabindutlka,83,108,109, 110, 114, 117, 119, 
156, 159, 162, 195. 

Nyaya-bindu-purva-pakga-sankgipti, 162. 
Nyaya-bhagya, 54, 57, 59. 

Nyaya-makaranda, 38. 

Nyaya-manjarl, 54, 56, 59. 

Nyayasara, 59. 

Nyaya-vartika, 55, 57, 60, 159, 162. 
(Nyaya-vartika)-Tatparyatika, 57, 142 passim. 
Nyaya-sutra, 54, 55, 66, 57. 

Parisuddhi, 31, 159. 

Prajna-pradlpa, 66. 

Prajna-mula, 66. 

Pratltya-samutpada-hpdaya, 66. 


Pramana-samuccaya, 162. 

Prasanna-pada, 67. 
Brhad-aranyaka-Upanigad, 159. 
Bodhicaryavatara-tika, 124. 

Bhagavadgita, 202. 

Majjhima-Nikaya, 39, 42, 135. 

Mahayana-vimsika, 66. 

Mahavagga, 6. 

Madhyamika-avatara, 83, 149. 
Madhyamika-vrtti, 55, 56, pass. 
Madhyamika-Ssstra, 65. 
Mula-madhyamika-sastra, 66, 134, pass. 
Yukti-sagtika, 65, 89. 

Yogasutra, 60. 

Ratnakuta-sutra, 50, 128, 129, 145. 
Ratna-malika, 190. 

Ratnavali, 190. 

Lankavatara-sutra, 31. 

Lokatlta-stava. 135, 147. 
Yajramanda-dharani, 131. 
Yigraha-vyavartanl, 65, 111. 
Vedanta-paribhaga, 38, 45,159. 
Vaidalya-sutra, 66. 

Salistamba-sutra, 106, 123. 
Sikga-samuccaya, 106, 133. 
Sunyata-saptati, 65. 

Sloka-vartika, 19, 37. 

Samyutta-Nikaya, 56, 125. 
Santanantara-siddhi, 85, 114, 205. 
Samadhiraja-sutra, 127. 
Sarvadarsana-sangraha. 28, 103 123, 171. 


15* 




— 218 — 


— 219 — 


3. Sanscrit and Pali Words. 


amsumaya, 179. 
aikya, 66. 
akirpcana, 209. 
akusala, 9. 

akftaka (= asaqiskrta), 40. 

acala, 181. 

accha, 10. 

ajanaka, 181. 

apu, 104. 

atipatita-loka-maryada, 141. 
ati-prasanga, 94. 
atlndriyartha, 163. 
atyauta-abbava, 195. 
atyanta-bhinna, 139. 
atyantanutpadatva, 40. 
adoga, 174, 180. 
advaita, 65, 90. 
advaita-brahma, 22. 
advaya, 42. 
advaya-lak§ana, 33. 
adhikarana-sadhana, 7, 134. 
adhipati, 172. 
adhipati-pratyaya, 176. 
adhyavasaya, 141. 
adhyavasita, 141. 
adhyatma-vidya, 55. 
adhyaropya, 208. 
adhvan, 41, 115. 
ananta-dravyah, 8. 
ananta-visegana-sambhava, 91. 
anatikramya, 164. 
anapekga, 46, 153. 
anapekgah svabhavah, 46. 
anabhivyakta, 101. 
anabhivyakta-rfipa-anutpatti, 101. 
anabhilapya, 156. 
anavagata, 89- 
anavastha, 95. 

anatman, 8, 134, 149, 152, 196, 204. 

anaropita, 146. 

an-arya, 156. 

anasrava, 125. 

anasrava-dharmah, 66. 

anitya, 185, 197. 

auityata, 181. 

anirvacaniya, 47, 91. 

anirvacanlya-vada, 136. 

anirvacya, 201. 


aniscaya, 136. 

anugamyate, 161. 

anutpatti, 101. 

anutpanna, 136. 

anutpada, 43, 203. 

anupapanna, 163. 

anupalabdhi, 195. 

anupakhya, 156. 

anupadaya, 48, 194, 195, 197. 

anupadaya (sat) = paramarthasat, 199. 

anubhava, 139. 

anumana, 96, 108. 

anumana-nirakpta, 108. 

anumana-badha, 99. 

anurodha, 151. 

anuloma, 123. 

anugakla, 56. 

anaikantika, 117. 

anta-dvaya-rahitatva, 81. 

anna, 124. 

anya-vyavptti, 155. 

a-nyaya, 154, 156. 

anyonya-abhava, 195. 

anvaya-jnana, 17. 

apatrapJl, 124. 

apara, 122. 

aparokga, 45, 159, 163. 
aparokga-vartin, 45. 
apavarga, 54, 60. 
apek^a, 137, 158. 
apek^ya, 43. 
apoha, 155, 156. 
aprati^iddha, 136. 
apratigthita-niryana, 185, 204. 
apratitya, 48, 197 (cp. oerr.). 
apratitya-samutpanna, 43. 
apratyaya-svabhava, 178. 
aprayartamana, 197. 
aprayrtti, 196, 209. 
aprahatavya. 198. 
aprapta, .89. 

abbava, 38, 48, 50, 120, 193, 194, 198, 199. 

abhidheya-bahutvat, 211. 

abhiniyisate, 208. 

abhijna, 19. 

abhiniyigta, 190. 

abhiprayartate = abhimukham pravartate, 180. 
abhimata, 90. 


abhisamaya, 47, 90, 212. 
abhuta, 111. 
amrtyu-pada, 59. 
ayatnena, 193. 
ayukta, 89. 

arupa-dh'atu, 7, 10, 11. 
arupino (dharmah), 8. 
artha, 12, 45, 141. 
artha-kriya-kara, 153. 
artha-kriya-karitva, 114. 
artha-jnanayor bhedah, 39. 
artha-padani'(catyari), 55. 
artha-vakya, 105. 
arthapatti, 104. 
alinga, 28. 

avadharana, 152. # 

avamrsyate, 56. 
v ayacya, 197. 
avicarita-siddha, 38. 
avigamatah, 208. 
avijnapti, 189. 
ayidya, 9, 134, 183. 
avidya-tgfne, 57. 
avidyamana-svarupa, 203. 
aviparitartha, 44. 
avyakta, 28. 
ayyabhicarita, 191. 
ayyakrta-vastuni, 207. 
asunya, 43, 186, 187. 
asunyata-vadin, 112. 
asubha-bhavana, 138. 

asamskrta, 15, 17, 34, 42, 55, 184, 185, 200. 

asangatartha, 121. 

asat, nirasat, 28. 

asat-kalpa, 162. 

asatkarya-vada, 113. 

asamanupasyan, 145. 

asambaddha, 157. 

asaryajno vakta, 210. 

asSdharana-karana, 165, 172, 176. 

asiddha, 41, 116, 117. 

asiddharthata, 115. 

asthana-yogena, 209. 

asti-vadin, 189. 

asthita, 59. 

asyabhava, 179. 

asvayaipmaya, 179. 

agama, 162. 

acara, 155. 

acarya, 66. 

ajavamjavibhava, 48, 197. 


atman, 8, 31, 41, 58, 59, 65, 152, 197, 202. 

atman (= svabhava), 204. 

atma-prajnapti, 184. 

atma-bhava, 155, 161. 

atma-labba, 199. 

atma-yada, 22. 

atma-sneha, 184. 

adi-santa, 35. 

adhipateya = adhipati-pratyaya, 165. 
adhyatmika, 105, 108, 114. 
adhyatmika-ayatana, 96, 108, 112, 113. 
an and a, 91. 

ayatana, 39, 55, 56, 105, 108, 134, 152. 
arambha, 179. 
arambhaka, 195. 
aropita, 44. 

arya, 3, 9, 12, 16, 55, 90, 91, 111, 128, 131. 

arya-pudgala, 55, 90. 

arya-satya, 55, 56. 

alambana, 150, 171, 173. 

alambanaka, 174. 

alambana-pratyaya, 173. 

alambana-buddhy-upajananah (sc. purugah) 150. 
alaya, 32. 

alaya-vijnana, 30, 31, 32, 67. 
avasthika, 123. 
asraya, 162. 
asraya-asiddha, 108. 
asritya, 38, 194, 197. 
asraya, 57, 125. 
iccha, 156. 

iti, 34, 55, 87, 90, 152. 
itthamvicara, 15&. 
itya, 86, 87. 
idam, 204. 
idamta, 47. 
idampratyayata, 47. 
idampratyayata-matram, 134. 
idamsatya-abhiniyesa, 128. 
idanim, 197. 
indriya, 56, 65, 116. 
indriya-kgana, 162. 
iva, 176. 

iha, 43, 56, 137, 190, 209. 

Isvara, 106, 204. 

Isvara-pranidhana, 15. 
ukta, 43, 57. 
uccheda, 106. 
uccheda-vada, 28, 50. 
ucyante, 65, 56, 59, 147. 
uta, 170. 




— 220 


— 221 — 


utkarga, 9. 

utpatti, 106, 108, 120, 121. 
utpatti-nihsvabhavata, S3, 
utpattih svatah = satkSryam, 94. 
utpadyate, 95, 173. 
utpanna, 40. 

utpada, 95, 97, 166, 179, 181, 197. 
udghatayati, 153. 
upajata-buddhih, 150. 
upadisyate, 43, 48. 
upanayana, 100. 
upapatti, 137, 155. 
upapatti-dhyana, 7. 
upapatty-antara, 155. 

(na) upapadyate, 191, 201, 206. 
upapadyl, 181. 
upapanna, 153. 
upapadaka, 12. 
upalakgana, 206. 
upalakgyate, 105. 
upasama, 187. 
upadaty, 151. 

upadana, 134, 174, 175, 195, 197. 
upadana-bhuta, 196. 

upadana-skandha (-tad dhetus ca duhkham 
uktam), 57. 

upadana-skandhah (— sasrava-dharmah), 184. 
upadaya, 48, 50, 192, 194, 195, 196, 197, 199. 
upadaya-prajnapti, 81. 

upadaya (= pratltya = sapekgika = iunya), 199. 

up ad ay a pravartate = pratltya pravartate, 197. 

upadaya (= sapekgika = sapratiyogitaka), 199. 

Ohyate, 204. } 

yddhi, 7, 19. 

eka-pauruga, 132. 

eka-vijnanotpatti, 86. 

ekagrata, 6. 

aikya, 66. 

karana, 176. 

karana-sadhana, 7. 90. 

kartr, 168. 

karman, 11, 13, 14, 28, 41, 56, 124, 128, 172, 
176, 188, 197. 
karma-kSraka, 66, 168. 
karma-sadhana, 47, 70, 90. 
kalpana, 135, 187, 141, 147, 158, 187, 195, 201, 
207, 210. 

kalpaaapoijha, 17, 45, 142, 156, 160. 
kalpyate, 202, 204. 
kavali-kara-ahara, 14. 
kathinyadi, 150, 152. 


kama, 12. 

kama-dhatu, 7, 10, 12, 81. 
karaka, 148, 155. 
karana, 176, 179. 

karaga-rupa-karyasya anutpatti, 101. 
karana-hetu, 41, 124, 165, 172, 196. 
karya, 166. 

karya-karana-bhava, 166. 
karya-karana-rupa, 124. 
karya-karin, 190. 
kalananugata, 142 (cp. corr.). 
kalika-ayacitakam, 41. 
kimapekga, 167. 
kimcid idam, 164. 
kukgi, 134. 

kumara = jina-putra, 210. 
kusala, 9. 
krta, 176, 200. 
kftanta = siddhanta, 94. 
kli§ta, 10. 

klesa, 10, 138, 185, 186. 
klesa = avidya-tfgne, 185, 186. 
klesa-kavma-janmadi, 188, 190. 
klesa-kalpana, 187. 
klesa-gana, 188. 
klesa (-janma), 29, 48, 193. 
klesa-taskara, 184. 
kriya, 167, 168, 169. 
ksana, 35, 41, 137, 142. 
k§ana-santana, 8. 
kganika, 95. 

kgana = svalakgana = param5rtba-Bat, 111. 

k^aya, 29, 191. . 

kganti = ruci, 17. 

kharatva, 116. 

khyati, 38. 

khyatr, 38. 

kvacit, 155. 

gatavya, 140. 

gati, 115, 142, 182. 

gotra, 86, 210. 

guna, 59. 

gudbabhiBandhih, 158. 
grabanaka-vakyam, 99. 
graha, 187. 

grabya-grahaka-rabita, 33. 
grabya-vi§aya (= paramarthasat), 141. 
cak?uh, 114. 
cakguradi, 108. 
cakgur-ayatana, 108. 
cakgur-vijnana, 162. 


catvary (artha-padani), 55. 

citta, 145, 148, 178. 

citta = manas = vijnana, 31, 108. 

citta-ekagrata, 7. 

citta-caitta, 46, 91. 

citta-dbarmata, 33, 47. 

citta-dhara, 145. 

citta-maba-bhumika, 7, 9. 

citta-svalakgana,’ 146. 

cetah = vijnana-skandba, 185. 

cetas, 6, 28. 

cetana, 124, 197. 

caitanya, 117. 

caitasa = caitta = citta-samprayukta-samska- 
ra, 148. 
caitta, 173. 
codana, 102. 
jagat, 204. 
jada, 59. 

jaui-kriya, 167, 168. 
janma, 55, 188, 209. 
jara, 181. 
jati, 86. 

jnana, 31, 45, 91, 141, 143, 149, 163, 202, 203, 
209, 210. 

jnana-sambhara, 209. 

jnana (= savikalpaka-juana = artha-visesa-pa- 
ricchitti), 149. 
jnana-kaya, 185. 
jnanakara, 89. 
jneya, 54. 

jyotir-vidya-siddha, 142. 

tat, 35, 40, 55, 57, 95, 153, 197. 

tat-sabbaga = a-BYa-karma-kpt, 115. 

tat-sadhana, 56. 

tat-svabbava, 204. 

tattya, 88, 41, 134, 153, 154. 

tattva-adhigama, 155. 

tattvatah, 188. 

tattva-darsin, 184. 

tattva-vid, 158. 

tattvabbava, 88. 

tad-viparyaya, 103. 

tatha, 110. 

tathagata, 123, 204. 

tatbagata-kaya, 45. 

tatbagata garbha, 47. 

tathagata-sasana-pratipanna, 188. 

tathata, 82, 47, 58, 67, 204. 

tatbata = dharmakaya, 176. 

tathata = dharmata, 33. 


tathata = sunyata, 146. 
tarkanila, 82. 
tatkaliki (gatih), 142. 
tarkika, 82, 112. 
tiraskara, 162. 
tirthika, 150. 
tpgna, 134, 191. 
traidhatuka, 34, 55. 
trailokya-vyavrtta, 142. 
darsana, 91, 164. 
divya-cakguh, 11. 
divya-srotra, 11. 
dlrgha, 39 

dlrgha-hrasva-vat, 196. 

duhkha, 16, 17, 26, 55, 56, 57, 121, 134, 135. 

duhkha = samsara, 188. 

duhkha = pancopodana-skandba, 65, 189. 

duhkha-vedana, 56. 

duhkha-(sabdena sarve sarlradaya ucyante), 55. 

duhkha-satya, 57. 

duhkha-samudaya, 55. 

dugana, 120. 

drsyate, 190. 

drgtayah = ayyakfta-vastuni, 206, 207. 
drgti, 65. 

dpgti-marga, 16, 18, 90, 137. 
dpgti-heya, 10. 
devanam-priya, 38. 
desana, 211. 
desananugata, 142. 
de9is8ami, 55. 
deboccheda, 28. 
doga, 171, 193; 
dravyato’sti, 33. 
dyandva, 180. 
dvaidbi-karana, 137, 147. 
dharma, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 18, 24, 26, 28, 29, 32, 
• 33, 34, 35, 39, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 55, 66, 81, 89, 94, 113, 123, 124, 128, 
133, 134, 136, 141, 172, 173, 175, 181, 183, 
184, 186, 188, 190, 191, 198, 208, 209, 210, 
211, 212. 

dharma (sya-bhava-dharanad dharmab), 46. 
dharma-anu-dharma-(pratipatti-yukta), 188, 209. 
dharma (karya-karana-rupa), 124. 
dharma-kaya, 26, 30, 33, 87, 41, 44, 48, 52, 61, 
81, 84, 91, 159, 181, 182, 185, 204, 210. 
dharma-kaya (= dharmata = tathata), 181. 
dharma (= pudgala-nairatmya), 55. 
dharma-jnana, 17. 
dharmata, 45, 47, 106. 


dbarmata = anatma, 90. 
dbarmata = dharma-kaya, 41. 
dhanraa-dhatu, 33, 47. 
dharma-nairatmya, 41, 125. 
dharma-pravicaya, 57. 
dharma-praviveka, 57. 

dharma-samketa = anatma = pudgala-nairat- 
mya — 12 ayatana, 135. 
dhanna = samskrta-dharma = samskara, 125. 
dharma-lakgana, 27, 185, 199. 
dharma-svabhava, 27, 28, 40, 185, 199. 
dhatu, 11, 14, 18, 55, 56, 65, 210. 
dhyana, 6, 7, 11, 18. 
dhvani, 150. 
nandiraga, 191. 
natha (= dharma-kaya), 182. 
nanya-nananya, 33. 
nama-jati-yojana, 137. 
nama-rupa (= panca-skandha), 134. 
nasa, 115. 
nasayati, 154. 
nasti, 121, 141, 152. 
nastika, 189. 
nastivadin, 189. 
nihsreyasa, 54. 
nihsattasatta, 28. 
nihsadasad, 28. 
nihsvabhava, 44, 45, 204. 
nitya, 185. 

nihsvabhava = sunya, 176. 
nidana, 65, 86. 
nimitta, 202, 209. 
nimitta-udgrahana, 202. 
nimitta-karana, 176. 
nimitta-grahin, 202. 
nimittalambana, 202. 
niyama, 179. 

niyata-rodha (= nirodba = nirvana,) 190. 
nirantara-utpada, 115. 
nirapekga, 40, 137. 
mravasega-prapanca-upasama, 43. 
nirakarana, 155. 
nirakrta, 108. 
niruddha, 35, 175. 
nirnpapattika, 95. 
nirnpapattika-pakga, 98. 

nirupadana (= asamskjta=paramarthasat), 202. 
nirupadhi-sega, 133, 184. 
nirodha, 16, 17, 25, 28, 55, 183, 185, 191, 204, 
206. 

uirodha-satya, 25. 


nirodhatmaka, 190. 

nirmana-kaya, 57. 

nirvatarka, 113, 165, 172. 

nirvartyate, 113. 

nirvartya- nirvartakatva, 113. 

nirvana, 17, 40, 48, 54, 55, 204, 205, 208. 

nirvana-dhatu, 133, 188. 

nirvikalpaka, 31, 141, 156. 

nirvartayami, 155. 

nivfta-avyakrta, 12. 

nivptti, 188. 

nivesana, 6. 

nivesayi, 181, 182. 

niscaya. 136, 137. 

niscaya — adhyavasaya = kalpana = vikalpa, 
137, 141. 

niscaya-rupam vakyam, 137. 
nigkriya, 58. 

nigprapanca, 42, 43, 44, 156, 187, 204. 

nisyanda-phala, 8, 176. 

nistattvata, 38. 

niladi-vijnana, 160. 

naiva, 208. 

nyaya, 35, 99, 105. 

pakga, 155. 

pakga-doga, 108. 

pakga-dharma, 94. 

pakga-pata, 209. 

paci-kriy5, 168, 170. 

panca-skandha, 184. 

pancopadana-SKandhah,. 56. 

pad, 85. 

padartha, 190. 

padaxtha = artha = dharma, 207. 

parata-anutpatti, 101. 

paratah, 101, 120, 121. 

para-tantra, 38, 137, 164, 189. 

paratra, 40. 

para-dugana, 121. 

para-paccayah, 181. 

para-bhava, 166, 181. 

para-mata, 88. 

parama-mahat, 58. 

paramartha, lll, v 188, 156, 157. 

paramartbatab, 40, 112, 113, 115. 

paramartha-sat, 111, 114, 141, 146, 156. 

paranulrtha-aatya, 141. 

paramartha-nihsvabbavata, 33. 

paraspara, 155. 

paraspara-vi bhhga, 147. 

paraspara-apekga, 153, 163, 164, 194. 


pararthanumana, 99. 
pari-kalpana, 144. 
pari-kalpita, 33, 137. 
pari-kalpita-svabhava, 189. 
pari-codana, 135. 
pariccbeda, 137, 155. 
parinama, 32. 

,parinama-duhkbata, 17. 
paritab, 212. 

pari-dipayata = parito dipayata, 90. 

parinirvasyati, 130. 

pari-nivrtta = parito niruddha, 212. 

parinigpanna, 33, 84, 189. 

parinigpanuata, 47. 

parihara, 155. 

paryavasyati, 110. 

pasyanti, 45, 204. 

pagana-nirvisega, 59. 

punya-sambbara, 209. 

pudgala, 8, 31, 41, 50, 151, 153, 183, 197, 198. 
pudgala-nairatmya, 41, 125. 
pudgala-nairatmya = anatman, 135. 
pudgala-vada, 31. 
punar-bbava, 134. 

puruga-kara-phala (purugena iva krta), 176. 

purva, 65,166, 209. 

purvapara-koti, 65. 

prthag-jana, 12. 

pptbag-janatva, 12. 

ppthivi, 143, 150, 152. 

prakarana, 66. 

prakrti, 28, 106. 

prakrti-prabhasvara, 45. 

prakpti-santa, 206. 

pracakgmahe, 43. 

prajnapti, 44, 60, 151. 

prajnapti — kalpaua, 196. 

prajnapti-sat, 24, 41, 50,151. 

prajnapyate, 194, 196. 

prajna, 9, 10, 67, 209. 

prajna-paramita, 45, 47, 83, 90, 212. 

prajnaparamita-parisuddhi, 45. 

prati-kartj*, 150. 

pratigba, 12. 

pratipakga, 151. 

pratipatta, 202. 

pratipad, 81. 

pratipadita, 43. 

pratiyogin, 150. 

pratiloma, 123. 

prativaktp, 150. 


prativijnapti, 202. 

prati-sankhya-nirodha, 57. 

pratisantana-sarira-kgana, 8. 

pratitya, 35, 48, 85, 86, 87, 170,195, 196, 197. 

pratltya = prapya, 88. 

pratitya — upadaya = pratiyogin, 200. 

pratltya = sunya, 107. 

pratitya pratltya ya utpadas ca, 197. 

pratltyaja 135. 

pratltya-samutpannatva, 33, 43, 90, 177. 
pratltya-samutpada, 33, 42, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88. 

89, 90, 123.135, 164, 165, 179, 180, 196,200. 
pratitya-sam-utpada, 8, 39, 42, 43, 46. 
pratltya-samutpada (= atyantanutpadatvam sar- 
vadharmanam), 40. 

pratltya-samutpada (—pratltyasya (ksaninkasya) 
samutpadah), 87. 

pratltya-samutpada = sunyata, 46. 
pratltya-samutpada (= sunyata = antadvaya-ra- 
hitatva), 84. 

pratyakga, 45, 90, 141, 156, 159, 162, 163. 

pratyakgab (= aparokgah sc. arthab), 45. 

pratyakgatva, 162. 

pratyakga-sutra, 19. 

pratyaya, 165, 170, 171 172, 179. 

pratyaya-adbinu, 43. 

pratyaya-niyama, 179. 

pratyayavati, 168, 169. 

pratyaya-vikarah, 178. 

pratyavekgana-jMna, 204. 

pratyatma-vedya, 18. 

prathama-dbyanadi, 12. 

pradhana, 28, 32, 187. 

prapanca, 91, 137, 138, 209. 

prapanca — vak, 48, 91, 156, 138, 209. 

prapancayanti, 45, 204. 

prabandha = kgana-santana, 85. 

pramana, 17,88, 141, 151,161. 

pramana-viniscaya-vada, 134. 

prameya, 56. 

prayukta, 146. 

prayoga-marga, 16, 18. 

prayoga-vSkya, 105. 

prayojana, 43. 

pravartate, 180, 197. 

pravartamana, 197. 

pravftta, 103. 

prav^ttitS, 156. 

prasama, 211. 

prasanga, 93, 94, 98, 103, 104, 106, 193. 
prasanga-vakya, 94. 



— 224 — 


— 225 — 


prasajyate, 168. 

bhautikani (indriyani), 116. 

prasajya-pratigedha, 93. 

bhrama, 55. 

prasankhyana, 57. 

mata, 123, 137. 

prasiddha, 143. 

mati, 9. 

prasrabdhi, 11, 14. 

mati-nayana = prajna-cakguh, 125. 

prabana, 183. 

madhyama, 81, 184. 

prablna, 9. 

madbyama-pada-lopin, 184. 

prakargika, 123. 

madhyama pratipad, 81. 

praninab, 8. 

manugya-loka, 26. 

pradar-bbavab, 43. 

maha-karuna, 83. 

prapti, 87. 

maha-bhuta, 158. 

prapya, 40. 

mahatmya, 84. 

prapyate, 141. 

maha-sastra, 84. 

prapya-yigaya (= adbyavasita), 141. 

mahl — ppthivT, 116. 

pramanya, 38. 

matra, 134, 191. 

pbala, 179, 212. 

manasa, 160. 

bahuTribi, 181. 

marga, 16, 19, 55, 212. 

badha, 106. 

marga-satya, 55. 

badhajaa-syabbava, 56. 

muktatman, 60. 

blja, 32. 

mukti, 59. 

buddba (= dharma-kaya = sunyata), 91. 

mukbya, 65. 

buddhi, 59. 

mula, 65. 

buddbyadi, 150. 

mokga, 28, 54. 

buddy-upajananab 150. 

mokga-nirvana, 59. 

bodbi, 204. 

yatha, 39, 110. 

bodhi-citta-utpada, 90. 

yathadhimnkta, 210. 

bodhi-sattva, 185. 

yatbadi-gtam (= dpgtam), 164. 

brabma, 38, 45, 52, 61, 110, 159. 

yathavasthita, 91. 

brahma-nirvana, 4. 

yatha-sambhayam, 110. 

bhavat, 199. 

yatsvabhava, 204. 

bhavati, 28. 

yantra-kara, 128. 

bhaya, 28,38, 45, 114, 115, 136, 166, 177, 185, 

yukti-viruddha, 167. 

190, 191, 194, 195, 198, 199. 

yujyate = upadyate, 203. 

bhavatab (= sva-bhayatah), 211. 

yujyante, 207, 208. 

bhavana, 120, 190. 

yoga, 4, 7, 9, 11. 212. 

bhavana-heya, 10. 

yogi-abhimata-sarvajna, 90. 

bhavam upadaya, 194. 

yogin (= arya), 187, 138. 

bbava-yathatmya, 115. 

yogi-pratyakga, 90, 137. 

bhava-sadbhava-kalpanavantab, 189. 

yojana, 147. 

bhaya-santati, 44. 

yonisab, 146. 

bhava-svarupam adhyaropya, 208. 

raga, 65. 

bhayabbava-kalpana ( = bhavabhava-yojana), 

ragadi, 188. 

207. 

rasi = avayavin, 41. 

bhasvara, 10. 

rQpa, 39, 46, 53,v 116, 197. 

bhikkhu, 55. 

rupa = 8varupa, 101, 208, -205. 

bhut, 55, 179. 

rupa-ayatana, 39, 116, 135, 158. 

bbuta, 111. 

rupa-dhatu, 10, 81. 

bhuta (= maha-bhuta), 116. 

rupa-vijnan5dl, 43. 

bhuta-koti-prabhavita, 45. 

rupa*skandba, 116, 184. 

bhuta-tathata, 47. 

lakgana, 33, 116, 150, 162. 

bhedaf 39, 

lakgana-nibsvabhavata, S3, 116. 


! 

lakgya, 150, 163. 
lakgya-lakgana-pravptti, 194. 
lokaprasiddih, 154. 
loka-maryada, 141. 
loka-vyddha, 155. 
lokacara, 155. 
loke, 163. 
laukika, 155, 164. 
lyut, 142. 
vakta, 210. 

vastu, 20, 25, 26, 29, 40, 41, 45, 65, 165, 
198. 

vak, 48, 91. 156, 209. 
vada, 134. 

vasana, 61, 209, 210. 
vikalpa, 43, 137, 147. 
vikalpa (-dvaidhl-karaua), 210. 
vikalpaka, 161. 
vigata (sc. asrava), 125. 
vigama, 208. 
vigrahavat, 38. 
vicara, 38, 153. 

. vicaryate, 110. 

vicarymana, 152, 180. 
vijanasi, 43. 
vijnapti-matraka, 34. 
yijnapti-matra, 33. 
vijnapti-matrata, 47, 

vijuana, 10, 14, 33, 39, 96, 124, 136, 141 143, 
148, 159, 167, 168, 184, 197, 202. 
vijnana (= citta = manas = artha - matra-pa- 
ricchitti = nirvikalpana-jnana=8atta-matra- 
pradarsana), 148, 149. 
vijnana-skandha, 31, 202. 
vijiiana-svalakgana, 144. 
vijnana-vada, 31. 
vijnanadi = skandhah, 191. 
vidyamana, 187. 
vidyamauatva, 97. 
vidyamana-svabhava. 190. 
yidyat, 111. 
yidbiyate, 104. 
viparyasa, 65, 110. 
vipasyana, 145. 

} vipaka, 32. 

vipaka-hetu, 172. 

viprayukta-samskara (= rupa-citta-viptayukta- 
saipskara), 189. 
yibhaya, 198. 
vibhu, 58. 

vimukti-jnana-darsana, 129. 


vimokgab = nivpttih, 28, 185, 191. 
vimokgab (yasmin sati cetaso vimoksah — ace- 
tanah), 26. 
viraga, 191. 
viruddha, 136. 
vivakga, 104. 
vivakgita, 139. 
vivarana, 99. 

(vividha)-asaya, 210. 
vividha-dhatu, 210. 
vivada, 141. 
visigta-sadhya, 101. 
visigyata, 59. 
visega, 81, 171. 
visegana-abdihana, 151. 
visegana-visegya-bbaya, 149. 
viseganantara-sambandha, 150. 
yigaya, 159. 
vlpsa, 162. 
yTrana, 169. 

vedana, 56, 134, 143, 184, 197. 
vedana-samjna-samskara, 39. 
voharasl, 182. 

vaiyavadanika (-dharma), 209. 
vyakti (= arthapatti), 94. 
yyatireka, 192. 
vyayaccheda, 137, 155. 
vyavastha, 107. 
vyavabara, 39, 44, 182. 
vyayabara-satya, 38. 
yyasta-yicara, 103. 
vyapara, 167. 
yyavrtta, 142. 
sakti-rupapanna, 101. 
sarlra, 55. 
santa, 35. 

santa = nivrtta, 35. 
sabda, 50. 
sastra, 59, 84. 
sasyata, 107, 187, 206, 207. 
sasvata-yada, 50. 
sila-sakala-kalpa, 59. 
suddha, 141, 161, 163. 
suddha-advaita, 204. 

suddham pratyakgam = niryikalpakam, 141. 
sunya, 41, 42, 43, 130, 141, 163, 183, 185, 204, 
210 . 

lunya (= syabbava-sunya), 41. 
sunyata, 42, 43, 46, 47, 49, 50, 53, 65, 67, 81, 
83, 84, 89, 90, 91, 116, 127, 137, 140, 141, 
203, 209, 210. 



226 — 


— 227 


sunyata-alambana, 203. 
sunyata (= dharma-nairatmya), 55, 90. 
sBnyata (= pratitya-samutpadah) 43. 
sQnyatya, 43. 

sunyatva (= anta-dvaya-rahitatva=:advaita), 90. 

sunya-yada. 30. 

sSnyata-vadin, 112, 186. 

sunya-rid, 180. 

gadayatana, 184. 

samvadaka, 141. 

«aqiTrti f 39, 90, 111, 134, 141, 152, 153, 154, 
155, 156, 179. 
samvrti-satya, 155, 164. 
samvriyate (etad iti samvrta), 90. 
sarasa-ranti, 196, 197. 
samsa.rga, 65. 

saqssara, 40, 127, 188, 189, 205. 
samsaravasthitah (=prthagjana aryas ca), 202. 
samsarinah ( = ppthagjana aryas ea), 282. 
samskara, 7, 8, 9, 28, 41, 65, 123, 124, 151,157, 
181, 197, 198,199, 
samskara = karman, 134. 
samskara-duhkhata, 17. 
samskara-samBha, 8, 10, 41. 
samskara-skandha, 184, 197. 
sam-skarah = sambhuya-karinah, 197. 
samskrta, 42, 48, 200. 
samskrta = krtaka, 200. 
samskrta = trilakganl, 65. 
samskrta = pratitya-samutpanna, 40. 
saipskr ta-dharma, 34, 86, 123. 
saipskrta-dharma (=samskriyate etad), 7. 
saipskr tatva, 196. 
saipskrta-lakgana-svabhava, 157. 
sakala, 43. 
samjananti, 210. 
eamjaa, 184, 197, 202. 
samjna-skandha, 81. 
satkaya-drgti, 22, 184. 
satkarya, 97, 118. 
satkaryavada, 97. 
satta, 161. 
sattva, 166, 

sattra (= vidyamatva), 116. 
satya, 65, 137, 164, 185. 
satyani (aryasya), 16, 55. 
sad-asat-karya-pratyayatya, 113. 
sad-bhUta-padartha-lesa, 111. 
sanidassana, 135. 
santana, 8, 9, 190. 
sannikarga, 141. 


sabbam, 55. 

sabba-vaggo, 55. 

sabhaga (= sva-karma-krt), 115. 

sabhaga-hetu, 172. 

samanantara-pratyaya, 32. 

samanupaiyan, 145. 

eamayaya, 150. 

samavayi-karaaa, 97, 174, 195. 
samadhi, 6, 7, 9,10, 11, 18, 57, 209. 
samana, 132. 

samapatti = anoms-par-bjug-pa, 6, 7, 10, 11, 18. 
samaveta, 139. 
samasrita, 206. 

samutpatti = pratitya-samutpada. 180. 
samutpada, 85, 87. 

8amutpannatYa, 197. 
samudaya, 16. 

samudaya-satya (= heya-betuh), 57. 
sam-prakasana = samyak-prakaiana, 84. 
samprayukta-betu, 148, 172. 
sambandha, 83. 

Bambandbin, 137. 
sambandhy-antara, 136. 
sambuddha-dht-sagara, 81. 
sambhava, 89. 
sambhava-vibbava, 65. 
sambbara, 18. 

8ambhara-marga, 16. 
sammurccbita, 135. 

sarva, 26, 34, 40, 41, 54, 55, 56, 95, 110, 142, 
172, 181. 

sarva (sabbam vo bhikkbave desissami), 55. 

sarva-akara-jnata, 90. 

sarva-injita-saminjita, 211. 

sarva : kalpana-kgaya, 190. 

sarva-gata, 58. 

saryajna, 210. 

saryajnata, 90. 

sarvajnata (= sanra-akarajfiata = sunyata-jua- 
na = prajna-paramita), 203. 
sarvajna-vada, 90. 
sarvatraga-hetu, 10, 172. 
saryatha-abhaya, 149. 
sarya-dharmah, 45, 136, 149, 207. 
sarya-dharmah (= sarre saipgkarah, 181. 
sarya-nimitta, 211. 
sanra-nimitta-anupalambha, 209. 

8arva-prapanca, 187. 
aarva-prapanca-atita, 202. 203. 
sarya-bhavah, 43, 186, 196. 
sarva-aunyatva, 38. 


sarva-vadinab, 188. 

8arva-syabhavamitpatti, 81. 
savikalpaka, 31. 
sa-syabhaya, 134. 
sa-syabhava-yada, 134. 

8a-svabhava-vadin, 104. 

saba-karin, 163, 171. 

sahagata, 191. 

sababhu, 8, 172. 

sanklesika, 208. 

sanklesika-dbarma, 209. 

samvrtta, 90, 154, 156. 

samvrttab (pratltya-samutpadab), 90. 

sadbakatama, 176. 

sadbana, 56, 120. 

sadkya (— pakga), 94. 

sadhya-sama, 117, 139. 

samagrl, 65. 

sapekgata-pravrtti, 150. 

salambana, 173. 

savakasa, 103. 

sasraya, 115. 

sasrava, 10. 

sasrava-dharma, 56. 

siddha, 163, 164. 

siddhi, 137, 147, 152. 

sukhadi, 143. 

su-gata, 182. 

skandha, 10, 30, 55, 65, 86, 125,152, 184, 185, 
186, 204. 

skandbab (= samskrta-dharinab = satHBkarab), 
185. 

skandha-ayatana-dbatavab (=anatman), 41, 42. 
skandha-parikga, 153. 

skandha-matraka (= anasrava-dbarmah), 184. 
skandbadivat, 186. 
stbita, 181. 
sthiti, 181. 

sthito’py (astbitan na visigyate), 69. 
sparsa, 124, 134, 135, 202. 
spragtavya-ayatana, 158. / 

smyty-upasthana, 146. 

'srota-apatti-pbala, 16. 
srota-apanna, 90. 
sva-upagama-virodba, 95. 
syatab, 94, 95, 97, 98, 106, 116. 

(na) syatab = na karanStmakam, 97. 

(na) svatah = na karyatmakam, 97. 


svata utpattib = satkaryam, 94. 
svata-utpadah, 97. 
svatantra, 66. 
syatantra-anumana, 117. 
svaduganantahpatitam, 121. 
syarupa, 203. 
svarupatah, 177. 
svarupatah = tattvatab. 178. 
svarupavastba, 58. 

svabhava, 40, 44, 45, 46, 65, 106, 116, 120, 153, 
166, 185, 204, 207. 
svabhava-abhava (— sunyata), 177. 
svabhava-kaya, 44. 

evabhavatab, 35, 40, 128, 178, 185, 187. 
svabhavatab = tattvatah, 180, 187. 
sva-bbava-dharana, 46. 
svabhava-paryaya (= atman), 152. 
svabhava-rupa, 208. 
svabhava-vadin, 186. 
syabhava-sflnya, 43, 115. 
svabhava-sunyata, 137. 
svabhava-siddha, 179. 

svabhavena (= paramarthatah), 43, 154, 164. 
svabhavena vyavasthita, 186. 
sva-matena, 38, 90. 
sva-yiitbya, 164. 

svalakgana, 35, 45, 135, 137, 141, 142, 146, 
150, 153, 154, 156, 161, 187. 
sva-vikalpa-abhyudaya, 211. 
svakhyata, 211. 
svatma-adarsana-dharma, 118. 
svadbimukti-daridra, 44. 
svanumanena, 102. 
svabhipraya, 153. 
syarthanumana, 99, 119. 
hi, 38, 56. 

hlnayana = binadbimukti, 36. ^ 

hrasya, 39. 
brl, 124. 

hetu, 57, 165, 172, 179. 
hctu-doga, 108. 

hetu-pratyaya, 8, 43, 171, 172. 
hetu-pratyaya-apekga, 90. 
hetu-pratyaya-samagri, 196, 199. 
hetu-pratyaya-samagrl-sam bhuta, 200. 
heya. 26, 56. 
heya-dharma, 212. 
heyopadeya-hanopadana, 26. 


— 228 — 


— 229 — 


4. Tibetan Words. 


bkod-pa — samnivesa, 181. 
khyad-par, 148. 
khyad-par-gzban 160. 
nes-te, 96. 
no-bo-nid-sku, 185. 
chos-mnon-pa, 162. 
nus-bcas,-med, 172. 
rnam-par-ses-pa = vijnana, 184. 
suin-rje-chen-po, 83. 
snoms-par-hjug-pa = sama-apatti, 
rtag-pa, 185. 


tha-sfiad-grub-pa, 66. 
thugs-rje-chen-po, 83. 
hdu byed = samskSra, 184. 
hdu-ses = samjna, 184. 
ye-ses, 185, 202. 
Legs-ldan-hbyed, 66. 
ses-pa, 185, 202. 
ses-pa-med-pa, 181. 


bdag-der-hdu-ses-yan-dag (= tad-atma-samjua), 
189. 


5. Mongolian Words. 

burhan-bagshi, 26. 


6. Subjects. 

Ab solute, called Nirvana (q. c.) in Buddhism, 2; impersonal, 3; either eternal life or eternal 
death, 26; probable history of the Buddhist conception, 60 ff; whether to be cognized ‘by 
logical methods, 140. 

Adamantine argument of Buddhapalita against Causality, 94, 139 n. 2. 

Agent, denial of conscious agents in the impersonal world-process, 148,149, 176 n. 2. 

'Agnosticism of the Buddha, 21. 

Annihilation of all elements (skandhas) of life, a reality in the Hinayana, 3; the ultimate 
end of life, 4, 5. The strangeness, for our habits of thought, of the idea that such an end 
must be «desirable*, 8; Indian protests against it, 4. Buddhism not the only Indian sys¬ 
tem with such an ideal, 64 ff. The probable explanation, 3—4, 54. 

Antinomies, similar to those of Kant, 205; similarity in the solution, ibid. 

A r y a, v. Saint. 

Beings,^ containing elements of 18 kinds, containing elements of 14 kinds (ethereal bodies), 
containing elements of 3 kinds (pure spirits), 11, cp. s. y. Mystic worlds and Central Cone., 
p. 10,97. 

Bhavaviveka’s criticism of Buddhapalita, 87 ff. 

B u d d ha, essentially human during life time and absolutely extinct after death in the majority 
of the early schools and with the Vaibhagikas, 19, 86, 44; such a Buddha denied in Ma¬ 
hayana, ibid; identified in Mahayana with the Universe, 44—46, 204 n. 8; the question 
whether he existed at life-time or after death has no meaning in the strictly monistic 
system of the Madhyamikas, 203—4; according to the Yoglcaras the Buddha abiding in 
apratisthita (cp. Index 7) Nirvana reveals himself as a real God, 204 n. 8. Cognized 
in mystic intuition, 49. 

B n d d h i s m, was always predominantly philosophic, 5; a moral doctrine based upon a system 
of ontology, ibid. 


•Causality I, in Hinayana. The world an infinite plurality of momentary entities 
(dharma) and forces ( sarnskara ) appearing and disappearing in strict coordination accord¬ 
ing to causal laws, 89, 197. No production of entities by other entities, but their coordi¬ 
nated appearance, ibid. Uniformity or regularity ( niyama ) in nature, 179, 197. The mys¬ 
tic worlds also imagined as obeying to special causal laws, 13, 14, 15. Similarity of this 
Buddhist conception of causality with the modern conception of causation as afunctional in¬ 
terdependence)), 40 n. 3. This the general meaning of the formula oiprafitya-samutpada, to be 
distinguished from the 12 membered special formula (q.c.), 134,164 n. 6. A general causal in¬ 
terdependence ( kdrana-hetu ) between all elements, past,present and future, of the whole Uni¬ 
verse, 41 n. 6, 172 n. This conception the forerunner (or corollary) of Monism, 42. Causes 
and conditions (hetu-pratyaya), 171, 172; the difference how far observed, 195 n., 171; 
both terms used as synonyms, ibid. Classification of conditions, 172; not always required 
to be strictly systematical, ibid. The classification of conditions in the school of the Sarva- 
stivadins, 165 n. The preceding condition or causa maUriaHs {samanantara-pratyaya), 174. 
The special condition or causa efficiens ( adhipati-pratyaya ), 176. The objective condition 
( alambana-pratyaya ), 173. The general or cooperating condition (hetu-resp. sahakdri- 
pratyaya), 171. The homogeneous ( sabhaga -), the simultaneous (sahabhu-, samprayukta-), 
and the moral ( vipaka-hetu — karman) causations, 172. Anthropomorphic {puruSa-kara - 
phala) conception of causation rejected, 176. 

•Causality II, in Mahayana. The conception of interdependent momentary elements 
replaced by the idea of their Relativity (q. c.), 40 ff. Origination, existence, relation con¬ 
ceived as synonyms, 166. The relativity of separate elements conceived as their ulti¬ 
mate unreality, 42; therefore causality denied altogether, 48, 92 ff, 113. The «adaman- 
tine » argument against causation: the effect can be neither identical with the cause nor 
can it be different, 139 n. 2. The current views of causality involved in contradictions, 
92 ff. Critique of the Sankhya view of an identity between the effect and its material 
cause, 93 ff. A new manifestation not to be distinguished from a new production, 97, 101, 
102—103. A new production of an existing thing useless, 100. Meaning of such argu¬ 
ments, 98, 118, 121, 138—139, 154—155. Critique of the converse (Yaisegika) view of a 
break between the effect and its material cause, 120, 139 n.; impossibility of efficient 
causes, 176 n. 2. Causation not to be established on the basis of direct experience, 189. 
Causality as coordination denied, 170. The denial of identity between cause and 
effect does not entail the acceptance of a difference between them, 103—104. Im¬ 
possibility of a double causation, when the effect is supposed to be partly identical and 
partly different from its cause, 121. Impossibility of a (pluralistic) Universe without 
causation, 121 ff. Impossibility of a causation by God, 122. Causation from Time, from the 
Atoms, from Primitive Matter, or Nature denied, 106. Causality in the phenomenal world 
likewise denied, but only on the score that its advocates are lacking the right conception 
of the difference between the Absolute and the Phenomenal, 107; otherwise contingent, 
phenomenal, relative causality accepted, 107, 112, 164 n. 

•Commiseration, Great, ( mahd-karuna) different in Hinayana and Mahayana, 83 n. 4. 

Controversy, philosophic, to be conducted on principles admitted by one party 118;— by 
both parties, 119. 

Cosmotheism, 48. 

Dharma-k ay a, the Cosmos or Cosmical Body of the Buddha, 45, 48, 91, 182 n. 3, 185, 
204; cp. Index 7 s. v. 

Differential calculus, its principle known to Indian astronomers, 142. 

D u a 1 i s m, 8. 

Jfelan vital, = karman , 14,66 ff.; = vipaka-hetu or moral causation, 172 n. 1; 7rpa)Tov xivouv, 
41 n. 1. 


g & 


— 230 — 

El ements, their number in a personality, 8; linked together by causal laws, 8; their 
intensity in a combination, 9; the two most precious ones in a personality, 9. Some 
elements suppressed by insight,’others by concentration {yoga), 10; divided in fundamental 
and their manifestations, 27. 

Energies, their separate existence denied, 167. 

Eternalist, 2. 

EtRic, 3. 

Entropy, 26, 197 n. 6. 

Evanescence, Buddhist theories about it, 110. 

God, as a Supreme Deity denied, 106, 122. 

Gods, their position in Buddhism, 10; are conceived as denizens of mystic worlds, eternally 
merged in trance, representing assemblages either of 14 or 3 categories of elements, 11. 

H I n a y a n a contrasted with Mahayana, 36, 123; its central conception a Plurality of Elements 
(dharma) and unreality of Substance or Soul (pudgala-nairatmya), 39; its moral ideal of 
personal Quietism leading to final Annihilation of every life, 3—4; divided into Vaibha- 
Sikas and Sautrantikas q. c. 

Idealistic views appearing several times in the history of Buddhism, 31. 

Ignorance (avidya) or naive realism conceived as a separate mental element, the reverse of 
prajna, 9. 

Illusion and reality, contrasted, 110. 

Impersonal Universe, 3. 

Introspection, 113,145. 

Logic, the question of its validity under Monism, 135 ff., 140; acceptance of realistic logic by 
the Madhyamika, 140, 141. 

M a d h y a m i k a, = the Middle Path = Relativity = non-Duality = Monism, 81 n.; not nihilism, 
37; history of the system, 66 ff.; its method explained, 98; controversy with Sankhya, 
101 ff. Misconception in Europe 37—38; misconceptions in India, 37—38. 
a d h y a m i k a s, 35 ff. passim. 

ahayana. its central conception Monism (advaita) or Relativity (§unyata) of every thing 
phenomenal or the unreality of the pluralistic Universe (dharma-nairatmya), 40 ff.; its 
contrast with the central conception of Hinayana q. c.; Aupanigad influence very probable,. 
50. This Monism interpreted in an idealistic sense by the Yogacaras, 66. The MahSya- 
nistic feeling of Great Commiseration and the Mahajanistic moral ideal of Universal- 
Salvation of every thing living, imagined as agreeing with monistic ontology, 83. 

Materialism (= denial of future life) 2, 4; ( = denial of retribution) 2,25, 29, 189. 

Matter, consisting of evanescent elements, 3; no Matter beyond sense-data, 152. 

Middle Path, also a synonym of Relativity 81; cp. madhyamd pratipad in Index 7. 

Mind, consisting of evanescent elements, 3; the number of separate mental elements coexist¬ 
ing at one moment, 8 n. 2. 

Monism, 3; parallel developments in- Buddhism and Brahmanism, 60; European parallels, 
51 ff.; harmonizing with the feeling of Great Commiseration, 83; the unique substance of the 
Universe possesses an infinite number of attributes, 91; impossibility of logic under Monism,. 
112 ff; every reason either unreal or contradictory, 113; in a jnonistic Universe the reality of 
the Buddhist doctrine itself must be denied, in that sense that it is also merged in the reality 
of the 'Whole, 208, ff. All philosophic systems ultimately tending towards Monism, 110 n. 

M o n i s t, 4. 

Monistic Universe, 2. 

Moral progress, how imagined ? 9. Moral law how to be established under phenomenalism,. 
127, 183. 

Mot ion, impossible in a monistic Universe, 139. 


I 


* 


— 231 — 

Mystic intuition (yogi-pratyqksa ) of the Saint, 15; the faculty of intuiting directly that 
real condition of the Universe which has been constructed conceptually by philosophic 
analysis, 16 ff. Different in Hinayana and Mahayana, ibid. Is called the Path of Illumi¬ 
nation {drsti-marga), ibid. Produces the Buddhist Saint ( arya — yogin), ibid. Attained 
suddenly in 16 consecutive moments, 17. 

Mystic worlds, higher planes of existence corresponding to degrees of absorption in 
trance, where the faculty of concentration and the special powers which it confers are 
predominant and control the character of life and the number of elements entering in 
composition for shaping individual existences, 11. These worlds projected by imaginaton 
on the basis of observation of the states of exstatic meditation, by transferring actual expe¬ 
riences into separate higher planes of existence, 14. Opinion of SrIIabh a, ibid. Whereas in 
the worlds of gross bodies the formula of an individual being contains elements of 18 
different kinds (5 sense faculties, 5 corresponding sense data, 5 corresponding sensations, 
the mind, ideas and mental sensations), in the worlds of trance (the four dhyanas) the ol¬ 
factory and gustatory faculties and the corresponding sensations being in abeyance, the 
formula is reduced to elements of 14 kinds, 11. The experimental foundation of this fea¬ 
ture, 14. Life shapes under the changed condition that neither food, nor clothes, nor houses 
are needed, 12. The consequent moral perfection of those beings, ibid. Their transparent 
ethereal bodies, ibid. The conditions of their life described, ibid. In the highest planes of 
trance the appearance of all physical elements being suppressed by yoga the formula of a 
personal existence comprises only mental elements (3 kinds of them), the denizens are pure 
spirits merged in almost eternal catalepsy, 11. 

Na'garjuna, his works, 95; his style, 46. 

Nirvana I, Hlnayanistic, a designation of the Absolute as an absolute end of all 
phenomenal existence, 2, 4; — possibly pre-Buddhistic, 4; unlike a survival in heaven, 
23,25: extinction of all active elements (samskara) of life, 28, 197; even the thinnest 
vestige of life, still existing in cataleptic states, extinct in N., 15. Yoga as the expedient 
through which a gradual extinction of all active elements, one by one, is attained 4, 8 ff; 
Protest against annihilation of life as the ultimate goal of life, 58 ff., 186; meaning of N. 
as immortality, 20, 25, 59; it is a place where there is neither life, nor (repeated) death, 
29, 200; a place of eternal death, 26; howfar similar to the materialistic conception, 29; 
similar to the Nyaya-Vaisegika conception of a « stonelike a condition of the Soul as the 
absolute end, 26, 59; howfar comparable to the conception of modern science about 
the absolute end (Entropy), 28, 197 n. 6; the difficulties of giving a clear definition 
of the Absolute realized in Hinayana, 21; the antinomies, 21 n., 205, 207 n. 9; their solu¬ 
tion similar to the answer given by Kant, 208, n. 2; the reluctance of the Buddha to go 
into details when pressed by inquisitive questioners, 21. N. final and non¬ 
final, 183 ff; their definitions in the Hinayana, ibid. The Vaibha^ikas the only school of 
later Buddhism which kept faithful to the idea of a lifeless N., 23, 191; their idea of 
this N. as being a reality (vastu) in the sense of a materialistic, lifeless reality, 26, 27, 
28 n. 3, 199 n. 3, 200; their line of argument, 27 ff., 199 n. 3.; the denial of such a N. by 
the Sautrantikas, 29; definition of the latter presupposes the acceptance of 
the Mahayanistic idea of dhanna-kaya, 30, 189 n. 2. The moral side of the 
problem of N., 3. Buddha’s emphatic protest against Materialism in the Indian 
conception of the term as connoting a denial of moral obligations and of retribu¬ 
tion, 4, 21, 28, 189; such Materialism is a direct way not to Nirvana, but to hell, 189; 
N., although extinction of all life, nevertheless a «desirable* aim, contrasted with pheno¬ 
menal life as the aim to be shunned, 56. The world-process as a process of gradual moral 
purification and spiritualization of life, 9; which nevertheless leads towards Annihilation 
of all life, 15. The strangeness, for our habits of thought, of the «desirability* of such a 
solution, 4; but Buddha finds the conception of an eternal Soul equally strange, 2—3. The 

10 




— 232 — 



— 233 — 


grip of the idea of Quiescence upon the Indian mind, 3—4. The protest of several early 
schools against a lifeless N., 4, 31. The idea of a surviving consciousness in the VatsI- 
putrlya, Mahasanghika and other schools, 31, 61 n. 5; their line of argument, 31 n. 1. The 
Sautrantika-school a continuator of this tendency leading to MahaySnism, 24. 

Nirvana II, Mahayanistic, a designation of the Absolute harmonizing with a system 
of philosophical Monism, 35 ff., 41, 47; its identity with the Vedanta conception, 52,204 n.; 
influence of the Upanishads probable, 50; its contrast with the Pluralism of Hinayana, it 
is neither an Ens, 190, nor a non-Ens, 193, nor both, 198, nor neither, 201. The last solu¬ 
tion (neither Ens nor non-Ens) howfar favoured in Mahayana 201 n. 2. N. means non- 
Plurality 84, non-Duality ( advaita ), 38, 42, 47; extinction of Plurality, 91; no origination 
93 ff., 182; no motion, 140; no real extinction 182; but it is the extinction of all construc¬ 
tions of human (pluralistic) thought, 188, 190. N. inexpressible, 202. N. is this world 
viewed sub specie aeternitatis 48, 195; thus there is a substantial identity between Nir¬ 
vana = the Absolute and Samsara = the Phenomenal, 164 n., 205; no line of demarcation 
between them, 187,205; therefore Nirvana is not a separate reality, 24, 25, 29; such is 
the meaning of the « denial» of N. 25, 27. Neither the Realists, nor the Materialists, nor 
the half-realistic Sautrantikas, nor the idealistic Yogacaras conceive N. rightly in a 
strictly monistic sense, 189. The three and four Nirvanas of the Yogacaras, 183 n. 3; their 
a altruistic)) (apratisthita, cp. Index 7) N., 185, 204; its seeming contradiction with strict 
Monism, ibid. The theistic tendencies of the Yogacaras and their artificial constructions, 204 
n. 3. The 20 solutions mentioned in the Lankavatara-sutra, a literary composition without 
any scientific precision, 31 n. 2. History of the Buddhist conception of N. 60 ff. 

Nihilism, 5. 

Nyaya-Vaise§ika, the Nirvana as taught in the early school similar to the Annihilation 
in Hinayana, 54, ff. 

Obj ect (the) as a condition of mental phenomena, 173. 

Ontology, 3. 

Path of illumination, 16. 

Path of Salvation, its divisions, 16. 

Particular, the notion of an Absolute Particular = the point-instant = «the thing in itself » 
(q. c.) 143 ff, 146 ff 

Personal identity denied, 151. , 

Personality, ( pudgala ) a bundle of elements, 8; a stream of thought, 8. 

P e 8 s i m i s m, 5; the term duhkha does not mean pain or suffering in the usual sense, but phe¬ 
nomenal life ( jauman = upaddna-skandhah) as contrasted with the eternal Quietitude of 
the Absolute which is the Only Bliss, 65; cp. Index 7 8. v. duhkha. 

Phenomenal Reality, vindicated as the a surface» (samvrti) covering the Absolute 
149 ff.; but there is in such Phenomenal Reality not the ((slightest bit» of Absolute Re¬ 
ality, i. e., no «thing in itself» (q. c.) 110—111. Phenomenal Reality denied as against non- 
Buddhists, since they have not the right conception of the difference between the Pheno¬ 
menal and Absolute Realities, 106—7. 

P1 u r a 1 i s m, 3,39, 41, passim. 

Psychology without a Soul, 5. 

Pratltya-samutpada, see in Index 7. v 

Quiescence (real bliss), 3. 

R e a 1 i s m, in Hinayana, 39, 134;— of the Sautrantikas, 29, 189; denied in Mahayana, 40 ff 

Reality, its conception in Hinayana, its definition by the Madbyamikas the same as the de¬ 
finition of Substance or Reality by Spinoza, 41. 

Rel ativity. The causal interdependence of all things regarded as their relative existence, 
42. The term pratitya-samutpdda has in Mahayana the meaning of Relativity 40, 42, 85, 
87, 89 etc. It is a synonym of Sunyata , 43 and n. 1. Existence absolute and relative, 41. 


t 

% 





Nothing short of the Whole, (i. e., the Whole of the Wholes) represents absolute, inde¬ 
pendent existence, 41, 164 n. Similarity of this idea to the conception of an independent 
Substance by Spinoza, 41 n. 1.; other European and Indian parallels 51 ff. Every separate 
thing relative, because not independent, 41. Meaning of the term Hunya as svabhdva- 
i unya , i. e., a thing «devoid)) of independent reality or «relative» 41, 89, 163. Relative 
means ultimately unreal or phenomenally real, 41, 134. Vindication of phenomenal re¬ 
ality ( paratanira ) by the Yogacaras, 33;—by the Madhyamikas, 149 ff Phenomenal an¬ 
other name for relative, 134, 152, 164 n. 1. Cause and effect correlative, 134. Co¬ 
gnition and its object correlative, 163. Sense-data correlative, 158. The «thing in itself» 
correlative, 153 n. 4. Non-relative (=non-coordinated = not caused) is only Nirvana, 91, 
195. Relativity as the «surface» (samvrti), — and Relativity as the essence «under the 
surface » ( sdmvrta ) 90, 164 n. 1; the essential identity of both, ibid. Synonyms expressing 
the idea of Relativity in the Buddhist interpretation, 81. One of the synonyms is « The 
Middle Path», Mddhyamika-Sdstra therefore to be translated as the Theory of Relativity 
50 n. 4, 81. Is Relativity itself relative? 49, 137. Some points of similarity between this 
conception of Relativity and the Dialectical Method of Hegel and his school, 53, cp. In¬ 
dex 7, s. v. vikalpa. 

Release, (Final) 3. 

Religion, Sacrificial, the promise of paradise, 2. 

Result, as a natural outflow of conditions (nisyanda), 176 n., the anthropomorphic, (purusa- 
Tiara) ibid. 

Saint ( drya ). The term drya which in the Brahmanical Codes and all Brahmanical literature 
has the meaning of a noble in race» changes in Buddhism this meaning altogether and is 
used as a technical term for the designation of a Buddhist Saint, 16, 90 n. (cp. the 
similar change that Buddha wished to inculcate in the meaning of the term <tBrahmin», 
Rhys Davids, Dialogues, I. 140); arya-pudgcda represents an assemblage of morally pure 
elements, 15; he is the man who has through accumulated virtue (punya-sam- 
bhdra) and accumulated knowledge ( jfiaaa-sambhdra ) entered the Path of illu¬ 
mination ( drsti-marga ) consisting in a direct intuition of the real condition of 
the Universe, as Pluralism in Hinayana, as Monism in Mahayana, 16, 90 n. 4, 131, 
134 n. 1; is called the Yogin 16,134 n.,— the Yogacara, 212. His intuition called mystic in¬ 
tuition {yogi-pratyaksa ) 16, ff. All habits of thought changed, ibid. This intuition only felt 
internally ( pratydma-vedya ), cannot be expressed in words, 45. The real attitude of the 
Saint in the discussions about the Absolute should be silence, 138. He nevertheless can 
adapt himself to the habitual ways of thinking and instruct mankind by arguments intelli¬ 
gible to them, 138—139. All arguments will be negative and point out the hopeless con¬ 
tradictions in the usual ways of thinking, ibid. 

S a n k h y a views, 3. 

Sarvastivadins, their idea of the world as an assembly of cooperating elements, 196, 197. 

Sautrantika, an intermediate school between Hinayana and Mahayana, 24, 29 ff; their r61e 
comparable with Occam’s Razor, 24; their conception of reality, 29 ff—189; regarded 
as Mahayanist, 189 n. 

Scholasticism in Early Buddhism, 23, 24. 

Sriptures, their conventional and real meaning, 125 ff. 

Sense-data, the only reality in Matter according to Hinayana, 144. 

Sense-perception, its definition as pure sensation, 156 ff.; the Madhyamika definition 
45 n. 7, 159. 

Sophisms of Bhavaviveka,, 115, 116; of Zeno of Elea, 62, 67, 140. 

Soul, eternal, individual, 2; denial of its existence as a separate substance in Early Buddhism, 
4, 5; an inanimate ubiquitous «stonelike» substance in Nyaya-Vaisegika, 59. 

Sound, theories about its essence, 109. 


16 : 




— 234 — 


— 235 — 


Sources of knowledge only two, (senses aud intellect), 141; the four sources of realistic 
logic accepted by the Madhyamika, 163. 

Space, a reality in Hinayana, 3. 

Speech, the Buddhist theory of speech ( apoha ), 155. 

Sphere (The) of purified matter or ethereal bodies, 10; of pure spirits, 10, cp. s. y. Mystic 
worlds. 

Substance denied, 3, 8, 144, 152; the unique substance of the world, 3. 

S u n y a t a means svabhava-Sunyata = paraspara-apeksata, or Relativity (q. c.), cp. Index 7. 

Thing in itself. The conception of an extreme concrete and particular, the absolutely par¬ 
ticular, the thing characterized exclusively by its own self ( sva-laksana ), the residue 
which remains when all constructions of thought aud all relations have been dropped, 
is opposed by Dignaga as a kind of Absolute to the Universal Relativity and Un¬ 
reality of Nagarjuna, 141. Candrakirti declares it also to be relative, 154; its 
double relativity, a) with the corresponding cognition, b) with the Universal as the 
thing «not in itself», 142 ff., 154. Its similarity to the Hoc Aliquid of Aristotle; to 
the atliing in itself» of Kant, 164 n.; to the «Thisness» of Hegel, 53. 

Time, its unreality, 115. 

Truths (The Four) of the Saint, 16; their meaning in Hinayana and their meaning in 
Mahayana, 17; in Nyaya-Vaisepka, 55; a scheme for philosophical construction ac¬ 
cepted by all systems, 55; nothing Buddhistic in them, since they are accepted by all 
systems, ibid. 

Upanishad views, 3. 

V aibhasikas, continuators of the Sarvastivadins, 23, 27 ff.; in a broader sense the name 

is applicable to all the 18 schools of Hinayana, sc. all Hinayana the Sautrantikas ex¬ 
cepted. 

Y atsiputrlyas, their idea of a surviving personality, 197. 

Yoga I, profound meditation, the means of attaining Quiescence, 4; is not magic, 5. Opi¬ 
nions of Keith, Beck, Lehman, Soderblom, Heiler, de la Yallee Poussin, S6nart, Woods, 
Anesaki, Takakusu, 6. The faculty of concentrating attention upon one point to the exclu¬ 
sion of all other objects (~ samadhi ), 6; considered as a separate faculty, one of the ten 
general faculties of the human mind (such as feeling, will, desire, ideas, attention etc.) 7 n.; 
when cultivated induces hypnotic states ending in catalepsy ( [asamjHi-samdpatti ), 7; consi¬ 
dered to be one of the most precious human faculties, 9. Can mean the faculty, the 
resulting mental state and the different places (worlds) where it is more or less intensely 
practised, 7. Its synonyms dhyana, samapatti, ekagrata, ibid. 

Yoga II, the mystic power produced by intense concentrated contemplation of a single point 
or idea, 10. This power capable of producing a radical change in the composition of indi¬ 
vidual existences by suppressing the operation of elements composing a normal existence, 
ibid. Individuals with a highly developed faculty of concentration and having much prac¬ 
tised it considered to be purified, ibid. This power capable of transferring human beings 
out of this world of gross bodies into higher mystic worlds (q. c.) where it becomes the 
predominant faculty controlling the character of life and the composition of individual 
existences (the gradually reduced number of elements entering into cooperation for pro¬ 
ducing an individual personal life) 11. The ultimate end of this process of suppression in 
Nirvana, 15. Buddhist yoga has nothing to do with magic and sorcery, 2 ff., 5 ff. Yoga ex¬ 
ercises in Zen monasteries in Japan, 15 n. Origin and history of the Buddhist doctrine of 
meditation, 18; its denial as a mystic power by the Mimaqisakas, 19; its importance in 
the Nyaya-Vaise$ika system, 68. 

Y o g a c a r a, the school, 31 ff.; their idea that all elements of life are eternally quiescent, 85; 
their conception of Reality, 33, 189; the synonym of a Mahayanist, 212. 


7. Technical Terms. 

ati-prasanga, a generalized deductio ad absurdum, e. g., «if cause and effect %re identical, every¬ 
thing will be eternally nascent, if they really are different, all things being, different 
from one another, everything will be produced out of anything», 94. 
adhikarana-sadhana, a noun denoting the place where an action is going on, e. g., dhyana from 
the Ydhyd «to meditate », in the sense of a world of which the denizens possess thought- 
concentration as their normal condition, 7, 134. 

■adhipati-pratyaya, a ruling or determining cause, e. g., the organ of vision in regard of visual 
sensation, 176, cp. samanantara—, alambana—, and hetu-pratyaya. 
adhyavasita-(visaya) see prapya-visaya, 141. 
adhvan, transition, time; past, present and future, 41, 115. 

anapeksah sva-bhavah, «one’s own» independent existence, non-relative, absolute Ens; a con¬ 
ception corresponding, to a certain extent, to Spinoza’s Substance, 46. 
anasrava, « uninfluenced » by MeSas q. c., cp. dsrava, 55, 125. 

andtma-[vada), the theory maintaining that the Whole, whether a Soul, a Psyche or a Substance, 
does not exist separately, over and above its separate elements ( dharma) linked together 
by causal laws. Thisthe principal tenet of Hinayana Buddhism, synon.pudgala-nairatmya,pra- 
titya-samutpdda (Hinayanistic), dharmata (Hinayanistic), dharma-sanketa, skandha-ayu- 
tana-dhdtavah etc., q. c. The converse theory, viz. that the Whole really exists, but not the 
parts, is the central conception in Mahayana, 39, 41,135. 

■anupdkhya, inexpressible in speech, beyond words and discursive concepts, = anirvacaniya — 
nisprapanca , 156. 

anupalabdhi, negation of the hypothetically assumed presence of something, e. g., «there is on 
this place no jar, because if it were present it would be perceived)), 195; a theory of ne¬ 
gative judgments very similar to that introduced into European Logic by Sigwart, cp. 
Logic, 8 p. 155, «die Yerneinung setzt eine Zumuthung ( aropa ), voraus»; cp. Nyaya- 
bindu, II. 26. ff. 

anupadaya-sat , existence independent of any substratum, uncaused, non-relative, absolute 
existence, 199. 

anubhava, immediate experience (as contrasted with philosophic interpretation), 139. 
anatkantika (-hetu ), inconclusive, indefinite argument, synon. savyabhtcara , 117. 
anya-vydvrtti, (existence of an object established by) contrast with its negations, e.g., «blue 
colour is established and exists only in so far as there are non-blue colours)), synon. apoha , 
para spar a-apeksa, svabhdva-Sunya etc., 155. 

anvaya-jUdna , a momentary mystic intuition of the «Four Truths® in the mystic worlds, i.e., of 
the elements out of which these worlds are constructed in accordance with special causal 
laws, 17. 

<tparoksa-(artha), the presence of an object in one’s ken, the essence of sense-perception accord¬ 
ing to Vedanta and Madhyamika, 45, 159, 163. 

■apratisthita (-nirvana), «altruistic® Nirvana, cp. in the preceding Index s. v. Nirvana, 185, 
204. M. de la Y. P. explains it (Mus6on, 1914, p. 34) as a Nirvana into which a Buddha 
could have entered, if he did not prefer to remain in Samsara and to work for the Sal- 
vatioD of all living beings. A similar explanation is also current in Japan, cp. 0. Rosen¬ 
berg, Die Weltanschauung des modernen Buddhismus, p. 30. J. Rahder, Dasa- 
bhumikasutra, p. XXIY, thinks that the Mahayanistic Buddha «does not reside® 
in aprat. »., ail n’est pas sdpare du samsara, ni ne Be rdjouit du nirvana®. But a 
Buddha who «does not reside® in Nirvana is not a complete Buddha in his Dharma- 
kSya. However aprat. «. is always represented as the highest form of Dharmakaya, the 
most perfect Mahayanistic Nirvana. It is contrasted with the Hinayanistic Nirvana or the 


— 236 — 


— 237 — 


1 


Nirvana of the Sravakas. The latter is attained by the Saint for his own, personal sal¬ 
vation, it is «egoistic ». The Mahayanistic Buddha a does not resides in that kind of 
Hinayanistic Nirvana, his Nirvana is «altruistic)) and represents allembracing Love and 
Wisdom as the highest manifastation of Dharmakaya, just as every creature and every 
object is also but a manifestation of it. The Tibetan Grubmthah is perfectly aware 
that the Mahayanistic Buddha represents the motionless Cosmos and cannot be an 
active principle, but the empirically existing virtues are conceived as a special mani¬ 
festation of the eternal principle; apratisthita-nirvana is thus defined negatively, it is 
not a Nirvana which is reached exclusively for one’s own Salvation, it is «altruistic# 
[ran kho-nai don-du zhi-ba-la mi-gnas = siarthamatrena upaSame na pratiSthitah). 
The manifestations of Love and Wisdom in the Universe are viewed as a special mani¬ 
festation of the eternal Buddha and this is called the altruistic aspect of Nirvana. The Hl- 
nayanist, i. e., the Sravaka and the Pratyeka, are characterized as persons degraded by 
their bias for personal egoistic Quietism (zhi-mthar Ihun-bai gan-zag — upaSamdnte 
patitaupudgcd.au). Suzuki’3 words (Mahayana, p. 345) that the Buddha «does not cling 
to Nirvana# etc., are apparantly intended to suggest the same explanation as the one 
here given. 

abhisamaya, 1) in Hlnayana = pra.jnd-amala, direct intuition of a pluralistic Universe ( = dham- 
mabhisamaya), 2) in Mahayana, direct intuition of a monistic Uni verse (=prajM- 
paramitd). Nagarjuna in his Prajna-mula has taught Monism directly and the 
Mahayanistic marga indirectly. Maitreya-Asanga in his Ahisamaya-alankara 
has taught this marga directly; it is thus a synon. of prajnd-pdramitopadeSa or marga, 
47,90,212. 

arupa-dhatu, immaterial plane of existence, the mystic worlds of pure spirits, 7, 10, 11, 81. The 
formula of individual existence in these worlds includes three kinds (dhatu ) of elements 
dhatu J\ r " 6 (manas), JVi 12 ( dharmdh ) and J\i 18 ( mano-vijilana ), cp. Central Concep¬ 
tion, p. 10, 97. 

arupino dharmdh, non-material, mental elements, 8. 

artha-knya-karitm, efficiency of an Ens, existence characterized as efficiency in the schools of 
Sautrantikas and Yogacaras, 114. 
artha-vakya , an aphorism implying a wide connotation, 105. 

avidyd , naive realism, as contrasted with prajfia amala = philosophic insight, 9, 134,173, 
avydkrta-vasiuni, the four insoluble antinomies established by Buddha, (they are 14, according 
to the Indian mode of reckoning), 207. 

asamskrta, not being produced by cooperating causes, eternal, absolute, (three such elements in 
the Sarvastivadin system), 15, 17, 34, 42, 55, 184,185, 200. 
atman, 1) Soul, personality, 8,- 81, etc.; the equivalent of pudgala according to most schools; 

different from it according to the VatsTputrlyas; 2) substance (= sva-bhava), 204; 
atma-bhava, individual existence, 155, 161; atman means here «body», and is usually in 
this context translated into Tib. as lus, cp. Buddhagho§a, Asl. 308. 
atmaAabha , taking shape, actual existence, 199; = dtma-bhdva-pratildbha, having a body in one 
of the three spheres of existence, either as a gross or an ethereal or immaterial (mano- 
maya) body, cp. Rhys Davids, Dialogues I, 259. * 

ddi-Santa-(dharma), eternally quiescent existence, 35; a theory denying a real transition from the 
phenomenal into absolute existence and maintaining that the phenomenal world itself is 
the Absolute, if viewed sub specie aeternitatis. 

adhyatmika-ayatana, the 6 internal bases of cognition, viz. consciousness (pure) and the 5 sense- 
faculties; the translation «mental phenomena# will be found applicable in many cases, 
although it is not quite correct, since samjna, cedand, samskara are classified as bahya- 
dyafana with regard to pure consciousness (manas), 96, 108, 112, 113. 


drambha-vada, the «creative# theory of causality advocated in theNyaya-Vaisegika schools, the 
reverse of the Sankhya theory of an identity ( taddtmya ) between cause and effect and of a 
mere change of manifestations (parindma-vada), 179. 
drya, a Buddhist Saint, cp. prec. Index s. v. Saint, 3, 9, 90 n. 

arya-satya (= aryasya catvdri satydni ), the four aspects of theUniverse (of its elements) as it 
appears to the Saint in mystic intuition, 55, 56; replaced of Mahayana by two aspects 
(the phenomenal and Che absolute). 

alambana-pratyaya, the object of a cognition viewed as a cause or a condition of every know¬ 
ledge, 173 

alambanaka, the agency producing the intentness of cognition upon an object, 174. 
alaya-vijitana , the «granary# of consciousness, containing the «seeds # in all future ideas and 
the residue of all passed thoughts and deeds, 30, 31, 32. 
dvasthika , (or prakarsika), pratitya-samutpada q. c. 123. 

aSraya-asiddha, devoid of a real substratum, e. g., the quality length of the (non-existing) horns 
of a donkey, 108. 

asrava, originally a physical «influx# of subtle defiling matter through the pores of the skin to 
fill up the Soul; in Buddhism, spiritual ((influence# by kleSa q. c., from Vsru. Buddhaghoga 
derives Pali asava from Ysu, and interprets it etymologically as an ((intoxicant#, 57, 
125. 

idamta , = tathatd, 47. 

idampratyayata, causation in its Buddhist interpretatation, 47, cp Index 6 sub. v. Causality. 
indriya, 1) the six, 5 sense faculties and manas (pure sensation), 56, 55, 116; 2) the 22, agencies 
determining the shape or formulas of life in the different planes of ordinary or mystic 
existence, cp. Ab. Kosa, II. 1 ff. 

indriya-ksana, a moment of the operating sense-faculty, which together with a moment of the 
object and a moment of consciousness (vijndna) produces actual sensation(the sparSa ); before 
such actual sensation consciousness in an embryo is latent sammurchita), 162. 
uccheda-vada, the theory denying future life, Materialism in the sense of a denial of retribution 
and of a moral law; according to this theory every death is Nirvana; Buddhism main¬ 
tains that this theory does not lead to Nirvana, but to the hells, 28, 50. 
utkarsa, either growth ( avayava-upacaya ), or increased intensity, 9. 

utpada, production or causation, in Mahayana a synon. of existence (bhava), of becoming 
(bhavana ), and relation (bhava), 166. 

upapatti, 1) being logically admissible, 155; 2) being reborn in one of the worlds, 7. 
upapatti-dhydna, being born in the lower 4 mystic worlds whose denizens possess ethereal bodies 
7, cp. samapatti-dhyana. 

upapdduka, apparitional, born miraculously or according to special laws, 12. 
updddna, substratum, 134, 196. 

upadana-skandha, sc. kleSa-upadana-skandha, the elements of a personality as influenced by 
avidyd and trsna, = sasrava-dharmdh = duhkha-satya = duhkha, 184. 
upddaya, having a substratum, coordinated, caused, relative, 197, 199. 
upaddya-prajdapti, a synonym of the Mahayanistic madhyamd pratipad q. c., 81. 
ekagratd, the concentration of thought upon one point (= samadhi), 6. 
karana-sddhana, a noun meaning the instrument of an action, 7, 90. 

karman , 1) volition and the purposive action following the volition (—cetana cetayitvd ca kara- 
nam, Ab. k. IV, 1), 2) the will of the Universe, the general force which keeps life going 
and models its forms in the different worlds, the 7tpcl)Tov xtvouv, the elan vital , 11, 13, 14, 
41, 56, 124 128, 172, 176, 186 197. Every system of philosophy in India has its own con¬ 
struction regarding the origin, the essence, the operation, the immediate and the remote 
result of karman. It has accordingly a place assigned to it in the ontology of each system. 


— 238 


— 239 — 


The Materialists deny its existence altogether, i. e., they deny the reality of an influence 
of past deeds, whether good or bad, upon man’s destiny. The Jains classify Jcarman, 
among their elements of Matter. Gosala admitted that volition is only half-fcarroan 
since the real barman is physical, cp. D. N., I. 54. The Mlmamsakas analyse it into 
their conceptions of vidhi, bhavana, apurva , niyoga etc. The Nyaya-Vaisegika 
system finds a place for it among the gvnas where its different aspects can be re 
cognized under the mental qualities of dharma , adharma, adrsta and samskara. The 
Buddhists place it into their samskara-sbandha where it originally held the place of a 
predominant, ruling force of life (cp. Central Conception, p. 20). In the Sarvastivadin list 
of ultimate realities it is classified as the dtta-mahd-bhumika-samprayukta-samsbara 
JV® 3, under the name of cetand «will», cp. Central Conception, p. 19 and 100. 
karma-sadhana, a noun meauing the object of an action, 47, 70, 90. 

kalpana, a mental act of linking together an indefinite something (Hoc Aliguid) either with a 
name or a universal or a quality or an action (= ndma-jdti-ddi-yojana); a judgment of 
the form «this is that» (sa evdyam), 137, 147. According to Sigwart, cp. Logic, 3 I, 
p. 67, the judgments of the form «this is Socrates», (i. e., sa evdyam) are also the funda¬ 
mental form of all judgment. Hence it is identified with vikalpa q. c. 
kalpanapodha, pure sensation without any participation of synthetic thought, 141, 142. 
karana-hetu, notion of a universal causal link between all elements of existence, past, present 
and future, 41, 124, 172, 196; also called sahakari-hetu as contrasted with the adhiputi- 
hetu q. c.; this notion a forerunner of Monism. 
kSlannnugata, having no duration in time, point-instant, cp. deMnanugata 141. 
kleSa , morally impure elements (mental in Buddhism, physical in Jainism); illusion and desire 
(avidyd-trsne) are the principle ones; when residues ( samskara ) of former deeds ( barman ) 
are moistened ( abhisyandita ) by them, they like « seeds u produce new existences ( janman) 
10, 185, 186. 

kriya, ( = vydpara), energy supplying a link between the cause and effect, such as the energy 
heat ( paci-briya ), 167,169. 

ksana, a moment, point-instant; identified with the «thing in itself®, 142; the differential of 
motion]; its principle known to Indian astronomers and philosophers (= ruci), 142. 
ksanti, satisfaction (= ruci), 17. 
kharatva, resistance, 116. 
khydti, —jfiana = ttpalibdhi, 38. 

gati, 1) motion, 115; 2) individual existence in one of the six kinds of bodies, 182. 
grahanaka-vakya, a short statement to be developed (vivarana) in the sequel, 99. 
grdhya-visaya, the prima facie object, the first moment in the cognition of an object, cp .prdpya- 
visaya , 141. 

citta, pure consciousness, or pure sensation, manas and vijnana (sc. vijnana-skandha ) its syno¬ 
nyms in Hlnayana, 31, 108, cp. vijnana. 

citta-mahd-bhumika (dharma), ten mental elements always represented in every conscious moment. 
7, 9, cp. Central Conception, p. 100. 

cetana, will, conscious volition, a purposive action (= barman q. c ), 124, 197. 
caitta, mental phenomenon, 173 (= citta-samprayukta-samskdra), cp. C. C. 
jani-kriyd, energy, function, 167, 168, ( =vyapara ). 

jiidna , 1) knowledge in general in the sense of a mental phenomenon, 143; 2) definite cognition as 
contrasted with pure indefinite sensation (vijddna q. c), 141,149; 8) transcendental,meta¬ 
physical knowledge, 202; 4) Omniscience (— Tib. ye-Ses). 
tatsabhdga , non-active, non-operating sense faculty (= a-sva-karma-brt), cp. sabhdga, 115. 
tattva, absolute reality, 153 ( = tattvam cva). 
tathata , a Thisness », absolute reality, 47 (many synonyms). 
tatkaliki gaiih, the differential of a planet’s motion, 142. 


duhkha, 1) vedand-duhkha, suffering; 2) parinama-duhkha, phenomenal existence ( —updddna - 
skandha), cp. Pessimism in Index 6. 

drsti, 1) intuition, 16; 2) wrong view, ( = mithyd-drsti); 3) antinomy, 207. 

drsti-marga , the path of illumination, momentary mystic intuition of the real condition of the 
Universe, (= yogi-pratyaksa), 16, 18, 90, 137. 
de&ananugata, having no extension, a point-instant, 141. 

dvaidht-karana , dichotomizing (thought), thought operating by contrast of A with non-A, 147. 
dharma , 1) doctrine, 2) quality, 3) element of existence; hence dharma-anu-dharma a doctrine 
about elements or an element according to that doctrine, 183; its connotation (dharma 
sanketa) includes strict uniformity in nature (asmin sati idam bhavati), 135; hence the 
translation «norm», «normalisra» which is not quite correct since norm is niyama — 
dharmanam niyama = pratyaya-niyama =pratitya-samutpdda q. c.; 4) a synonym of 
sarnskrta-dharma and samskara q. c.; 5) in Nyaya-Vaisegika— a meritorious action 
(— karman)Q); in Jainism, a special ubiquitous substance, the medium of motion. 
dharma-kaya, the Cosmic al Body of the Buddha, i. e., the Cosmos regarded as the personifica¬ 
tion of the eternal Buddha, 45; divided into svabhaya-kaya, which is nitya and 
jOdna-kdya , which is anitya 185 n. 3; identified with Buddha’s final Nirvana, 48, 
when mentioned in Hinayanistic lore (e. g., D. N., III. 84 with the synonyms brahma-kaya 
and dharma-bhuta) it probably has no clearly Mahayanistic, sc. monistic, connotation. 
Synon. tathdtd. 

dhdiu, has many different meanings which are summarized in the JBahu-dhatuka-sutra , the prin¬ 
cipal are, 1) when three are reckoned, the 3 spheres or planes of existence, of gross 
bodies ( kama —), of ethereal bodies (rupa —) and of immaterial ( arupa - or arupya-dhdtu) 
bodies, 11, 55, passim; 2) when six are reckoned, the component principles of an existence 
in the material worlds, sc. the four general elements of Matter ( maha-bhuta ), akasa 
and vijnana; this akdSa is not the asamskrta-dkaSa included in the next classification, 
and vijftdna here comprises all mental elements, it is also quite different from the 
vijndna-dKdtu of the next classification, cp. Ab. Kosa, I. 28; 3) when eighteen are reckoned, 
a special division of all elements of existence into 10 material and 8 spiritual ones, 
(cp. Central Conception, p. 9), 11, 14, 18, 56, 66, 4) dhdtu = gotra, 210. 
dhyana, 1) concentrated contemplation (= samddhi = yoga); 2) a mystic world where the denizens 
normally possess thought-concentration, 6, 7. 

ndstika , when used by Buddhists as an invective means Materialism as a denial of barman i. e. 

of the moral law and of every survival after death, 189. 
nih-svdbhdva, having no independent existence of one’s own, relative, ultimately unreal, = 
tuny a, 176. 

niyama, Btrict uniformity in nature, norm, causality between elements of existence, cp. dharma, 
179. 

nvrodha-satya , 1) in Hlnayana, the reality of the Annihilation of all energies (samskara), com¬ 
parable with the idea of Entropy in modern science 16,17,197 n; 2) in Mahayana, the ces¬ 
sation of all differentiation in a monistic Universe, 190 (sarva-kalpana-ksaya). 
nirmdna-kdya, the apparitional body of Bnddha, Buddha in the docetic sense, 57. 
nirvana, cp. prec. Index. 
nirvana-dhatu, ditto. 

nir-vikalpaka, pure sensation, devoid of any synthesis or thought-construction, 31, 141, 156. 
nisprapaUca, inexpressible in speech and irrealizable in concepts, = the Absolute, 42, 43, 44, 
156, 187, 204. 

nisyanda-phala, natural result, automatical outflow out of preceding homogeneous conditions (sa- 
bhaga-hetu ), 8, 176. 

paJcsa, tenet, thesis, minor term in a syllogism, 155. 
pdksa-dosa, impossible thesis (=bddhita-visaya), 108. 



— 240 — 


paksa-dharma, minor premise (= upanaya), 94. 
paddrtha, a thing, an entity, 190. 

parata-utpatti, a break between cause and effect, production out .of something different, the 
Nyaya-Vaise?ika view of causality, extreme realism, involving arambha-tada q. c. and 
the doctrine of samavdya as a semi-substantial universal substratum, an ubiquitous, 
thing invented in order to bridge over the gap between a result and its material cause 
101, 120, 121. 

paratantra , relative (with the connotation attached to it in the Yogacara school which admits 
the reality of relative things obeying to causal laws). 33, 164, 189. 
paramartha-sat , existing in an absolute, non-relative, sense, 111, 114, 137, 141, 146, 156. 
paramartha-satya , absolute reality as contrasted with samvrti-satya q. c., 140. 
paraspara-apeksa, mutually relative, relative, 153, 164, 191, synon. Sunya, pratitya-samut- 
panna. 

parikalpita-ldksana , see laksana nihsvabhavata. 

parindma-duhkhatd , the changing, impermanent or phenomenal world, 17; synon. duhkha-satya, 
or duhkha , cp. duhkha-vedand suffering. 

parinispanna, absolute reality in a monistic sense with the connotation attached to it in the Yo¬ 
gacara school, 33, 34, 189. 
pudgala-nairatmya — anatman q. c., 135. 

pudgala, «the fleeting union of elements that make up, for a time only, an unstable individuality# 
(Rhys Davids, Dialogues, I, 260), synon. alma-bhava, $ant*na. Yatsiputrlyas and others 
assume a kind of surviving pudgala ; this tendency the forerunner of Mahayana. 
purusa-kara-phala (=purusena iva krta) antropomorphic result, antropomorphic conception of cau¬ 
sation, 176. 

prthivi, the resistant hard stuff in Matter, imagined as an atomic force of resistance, 143,150,152. 
prati-vijilapti, the momentary awareness of the presence of an object in one’s ken, 202. 
prati-sankhya-nirodha , the blank created by the extinction of an element ( dharma ) through 
yoga, 57. 

pratitya , different interpretations of the term, 85—88, 107, 200. 

prafitya-samutpada, 1) in Hinayana, interconnection according to causal laws of all the elements 
cooperating in the formation of life, contrasted with adhitya-samutpada «production at 
random », synon. pratyaya-niyama = niyama = samskrtatva = dharma-sanketa, 39; 

2) in Mahayana, Relativity, synon. paraspara-apeksata = svabhava-Sunyatd —Sunyatd = 
samvrti- 3) its general formula in Salistamba-sutra, in Hinayanistic and Mabayanistic 
interpretation, 123, 124; 4) avasthika or prdkarsika pr. s.utp. =12 nidana, a special case of 
the general law, its application to the evolution of an individual life under the influence of 
illusion ( avidya ) and passion as long as they arenot extinct by philosophic insight(pra/Iia)and 
ecstatic meditation and the mystic power (yoga) derived from it. Prenatal forces ( samskdra ) then 
produce a new life ( vijnana ) in a matrix, it passes through an embryonic state (i nidana 4—7), 
develops into full life (n. 8—10), decay and death and is continued in a new life (n. 11—12) 
in a new individual and bo on without an end, until Nirvana is attained, which according 
to strict Hinayana represents a complete Annihilation of every life (Entropy). This twelve- 
membered formula refers to the phenomenal world, 123, 134. 
pratyaksa, sense-perception or object perceived, 45, 90, 141, 156, v 159, 162, 163. 
pratyaya-niyama , see niyama , 179. 

pratyavcksana-jndna, a special kind of Omniscience with which the Buddha, according to the 
Yogacaras, is endowed when representing apratisthita-nirvana q. c., 204. 
prapaflca, speech (=vak), the expression of conceptually differentiated reality in words, 48, 91, 
156, 209, 

pramana-viniScaya-vada, vindication of Logic, anti-skepticism, the standpoint of Dignaga and 
Dharmaklrti as opposed to the Madhyamika school, 134. 


— 241 — 


prayoga (-vdkya), formulation, syllogism, (= prayogdnta), 105. 
prayoga-mdrga , path of practice, the 2nd division of the Path of Salvation, 16, 18. 
prasanga-vdkya, deductio ad absurdum, 94. 

prasajya-pratisedha, simple negation, not necessitating any affirmation of the opposite, 93. 
prdkarsika, cp. avasthika (sc. prafitya-samutpada), 123. 

prdpya-visaya, the object as cognized in a definite representation, the final object, synon. adhyava- 
seya —, cp. grdhya-visaya, 141. 

bhdva, existence, becoming (= bhavana), relation, production, 166, pass. 
bhavand, 1) profound meditation (= samadhi), 120, 190, 2) = vasana, karman. 
bhdyana-heya, an element of exsistence to be neutralized or extirpated by profound Meditation, 
10, cp. drsti-hcya. 

bhdva-sadbhdva-kalpana, Realism, 189. 
bhavabhava-kalpana, affirmation and negation, 207. 
bhuta = maha-bhuta, Matter 116. 

madhyamd pratipad, the Middle Path, 1) in Hinayana, a middle course between materialism 
(uccheda-vada) and the doctrine of an Eternal Soul ( atma-vada , tasvata-vada); 2) in Maha¬ 
yana, Relativity = Sunyata, 81 n., the theory which maintains that the Relativity of all 
the objects of the empirical World is the surface ( samvrti ) of its monistic Essence. 
maha-kdruna, Great Commiseration (Hinayanistic, different from Mahayanistic), 84. 
maha-bhuta, the four fundamental elements or atomic forces of Matter: repulsion, cohesion, heat 
and lightness (or motion), 158. 

yathadhimukta, being in accordance with one’s religious fervour (either Hinayana or Maha¬ 
yana), 210. 
yoga, v. Index 6. 
yogacara, v. Index 6. 

rupa, 1) = svarupa, essence, real essence, 101, 203, 205, 2) = rupdyatana, colour and shape, the 
external basis (bahya-ayatana) of visual cognition, 39, 116, 135, 158; 3 ) = rupa-skandha, 
the assemblage of all physical elements partaking in the constitution of an individual life, 
the elements of its body and of its external world, 116,184; 4) = rupa-dhatu, the mystic 
worlds of ethereal (accha) bodies, 10, 81. 

Iak8ana-nih-svabhdvata, the unreality of logical constructions (parikalpita) , according to the 
Yogacaras, 33, 116. 

laksya-laksana-pravrtti, imagining entities as something continuant characterized by changing 
characteristics, 194. ' 

vasand, the Yogacara idea of karman q. c., explained as purvam jiidnam , and derived either from 
V'eas «to perfume#, or from the caus. of Vcas «to live#, vdsana = bhavand «to make 
live#, to produce empirical existence, 61, 209, 210. 
vikalpa, dilemma, dichotomizing thought, the differentiation of the object into A and non-A, hence 
productive imagination, thought in general and a synonym of kalpand q. c., 43, 147, 210* 
vijflana, 1) in Hinayana synon. of citta and manas, = vijhdna-skandha, = mana-dyatana = mano- 
dhdtu, pure indefinite sensation, pure consciousness, the principle of every conscious life, 
135, 148, 149; 2) the 3rd member of the 12-membered formula of pratitya-samutpada, 
it is latently ( sammurcchita ) present even in an egg as long as it has not lost its vitality; 
this vijnana is regarded by the Yogacaras as an alaya-vijndna, by the Hlnayanists and 
Madbyamikas as a mano-vijflana-dKdtu ; in the moment of conception the masculine and 
feminine sperma unite with vijhana under the influence of samskdras ( — karman), the 
physical part of the new being comes from the parents, but the vijflana element is cau¬ 
sally connected with some previous existence, not necessarily that of the parents; this 
theory, possibly founded upon some observation, has led to the doctrine of reincarnation; 
vijftana is here to be translated as «life», a the vital principle#, and must be distin- 


— 242 — 


guished from sensation, sparSa , which is a further step of the formula, 134, 135; 3) em¬ 
pirical knowledge, when contrasted whith absolute knowledge (jOana = sarvajdata = Tib. 
ye-§es), 149, 202; 4) in the idealist Yogacara system ( vijflana-vada ) everything becomes 
vijddna, it then means idea in general. 
vijHana-skandha, ditto. 
vipdka-hetu, moral causation, = barman, 172. 

viprayukta-samskdra, forces xaT’e£<?x'/) v j pure forces which cannot be classified neither as Matter 
nor as Mind (= rupa-citta-viprayukta-samskdra), 189, ch. Central Cone., p. 20. 
miyavadanika-dharma , those elements of an individual life (santdna, pudgeda) which have a 
purifying, soothing force, conducing to Nirvana, e. g., prajfta and sarmdhi , 209. 
iasvata, eternal, beginningless ( cp. purvantam sama&ritya drsti ) 206. 

Sunya, devoid’of independent reality (= stabhava-Sunya), dependent, relative, unreal; inMaha- 
yana, a synonym of pratltya-samutpanna q. c., 41, 42. 

Sunyaia, Relativity, the theory that nothing short of the Whole is real, the parts being always 
dependent are ultimately unreal; its synonym is pratitya-samutpada, madhyama prati- 
pad etc, 81; as sdmvrta-Sunyata q. c. represents the Absolute, 43. 
samrndaka, agreeing with experience, supported by successful purposive action ,-=avisamvadaka, 
not contradicted by experience cp. N. b. t., p. 3. 6- 
samvrti-satya, the «surface » reality, empirical reality, identified with Relativity, with the Dia¬ 
lectic of Being, 155, 164. 

samskara, 1) the forces xoct , £;ox y 1 v , the four forces ( samskrta-laksana) accompanying the ap¬ 
pearance ef every momentary existence (jdti-sthiti-jara-anityatd), 2) = viprayukta 
samskara q. c., 3) citta-samprayukta-samskara — all mental phenomena, 4) a synonym of 
samskrta-dharma in general, 5) = karman cp. Central C., p. 20 ff. 
satnjna, idea, conception produced by abstraction (: nimitta-udgrahana ), 149, 184, 197, 202. 
satya, truth, reality, four stages of reality in Hinayana and in all realistic systems, replaced by 
two stages in Mahayana, 55, 164, 185. 
sanidassana, the visible, —rupayatana q. c., 135. 

santdna, continuity or synthesis of moments of existence of either an element, or an assem¬ 
blage of elements, a personality (—pudgala — atman), 8, 9, 190. 
sabhaga , 1)— hetu, homogeneity between cause and effect, 172; 2)— indriya, active, operating, effi 
cient, = sva-karma-krt, 115, cp. tat-sabhaga. 

samanantara-pratyaya , the immediately preceding moment of every effect, its substratum- 
(— upaddna-ksana), 32, 174. \ 

samapatti-dhydna , being transferred in extatic meditation to one of the mystic worlds, 7. 
eanibhdra-mdrga, the accumulation of virtue and knowledge, the preparatory path to Sal¬ 
vation, 16, 18. 

sarva, a techn. term denoting the totality of all elements of the Universe including the Abso¬ 
lute, 55. 

sarvajdata, Omniscience in the sense of an intuition of the Absolute, 90. 
sa-stabhava-vada, Realism, 134. 

sdmvrta , «under the surface®; Relativity (pratitya-samutpada = iunyata) is the «surface® 
(8amvrtti) of the absolute reality; this same absolute Reality viewed as the thing lying 
a under the surface® is metaphorically also called pratitya-samutpada or Sunyata which, 
in this sense, become designations of the Absolute, and it is in this sense that Nirvana 
the Absolute is declared to be the equivalent of Saipsara the Phenomenal, 90, 154, 156. 
sadhya-sama, petitio principii , 117, 139. 

sanklekika, associated with kleSa q. c., defiling, disquieting, relegating NirvUna, 209. 
samagri (= httu-karana-samagrx), the sum total of causes and conditions relative to a given 
entity, «the entire setting in which the thing exists® (J. S. Mill), 65, 196, 199. 


— 243 — 

salambana, intentness upon an object as a characteristic of mind and mental phenomena, 173. 

sdsrava, see asrava. 

skandha-ayatana-dhatavah, classification of the elements (dharma) of existence from different 
points of view, = anatman q. c., cp. Central Cone., p. 3 ff. 

sparSa, sensation as a mental element (citta-samprayukta-samskdra), the sixth member of the 
12-membered formula of life’s development, it is sensation in which a sense-faculty and 
its object partake , it must be distinguished from vijnana, the third member, which then 
represents the quite indefinite and even latent principle of life, 135. 

8vabhava-abhava, = nihsvabhdvatd, Sunyata q. c. 

svalaksana, the «thing in itself®, cp. prec. Index. 

hinadhimukta , = a HInayanist, 36. 

hetu-pratyaya, causes and conditions, both terms also used as synonyms, 8, 43, 90, 172, I96 r 
199, 200. 

heya-dharma, elements of phenomenal existence to be extinguished by the Saint, 10. 


CORRIGENDA. 


ERRATA. 


in the printed text of chap. I and XXV of the Madhyamika-vrtti. 


Page Line 


1 

3 

toyasya 

kosasya 

7 

4—5 

ni pa tah 

pathah 

8 

10 

etad va ayuktam 

etaccaynktam 

9 

1 

anenaiva tat-prapteh 

anavagate ’prapte 

20 

3 

samgrahenokta-vakyasya 

grahanaka-vakyasya 

30 

4 

abhutam 

bhutam 

31 

14 

pare 

paraih 

32 

9 

sasrayam 

sabhagam 

35 

1 

eva 

evam 

37 

2 

anahtahpati 0 

antahpati 0 

40 

1 

the second tathagatanam 

to be dropped 

40 

5 

nirudhyate 

virudhyate 

40 

7 

yata evam 

yata eva 

41 

2 

anasrava 

asrava 

56 

6 

tadviruddhaviruddha 

tadviruddha 

62 

4 

asamanupasyan 

samanupasyaii 

65 

14 

dei khyad-pas 

dei khyad-par 

66 

6 

visegananantara 

viseganantara 

67 

11 

samvrtir 

8amvrter 

69 

1 

samvrti- 

saqivrtim 

69 

10 

pravrttito 

pravrttita 

81 

2 

parikriya 

paci-kriya 

525 

15 

vyabhicaritam 

avyabhicaritam 

529 

3 

— gamana-bhava- 

— gamana-bhavo 

530 

1 

pravartayamanah 

pravartamanah 

532 

11 

bhavam cabhavam ca 

bhavas cabhavas ca 

540 

6 

desanayah 

desananam 


K 


Page 

5 

Line 

15 

precedeing 

9 

12 

developement 

— 

20 

controled 

10 

26 

Buddist 

11 

35 

eist 

14 

12 

resi stent 

— 

17 

— 

— 

21 

-- 

15 

n. 3 

meditatiou 

— 

— 

Monastery 

— 

— 

nonastery 

15 

n. 2 

practised 

18 

n. 3 

l’intution 

21 

22 

Vasubandu 

22 

16 

Vinnalaklrti 

— 

28 

prefered 

24 

n. 1 

Bourses 

27 

24 

n. 3 

manifestations 

30 

9 

consiousness 

31 

13 

substanse 

33 

21 

dhama-kaya 

36 

3 

ts 

39 

13 

discreet 

42 

7 

samskrta 

— 

— 

asamskrta 

43 

n. 1 

pratltya-samatpada 

45 

2 

It 

— 

28 

worshiped 

50 

26 

XIX 

51 

34 

litteral 

58 

n. 1 

Heihelberg 

65 

n. 1 

on ^ 

72 

8 

whatfore 

88 

13 

Budohapalita 

89 

8 

disjunctive 

90 

n. 3 

samvrtti 

91 

5 

— 

— 

8 

equalisation 

— 

9 

realised 


preceding 

development 

controlled 

Buddhist 

exist 

resistant 


meditation 

monastery 

monastery 

practiced 

l’intuition 

Vasubandhu 

Vimalakirti 

preferred 

sources 

n. 2 

manifestations 2 

consciousness 

substance 

dharma-kaya 

its 

discrete 
samskrta 
asamskrta 
pratitya- samutpada 
If 

worshipped 

xvm 

literal 

Heidelberg 

On 

whatfor 

Buddhapalita 

conditioned 

samvrti 

equalization 

realized 


— 246 — 


Page 

Line 



91 

15 

(eternal) 

(this negative eternal) 

94 

19 

Bavaviveka 

Bhavaviveka 

— 

15 

Buddapalita 

Buddhapalita 

103 

n. 4 

Budohapalitas 

Buddhapalita’s 

105 

6 

Nagajuna 

Nagarjuna 

111 

n. 1 

paramar tha-sa 

paramartha-sat 

120 

n. 1 

treads 

threads 

— 

n. 3 

some 

sum 

127 • 

24 

be to 

to be 

135 

n. 10 

p. 7 1 

p. 7.1 

— 

n. 10 

' movng 

moving 

— 

— 

samvrtta 

samvrta 

136 

n. 3 

aprati§ ddhah 

apratisiddhiih 

137 

n. 3 

judgmeuts 

judgments 

141 

n. 

samvadaka 

samvadaka 

142 

n. 

kalanugata 

kalananugata 

143 

2 

charac-tized 

characterized 

145 

n. 6 

p. 62 7 

p. 62. 7 

146 

n. 3 

piirantam 

purvantam 

152 

n. 12 

samvrti 

sanivrti 

152 

12 

orsense 

or sense 

158 

22 

transcendantalist 

transcendentalist 

159 

15 

connenction 

connection 

161 

13 

mnid 

mind 

163 

16 

regads 

regards 

164 

n. 1 

estblished 

established 

165 

1 

caunot 

cannot 

173 ' 

24 

conditon 

condition 

186 

n. 4 

svabhavenavyavasthita 

svabhavena vyavasthita 

197 

14 

stopps 

stops 

197 

n. 17 

snstratum 

substratum 

— 

n. 4 

apra Itya 

apratitya 

202 

8 

Bhavadglta 

Bhagavadgita 

205 

7 

improssible 

impossible 

208 

19 

absolutely 

absolutely 

209 

5 

speach 

speech 

210 

6 

religions 

religious. 

— 

7 

existencies 

existences 

— 

n. 11 

poeticaily 

poetically 

— 

n. 11 

svabhavo-sungaa 

gvabhava-sunyat&
