---
title: Biographical sketch of Millie Christine, the Carolina Twin
collection: 21-anti-colonial/colonial-studies
region: africa
counter: colonialism / empire
subjects: Enslaved persons -- North Carolina -- Biography; African Americans -- North Carolina -- Biography; McCoy, Millie, 1851-1912; McCoy, Christine, 1851-1912; Conjoined twins -- North Carolina -- Biography
source: Project Gutenberg
source_url: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/73204
language: English
license: public domain
author_catalog: Anonymous
perspective: colonized peoples
---
Biographical Sketch of Millie Christine




[Illustration: EIGHT WONDERS OF THE WORLD.]


THE LIGHTHOUSE OF PHAROS.

 Pharos was an island off the coast of Egypt, near Alexandria. It was
 famous for its lighthouse, completed 280 B. C., built of fine white
 marble. Its light was visible more than 40 miles. It existed 1600
 years. Destroyed by earthquake.


THE TEMPLE OF DIANA.

 The Temple of Diana at Ephesus was 220 years in being built, was of
 imposing richness, was 425 feet long, 225 feet broad, and supported by
 127 columns of the finest Parian marble, each column 60 feet high and
 weighing 150 tons--these columns furnished by 127 Kings.


STATUE OF JUPITER.

 The Colossal Statue of Jupiter in the Temple of Olympia at Elis was of
 gold and ivory and sat enthroned 800 years, and was destroyed by fire
 about A. D. 475. An imitation of the head is preserved in the British
 Museum.


THE COLOSSUS OF RHODES.

 This statue was 105 feet high, and hollow, with a winding staircase to
 its head. After standing 56 years, it was destroyed by an earthquake,
 224 years B. C. It lay for nine centuries on the ground. It is said
 to have required 900 camels to remove the metal, hence it must have
 weighed over 700,000 pounds. It was erected to express the gratitude
 of the City of Rhodes to their allies under the King of Egypt against
 their enemy, the King of Macedon.


THE EIGHTH WONDER OF THE WORLD.

   =MILLIE CHRISTINA=
   =The Carolina Twin=
  =Born in Columbus Co.,=
    =North Carolina=
   =JULY 11th, 1851.=


THE MAUSOLEUM OF HALICARNASSUS.

 This structure was erected by Artemisia, who was the sister, wife and
 successor of Mausolus, King of Caria, B. C. 353. It was a rectangular
 building, surrounded by an Ionic portico of 36 columns, and surmounted
 by a pyramid rising in 24 steps, upon the summit of which was a
 colossal marble quadriga, with a statue of Mausolus.


THE PYRAMIDS OF EGYPT.

 These were 70 in number. They were constructed of blocks of red
 granite and of a very hard stone. These were of extraordinary size,
 and their transportation and adjustment indicates a surprising degree
 of mechanical skill. The Great Pyramid was supposed to have been
 erected about 3,800 years B. C., and is of the enormous size of 746
 square feet at its base, covering about 12 acres of ground, and is
 over 450 feet high. It was probably erected as a burial place for the
 rulers of Egypt.


THE HANGING GARDENS OF BABYLON.

 These were built by Nebuchadnezzar to gratify his wife, Amytis, a
 native of Media, and who longed for something to remind her of her
 mountain home. They consisted of an artificial hill 400 feet square
 at the base, and rising in terraces to a height which overtopped
 the walls of the city. These terraces were filled with luxuriant
 vegetation of all kinds, even large trees, and were watered by a
 fountain at the summit, fed with water drawn from the Euphrates.




                      SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA RAILWAY COMPANY.
                      PASSENGER DEPARTMENT.
                      H. G. THOMPSON, Gen’l Pass. Agt.
                      H. K. GREGORY, Ass’t Gen’l Pass. Agt.

                        Los Angeles, Cal., Jan. 30, 1895.

TO CONDUCTORS, Los Angeles to Santa Ana, San Bernardino via
Orange, San Bernardino to Redlands, and Redlands to Los Angeles:

It is customary for Millie Christine, the dual woman, to require but
one ticket. Please be governed accordingly when Millie Christine is
making a trip over any of our lines as above indicated.

  Yours truly,
  H. G. THOMPSON, G. P. A.


                      THE PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD CO.
                      PHILA., WILMINGTON & BALT. R. R. CO.
                      ALEXANDRIA & FREDERICKSBURG RAILWAY CO.
                      CAMDEN & ATLANTIC RAILROAD CO.
                      NORTHERN CENTRAL RAILWAY CO.
                      BALTIMORE & POTOMAC R. R. CO.
                      WEST JERSEY RAILROAD CO.
                      OFFICE, 233 SOUTH FOURTH STREET.
                      PASSENGER DEPARTMENT.
                      J. R. WOOD, Gen’l Pass. Agent.
                      GEO. W. BOYD, Asst. Gen’l Pass. Agent.

                        Philadelphia, June 10, 1894.

  Subject: Refunding extra fare.

  J. P. SMITH, Esq., Grand Central Hotel, New York City.

DEAR SIR:

Referring to your call at this office a few days since I enclose
herewith order No. 25286 on our Treasurer for $4.71, covering refund of
extra fare paid from Washington, D. C. to Philadelphia, June 4th, by
Millie Christine, the dual woman, in connection with one first-class
ticket between same points, which the conductor lifted on the ground
that two fares were necessary to cover passage.

Please sign and return enclosed form of receipt, and oblige,

  Very truly,
  GEO. W. BOYD, A. G. P. A., Wash.


                      BALTIMORE & OHIO SOUTHWESTERN RAILROAD.
                      PASSENGER DEPARTMENT.
                      CITY OFFICE, SOUTHEAST CORNER FOURTH
                        AND VINE STREETS.
                      O. P. MCCARTHY, General Passenger Agent.

                      CHAS. H. KOENIG, District Passenger Agent.

                        Cincinnati, O., April 13, 1892.

CONDUCTORS B. & O. S W. and connecting lines:

This is to certify that Manager Smith has purchased three (3) tickets,
Cincinnati to New York, in connection with Millie Christine, the dual
woman, this person being included. It is customary to require but one
ticket for her passage. Kindly be governed accordingly.

  CHAS. H. KOENIG, D. P. A., B. & O. S W.


                      TREASURER’S OFFICE, T. H. GIBBS, Treasurer.
                      COLUMBIA, NEWBURG & LAURENS RAILROAD COMPANY.

                      Columbia, S. C., Sept. 8, 1893.

CONDUCTORS S. A. Line and connecting lines:

This is to certify that J. P. Smith, Esq., has purchased three (3)
tickets from Columbia, S. C. to Lincoln, Nebraska, in connection with
Millie Christine, the dual woman, this person being included. It is
customary to require one ticket for her passage.

  B. F. F. LEAPHART, Ticket Agent, C. N. & L. R. R.


                      BURLINGTON, CEDAR RAPIDS AND NORTHERN RAILWAY.
                      LOCAL FREIGHT AND TICKET OFFICE.
                      A. F. PILCHER, Agent.

                        Sioux Falls, So. Dak., Oct. 5, 1895.

TO CONDUCTORS:

It is customary to carry Millie Christine on one ticket.

  Respectfully,
  A. F. PILCHER, Agt.




  BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

  OF

  MILLIE CHRISTINE,

  THE CAROLINA TWIN,

  SURNAMED

  THE TWO-HEADED NIGHTINGALE,

  AND THE

  EIGHTH WONDER OF THE WORLD.


  “None like me since the days of Eve--
  None such perhaps will ever live”--Except Christine Millie.


  At each Levee MILLIE CHRISTINE will sing some of the songs
  and duets which will be found at the end of the book.


  _Hennegan & Co., Print. Cincinnati. O._




                      SOUTHERN RAILWAY COMPANY,
                      Office of Division Passenger Agent.
                      R. W. Hunt, D. P. A.
                      S. H. Hardwick, G. P. A., Washington, D.C.
                      W. H. Tayloe, A. G. P. A., Atlanta, Ga.

                        Charleston, S. C., December 13, 1902.

To Conductors:--It is customary for Millie Christine, the dual woman,
to travel on one ticket. Please be governed accordingly when she is
traveling over the Southern Railway.

  Yours very truly,
  R. W. HUNT, D. P. A.


                      ATLANTIC COAST LINE,
                      Traffic Department.
                      T. H. Emerson, Traffic Mgr.
                      H. M. Emerson, G. F. & P. A.

                        Wilmington, N. C., December 10, 1897.

To Conductors:--Millie Christine, the dual woman, is transported over
these lines for one ticket, notwithstanding the fact that she has two
heads.

  Yours truly,
  H. M. EMERSON, G. P. A.


                      BALTIMORE AND OHIO RAILROAD,
                      Passenger Department.
                      John K. Cowen and Oscar G. Murry, Receivers.
                      S. B. Hege, D. P. A.
                      H. R. Hoser, Ticket Ag’t, 619 Pennsylvania Ave.

                        Washington, D C., June 9, 1898.

Conductors B. & O. R. R.:--This is to certify that Manager Smith
has purchased four tickets Washington, D. C. to Zanesville, Ohio,
in connection with Millie Christine, the dual woman, this person
being included. You will accept one ticket for the passage of Millie
Christine.

  Yours truly,
  Per S. B. H., D. P. A.
  J. M. SCHRYVER, G. P. A.


                      PLANT SYSTEM OF RAILWAYS.
                      B. W. Wrenn, P. T. M.

                        Savannah, Ga., November 22, 1900.

To Conductors:--It is customary for Millie Christine, the two headed
woman, to travel on one ticket. You will please govern yourselves
accordingly.

  Yours truly,
  B. W. WRENN, P. T. M.


                      SEABOARD AIR LINE RAILWAY.

To Conductors:--It is customary for Millie Christine, the two headed
woman, to travel on one ticket. You will please govern yourselves
accordingly.

  Yours truly,
  A. O. MACDONELL, A. G. P. A.


                      ATLANTIC VALDOSTA & WESTERN RAILWAY,
                      Traffic Department.
                      Smith D. Pickett, G. F. & P. A.

                        Jacksonville, Fla., November 30, 1900.

To the Conductors, A. V. W. Ry.:--It will only be necessary for Millie
Christine, known as the Dual Woman, to present one ticket for her
passage over our line.

  S. D. PICKETT, G. P. A.


                      SOUTHERN RAILWAY COMPANY,
                      Office of Traveling Passenger Agent.
                      W. A. Turk, G. P. A., Washington, D. C.
                      C. A. Benscoter, A. G. P. A., Chattanooga, Tenn.
                      John C. Lusk, T. P. A.

                        Selma, Ala., January 11, 1901.

To Southern Railway Conductors:--It is the custom for Millie Christine,
the dual woman, to travel on one ticket. Please be governed accordingly.

  Yours very truly,
  J. O. LUSK, T. P. A.




SKETCH OF THE LIFE

OF

Millie Christine; or Christine Millie,

THE CAROLINA TWIN.


The Two-Headed Lady, the Double-Tongued Nightingale, the Eighth Wonder
  of the World, the Puzzle of Science, the Despair of Doctors, the
  Dual Unity.

All of these names has she earned at various times, with the final
title which we claim for her in defiance of any other or others:

The Most Wonderful Being Alive.

There are giants and giants, dwarfs and dwarfs, fat men and women,
living skeletons of both sexes, hirsute monsters and baldheads by the
century; there are marvels of nature, science and art, of all which
the world knows; but there can only be one NONPAREIL, one
UNEQUALLED, and that is the subject of our brief sketch, for
only one living creature is like Millie Christine, and her name is
Christine Millie.

But, says the curious reader, was there ever such another heard of
before?

Only one is on record, attested as a fact, and leaving out of the
question fabulous monsters. The first year of the eighteenth century
witnessed the birth of a similar phenomenon in Hungary, the sisters
Helen and Judith, born in the year 1701. These girls were united at
the lower part of the body only, and were perfectly distinct beings in
every way. Helen was larger, stronger, and better-looking than Judith,
besides being much more active and intelligent. These girls lived
to their twenty-second year, when Judith fell sick and died, Helen
following her within a few minutes of her demise. And all this, you
remember happened more than a century since, so that it takes Nature a
hundred years at least to produce such a marvel again. Helen and Judith
died at twenty-two years of age, while Millie Christine still lives,
healthy and happy, at thirty-eight, and bids fair to attain a ripe old
age as easily as less wonderful beings. The following pages, confined
to a simple record of the facts in her career, will therefore prove of
interest and value.

Miss Millie Christine, or Christine Millie, was born of slave parents,
on the plantation of Mr. Alexander McCoy, near the town of Whiteville,
Columbus County, North Carolina, on July 11, 1851. At her birth her
mother was in her thirty-second year. She was a handsome woman, finely
formed and in excellent health. Millie Christine’s father, of Moorish
descent, slender and sinewy, with the powerful activity characteristic
of his race. Prior to the birth of Millie Christine, her mother had
borne seven other children, five boys and two girls, all of ordinary
size, with no peculiarities of conformation, and some of them are still
alive.

The wonder of the family, Millie Christine, weighed seventeen pounds
when she entered the world, and, although her mother was only attended
by a colored midwife, no serious consequences attended such a
remarkable birth.

But, when the child was once fairly in the world, how rumor flew about
the township of Whiteville, and spread from thence over the whole
country! “Have you seen the girl?” was the first question asked of
every one by every one, and pilgrimages to visit her became all the
rage in the country side.

The old nurse who had superintended her introduction into this world
was doubtless awestruck at the anomalous and wonderful addition she had
made to her master’s property, and not unnaturally prided herself on
having assisted Nature to produce a phenomenon; but the master himself,
and his amiable lady, without stopping to question the designs of
Providence, immediately surrounded the extraordinary infant with such
care and attention as enabled it to thrive and grow. The dual-headed
child was taken from the cabin to the mansion, and Mr. McCoy’s family
commenced then a course of care and attention to her health and welfare.

During the first eighteen months of her life nothing of importance
occurred to Millie Christine worthy of note. She grew as other girls
grow, learned to walk at twelve months old, was of a lively and
agreeable disposition, and at fifteen months began to talk with both
her mouths. She was cheerful and active as any girl of her age, with
every appearance of robust health. Her vivacity and goodness, together,
no doubt, with her peculiar formation, rendered her the almost
idolized of the mother and a general favorite of both old and young,
and every attention and kindness was bestowed upon her.

At this time Mr. McCoy, being a man in very moderate circumstances,
a plain farmer, thinking the girl would become a burden to him, and
annoyed with the frequent visits of strangers to see her, determined
to dispose of her. He was not long in finding for her a purchaser, a
person of the name of Brower, who offered $10,000 for her, seeing the
possibilities of the child in the way of an exhibition. But inasmuch
as this Brower was not possessed of the requisite cash to back his
faith, and only offered to give a note of hand for the purchase money,
Mr. McCoy naturally desired some responsible person to whom to look
for the money in case of the non-payment of the note when due. This
person was ultimately found by Brower in Joseph P. Smith, of Wadesboro,
North Carolina, and Mr. McCoy finally parted with Millie Christine, in
consideration of Brower’s note for $10,000, endorsed by Mr. Smith.

The happy Brower, in full possession of his prize, at once departed for
New Orleans, in obedience to a request from the medical faculty of that
city asking that she be brought there for a scientific examination.

Rooms were taken and every preparation made for the contemplated
examination, after which she was to be placed on public exhibition. It
had been arranged, prior to their leaving home, that their presence
in the city should be kept as quiet as possible, as the desire to
see her would undoubtedly be very great and might interfere with the
examination. This precaution was not strictly regarded, and soon the
rooms and the passages leading thereto were literally besieged with
anxious crowds of people eager to get a sight of her.

The examination, however, at length took place and proved most
satisfactory, every physician in attendance concurring in pronouncing
her Nature’s greatest wonder. Being endorsed by the medical faculty,
she was now put on public exhibition, but from want of proper
management she succeeded but indifferently.

Mr. Brower, being quite ignorant of the business he had undertaken,
despaired of success after a few more efforts. About this time he
became acquainted with a certain adventurer who hailed from Texas and
boasted of his immense tracts of land in that State. This swindler
proposed to purchase the girl by giving for her lands, at a fair market
valuation, to the amount of forty-five thousand dollars, and Brower,
having full confidence in the would-be millionaire, concluded the
bargain by giving possession of the girl, and was on the following day
to receive the deeds in due form. The day arrived, but neither the
Texan nor the deeds were forthcoming, and then for the first time the
unpleasant fact broke upon him that he had been completely duped. To
gain some knowledge of her whereabouts was now his first effort; but
so adroitly was everything pertaining to her abduction managed that
no clue to her, or even the direction she had been carried, could be
gained, and every effort for a time to learn anything of her proved
futile.

Mr. Brower, after weeks of useless search, becoming convinced that, for
the present, further efforts to regain her would only prove useless,
determined to return to North Carolina and impart to Mr. Smith his
loss, and to the mother the sad intelligence of the abduction of her
daughter. Words are inadequate to describe the anguish of the parent on
learning the fate of her child. For a time she was perfectly frantic,
during six days refusing food and for the same number of nights her
eyes did not close in sleep. Her excellent character, uniform kindness
and amiable disposition had made her a general favorite, so that
everything that could be was cheerfully done to comfort and soothe
her mind. She was promised that no amount of money should be spared,
no effort left untried to procure her much-cherished child. How truly
this promise was kept the sequel will prove. Brower and partner were
bankrupt, and Mr. Smith expected no assistance from them. But before
anything could be done to recover the child it was necessary that her
original owner should be compensated for his loss in the transaction.
Christine Millie had been spirited away to parts unknown, and all that
Mr. McCoy had to show for her was Brower’s note for $10,000; and as
Brower could not pay this money his endorser, Mr. Smith, became the
responsible party and accepted the responsibility. He at once paid the
purchase money in full to Mr. McCoy, and took from him a deed which
made him the exclusive owner, under then existing laws, of the person
of Millie Christine. The proviso, “wherever he could find her,” was
of course understood, and in order to quiet the mind of her mother
and convince her that, whenever found, the child would be restored to
her care, Mr. Smith at the same time purchased the father, mother and
seven children, a transaction of course involving a large sum of money,
all of which was dependent for its recovery on the recovery of Millie
Christine herself.

The question then arose, where was she, and if found, how was she to be
recovered, if at all?

Mr. Smith found in the person of Mr. T. A. Vestal of Selma, Alabama,
one of the shrewdest detectives in the country, and Vestal at once
commenced operations, with the assistance of two other detectives, and
ultimately gained intelligence of her in the city of Philadelphia,
though not before the lapse of some fifteen or eighteen months.

Vestal heard from a negro barber, whose confidence he had obtained,
that about a year ago a child answering her description had been in
the city, and for a time had been secreted in a cellar on Pine Street.
The cellar was found, and, through the influence of bribes, it was
ascertained from an old woman still living in a portion of the house
to which the cellar belonged that the child had been carried to New
York. The next day Mr. Vestal started for that city to prosecute his
search, and remained there five weeks. Every effort was made, but no
further intelligence of her could be learned. If any one knew of her or
had seen her there, their mouths were sealed to the influence of money
or persuasion. Mr. Vestal began almost to despair, yet determined not
to yield his cherished object. He had every reason to believe she was
alive, for when taken from New Orleans she was in excellent health. The
papers had been watched closely by him, and no account of the death of
any one answering her description had been noticed, which certainly
would have been the case had she died. From New York he proceeded to
Boston; from thence to Philadelphia, and ultimately to Newark, New
Jersey. There, for the first time, he got definite information of her.
He learned from a man then keeping a drinking house that at one time,
when engaged as a cabman in the city of New York, he had been hired
to convey a girl answering her description to a sailing vessel, the
name of which he did not remember, bound for and ready to sail for
Liverpool; that he had seen the vessel depart, and knew the child was
aboard of her when she sailed. Acting on this valuable information,
Mr. Vestal immediately returned to North Carolina and urged on Mr.
Smith the necessity of following her. Mr. Smith determined to make the
attempt, and accordingly prepared for the journey. Accompanied by the
mother of Christine Millie, he reached New York, took the steamship
Atlantic, and after a pleasant voyage reached Liverpool. There they
learned that the child had been on exhibition in that city; also in
London, Leeds and other places.

Seated in a promiscuous crowd of traders and traveling clerks one
evening, in front of his hotel, her name was introduced, and he learned
that a short time before she had been on exhibition in Glasgow,
Scotland. Immediately they started for that city, but on arrival found
that a short time before she had been taken back to England, and was
then in Birmingham. So to that city they posted, and on their arrival,
to their joy, found she was then on exhibition. It now became necessary
that extreme caution should be used, lest their long-cherished object
would be frustrated on the very eve of consummation. The impatience
of the mother knew no bounds: scarcely could she be restrained from
rushing to the exhibition room and defiantly claiming her child,
supposing the party who then had possession of it would recognize her
claim. She was, however, at length convinced of the imprudence of such
a course, and submitted until the case had been placed in the hands
of the proper officers. Accordingly the Chief of Police and a select
body of assistants were called and a true statement of the affairs
given. The American Consul was also waited upon and consulted. He
immediately took a lively interest in the matter, and advised that the
arrival of the American party be kept unknown to the exhibitor until
they, in company with a protective force of police, should enter the
hall that evening; and should the child recognize the mother among the
audience, it would be _prima facie_ evidence of the facts attempted
to be established by them, and used as such in case of litigation.
Accordingly, the impatience of the mother was restrained until the
hour of the gathering of the visitors, when a portion of the police
(selected for the purpose and disguised) Mr. Smith and the mother
procured tickets of admission and entered the hall, as casual visitors
impelled only by the general curiosity. No sooner, however had the
keen eye of the mother caught a glimpse of her long-lost child than
she uttered a scream of such heart-rending pathos that the audience
simultaneously rose to their feet, wondering and astonished. The
mother, overpowered, fell fainting to the floor. When resuscitated she
wildly threw her arms about, crying in most piteous tones. “My own
child! O! give her to me! Do not take her away again; she needs my
care! Where is she? Where is she?” While this scene of excitement was
going on, the exhibitor attempted to secrete the girl in an adjoining
room; but an honest Scotchman, divining his intentions, placed his back
against the door, and bringing himself into a position that would have
delighted a pugilist, cried out: “Ye’ll nae tak’ the bairn ayant the
door, maun ye wallop me first, and I’m nae thinkin’ ye’ll soon do that.”

Such a scene of excitement as this denouement created has seldom been
witnessed. The women fainted, and the men, learning the true state
of affairs from the Chief of Police, who mounted the stage for the
purpose, threatened with immediate and summary punishment the sordid
villain who had stolen, for the purpose of gain, a helpless child. He
managed, however, to escape by jumping from the second story window,
which hazardous feat alone, for the time, saved him from certain and
well-merited punishment.

The mother, recovering, took the child, and they were conveyed to the
hotel, where, for the first time in three years, she slept with it
in her arms, forgetting, in the possession of the fondly-loved and
long-lost one, the days and nights of anguish she had spent during
its absence, and dreamed of naught save happiness and pleasure to
come. But her troubles were not to end here. The prize was too rich
to be thus easily given up by interested ones. So, on the following
morning, a writ of _habeas corpus_ was served upon them, requiring the
appearance of mother and child before the Court of Admiralty, to show
cause why she was taken from the custody of the exhibitor. Here the
Consul again proved a friend and true American by demanding the child
as an American citizen, and requiring it, as a minor, to be placed in
charge of the mother, and that protection be given her to maintain her
maternal rights.

Voluminous proofs, giving an accurate description of mother and child,
together with all necessary facts bearing upon the case, had been
carefully procured and carried there, in case of necessity. Upon these
the Consul spoke a short time, when the judge, arising, declared it
useless to occupy more time, for from the opening of the court the
case had been decided by the Bench. “The child should be given into
the custody of its lawful mother. If it was not the child of the
defendants, then mother never bore a child. Every lineament, every
feature, every look betokened it; every spectator in his inmost heart
felt, yes, knew it to be her child, almost as certainly as though they
had seen it every hour since its birth.” A long and hearty shout of
approbation at this decision ascended to the dome of the stately old
building.

As soon as order was restored, the plaintiff determined to make one
more effort; so, calling the attention of the Court to the fact of his
ability to perform all he promised, he said he was ready then and there
to settle upon the mother the sum of ten thousand pounds sterling,
and deed to her an elegant house, in which she could spend the rest
of her days in luxury and comfort if she would remain in England and
give him possession of the child until she was eighteen, to all of
which flattering offers she only turned a deaf ear, preferring, as she
said, “to return and live, as she had done, in the land of her birth,
with those she had known from infancy, and among her kindred and her
friends.”

It should have been remarked before that the Texan, although shrewd
enough to dupe Brower, was in turn made a dupe himself. Arriving in
Philadelphia, on their way from New Orleans, he fell in with two
showmen, Thompson and Miller, who soon succeeded in getting possession
of the girl, and it was they who had carried her to, and in whose
possession she was found, in England. As Thompson and Miller had been
most successful in their exhibitions of her (in the course of three
years arising from poverty to comparative affluence), it was not to be
presumed they would willingly abandon the hope of again possessing her,
be the means of possessing what they would.

Mr. Smith, the mother and the subject of our sketch, being now free to
depart, made their preparations openly to return. The Atlantic had made
a return trip and was then at the Liverpool docks. The now happy party
again took passage upon her, and after a prosperous voyage reached New
York. There they took the cars and were soon landed safely in the good
old State of North Carolina.

Astonishing as it may appear, scarcely had the party reached home when
those who had caused so many sleepless nights and days of anguish
and trouble made their appearance in Charlotte, distant from the
girl’s home fifty-five miles, evidently intent upon another attempt
to regain the rich prize they so fraudulently had possession of for
a time, but now wrested from their avaricious grasp. The citizens of
Charlotte, learning of their presence and intentions, concluded to give
them an admirably fitting suit, composed of good _tar_ and excellent
_feathers_, and the freedom of the streets for promenading, with the
company of a lusty negro to keep time to _quickstep_ on the end of a
large tin kettle.

Thompson and Miller, by accident, learning the intentions of the
Charlottins, concluded “discretion was the better part of valor” and
decamped by night, and since then nothing has been heard of either in
North Carolina, and the only thing to remind you of their visit to that
section is the chorus of a negro song heard at the corn shuckings:

    Massa Tomsin run a race;
      Oh! oh! o-o-o yah!
    He beat de fastest hoss in de place;
      Yah, oh yah! O La!

Millie Christine grew and flourished, when Mr. Smith, yielding to the
earnest solicitation of friends who knew him to be possessed of the
world’s greatest marvel, allowed her to be taken upon a tour through
the States of South Carolina, Florida, Georgia and Louisiana. At the
close of that tour, in the City of New Orleans, an incident occurred
which, for a short time, made shipwreck of the happiness of Millie
Christine, and which, but for the affection of Mr. and Mrs. Smith,
and the persistence which that affection inspired, would probably
have altered the whole life of the child for the worse. She was again
kidnapped and for months was hurried over the country, from place to
place, and deprived of the fostering care of her natural guardians.
Ultimately, however, Mr. Smith’s anxiety and determination were
rewarded, and the child was restored to the arms and heart of Mrs.
Smith, whom it soon came to regard and denominate its “white mamma.”
Under her care the girl was reared to regard with reverence and
love the Supreme Father of all mankind, and speedily grew up into
an intelligent Christian child. She not only became proficient in
elementary education, but, showing a high appreciation and taste for
music, soon became an object of great interest to all visitors at Mr.
Smith’s home by the rapid progress she made in that accomplishment.

The year 1860, the dreadful year which brought so much pain and
suffering to the United States of America, brought its own individual
sorrow to the home of Millie Christine. Mr. Smith, after a few weeks of
suffering, passed quietly away to a better world, mourned by all who
knew him, and by none more than those who called him master. Indeed, it
is only due to Mr. Smith and his wife to state, and Christine Millie
desires particularly that it be inserted in this sketch of her life,
that she experienced at his death rather the affliction of one who had
lost a beloved father rather than a master. Not only this, but other
families on estate of the Smiths, while calling the owner and his wife
master and mistress, always regarded them in the light of protecting
parents.

But the war came on, and with it came those heavy losses which
prostrated the fortunes of the Smith family, making of the once
prosperous plantation an untilled waste, over which the restless hand
of the armed spoiler worked its will. It was then that the kindness of
the past found its fruit in the devotion displayed by Millie Christine
towards her only living protector, Mrs. Smith, whom she regards with
filial affection, and from whom she was fully determined never to
separate herself. To retrieve the fallen fortunes of the family she,
now free, consented to place herself on exhibition, and afford the
world the opportunity of seeing the most marvelous physical development
which has ever existed in the human family.

It may be mentioned here as an interesting fact, showing the strange
mutability of human fortunes, that Jacob, the father of this wonderful
being, once the slave of the planter McCoy, now owns, with his wife
Monemia, the very plantation on which he was once a bondman, and on
which Millie Christine first saw the light of day, the same having been
purchased by her with the proceeds of her exhibitions as a present to
her father and mother.

It will be necessary to append to this sketch a few of the medical
and surgical reports on Millie Christine’s physical organization; but
it may not be uninteresting to give a brief description of her as
she strikes the mind and eye of a familiar friend. Millie Christine,
physically, has but one existence; mentally, she has two, perfectly
developed. From the middle of the single spine grow two perfectly
developed busts, each of which has a pair of fine arms, and terminates
in an interesting head. Both heads are adorned with curling black
hair; each has a pair of sparkling black eyes, constantly lit up by
intelligence, which, at any outburst of fun and humor, seem literally
to dance with glee; while each mouth is adorned with a set of brilliant
teeth. The two faces are bright and interesting, but differ materially
in features, one resembling Jacob, the father, the other Monemia,
the mother. There is very little distinction to be made in the two
developments. The two sets of brains always agree in forming the same
conclusions; equally amiable, and equally agreeable in character, they
never form different ideas on the same subjects, and the thoughts of
each are characterized by that independence which is usually exhibited
by natives of America. The tastes and habits of the two are alike;
both are fond of music and dancing, both take interest in the same
amusements; indeed, this marvelous organization shows its wonder in
nothing more evidently than its perfect happiness. The two minds can
converge each through its own lips. The being is never at a loss for
society or for company, for each has, attached to itself, another
existence; and yet in no single instance has a particle of disagreement
ever occurred to conflict with the happiness or comfort of either. If
the one mind formed the fancy to be in London, and the other desired
its body to proceed to Paris, a conflict might ensue; providentially,
this seems impossible, and has never occurred. Christine has a
soprano voice, Millie a contralto; and they sing duets together with
exquisite taste and sweetness. Their natural taste for music has been
conscientiously and carefully cultivated by their kind protectress, and
the public will not be slow to discover that they have as much power
to please and amuse as a very large number of artistes of established
reputation. It should now be stated that Millie Christine has four
legs, on which she walks with grace and ease; but she can use the outer
ones only for purposes of locomotion. She is a very graceful dancer,
and executes the schottische, polka or waltz with equal ease. Her
manners in the presence of strangers are most engaging. She does not
object to speak of herself or her own peculiarities, and her two minds
are always as one on these points. The two minds composed some verses
descriptive of herself, which the two voices repeated in unison, and,
although of no great literary merit, they are simple and expressive.
The verses are as follows:

    ’Tis not modest of one’s self to speak;
    But, daily scanned from head to feet,
    I freely talk of everything,
    Sometimes to persons wondering.

    Some persons say I must be two,
    The doctors say this is not true;
    Some cry out humbug till they see,
    When they say--great mystery!

    Two heads, four arms, four feet,
    All in one perfect body meet;
    I am most wonderfully made
    All scientific men have said.

    None like me since the days of Eve--
    None such, perhaps, will ever live--
    If marvel to myself am I,
    Why not to all who pass me by?

    I’m happy, quite, because content,
    For some wise purpose I was sent;
    My maker knows what he has done,
    Whether I’m created _two_ or one.

The medical reports on the anatomical construction of this
extraordinary phenomenon are published separately for the benefit of
the scientific and the gratification of the curious, but sufficient
may be here stated to satisfy the ordinary interest of the public. A
number of gentlemen connected with Jefferson Medical College, in the
city of Philadelphia, examined Christine Millie. Among them were Drs.
Pancoast, Meigs, Bidde, Wallace and Dickson, all well known in the
medico-scientific world. _Forney’s Press_ contains the following report
of the clinic:

 At a special clinic recently held at the Jefferson Medical College,
 “Christine Millie” was submitted to a scientific anatomical
 examination.

 Assembled at the clinic we found Professors Pancoast, Ormsby, Rand
 and Gross, and Drs. Meigs, W. H. Pancoast, Gardette, Ray, Turnbull,
 Atkinson, Barson, Bache, Dickson, Cohen, Atlee, Andrews and others,
 well known to surgical fame.

 The double-headed girl was introduced by Dr. William H. Pancoast,
 the demonstrator of anatomy at the College, and a general feeling
 of astonishment was felt when it was discovered that, instead of a
 monstrosity there was exhibited to the professional talent assembled
 a well-educated, intelligent, quick-witted girl, with nothing about
 her that was repulsive or calculated to offend the most fastidious,
 but which at once stamped her as a wonder and a source of scientific
 information to those learned in anatomy.

 Dr. Pancoast stated that the body had been placed under his
 professional care, and, owing to the important questions involved, a
 private examination had been made by Professors Pancoast and Gross,
 and Drs. Sevie and Andrews, which had verified all the opinions
 expressed as to her duality.

 It was then stated that this remarkable freak of nature was united at
 the lateral posterior portion of the pelvis, while above that point
 they were separated--had separate chests, two pairs of fully developed
 arms, but only one trunk.

 The double-headed possessed separate intellectual faculties as
 entirely distinct as was the brain power of two different individuals,
 while their faces indicated, to a remarkable degree, intelligence of a
 high order and amiability. The lower portion of the body had inclined
 outwards from each side, and the lower limbs were inferior, and not so
 fully developed as the arms.

 A series of experiments was then made under the direction of
 Professors Pancoast, Atlee, Maury, and others, calculated to
 demonstrate the construction of the nervous system, which showed
 that while above the junction the sense of feeling was separate and
 distinct in each, below the union it was in common. A touch upon the
 foot of one would be instantly detected by the other, while a hand
 placed upon either shoulder was only noticed by the one touched.

 The pulse of Millie was found to be about four beats slower than that
 of Christine, while the beat of the two hearts was nearly the same.

 An impromptu performance was given at the clinic in order to show
 the agility of the girl, and, to the astonishment of the audience,
 dances were executed, conversations carried on between the two heads,
 and conversations with two different persons at one and the same
 time. They stood upon their outer limbs, walked about with a pleasing
 undulating motion, and Christine lifted the other by the ligature
 at the pelvis merely by inclining her body to one side. To cap the
 climax, a duet was executed by the girl, displaying musical knowledge,
 culture, perfect time and tune, one head taking the soprano and the
 other the alto; and then, in order to show the sympathetic nature of
 their voices, “Sweet Spirit, Hear my Prayer,” was given in admirable
 style.

Some of the leading statesmen in Washington manifested great interest
in the case, and two of the most eminent physicians in the city
wore afforded an opportunity to make an examination. Respecting it,
the _Washington Republican_ says: “The examination by Dr. Bliss and
Dr. Borland was most satisfactory, and revealed the fact that the
representations made by the young lady’s guardians are entirely
correct, the girl being but of one body, with two heads, four arms,
four feet, two sets of lungs, two hearts, but only one physical
organization. The doctors express themselves as entirely satisfied that
the young lady is the most wonderful human being on the face of the
earth.”

The _Baltimore Sun_, a paper of very high standing in Maryland, says:
“There is, at the juncture of the trunk, but one spinal column. The
nervous system seems to be identical, but each possesses individual
consciousness, and each head does its own thinking. On the other hand,
the appetite is the same; when one is hungry the other is the same. The
digestive organs are independent. As she moves about she looks like
two bright young copper-colored girls tied together in the middle, in
the same dress, which is cut short so as to display the movements of
four feet. The busts of each are very nearly symmetrical; the heads and
necks, shoulders and arms, are perfect. The faces are round, bright and
intelligent; eyes large and clear; hair black and glossy.”

The press of all the large cities in America bore similar testimony.

During the past few months Millie Christine has received an enormous
number of visitors. Christine Millie’s receptions have always been
attended by great numbers of people. In the city of Washington,
during a fortnight’s stay, thirty thousand persons attended her
receptions; in Philadelphia, during eight weeks, a hundred and fifty
thousand visited her; in Boston, seventy thousand in three weeks;
and in New York, in a single day, ten thousand persons flocked to
see her. Christine Millie has made an extensive tour of Europe, and
remained there several years. The _Liverpool Mercury_ has the following
regarding her.


 EXTRAORDINARY PHYSICAL PHENOMENON.

 Since the days when the Siamese twins arrived in this country and
 occasioned so much excitement in medical circles, no illustration
 of the freaks of nature has been found at all approaching in its
 remarkable character to that given in the person of Christine Millie,
 a native of North Carolina, who arrived at this port on Tuesday, per
 City of Brussels, from New York. The young person who is about to
 proceed to London for exhibition, is the child of parents formerly
 slaves in North Carolina, still living, and having several other
 children, and was herself born a slave. It is scarcely possible by
 a written description to convey anything like an adequate idea of
 the marvelous physical organization of this extraordinary being. In
 figure, Christine Millie, who is 19 years of age, is rather short,
 and possesses two heads upon one body, with two well-developed chests
 and four arms. This portion of the frame is as perfectly distinct
 in each figure as if the upper part were the heads of two persons;
 but at the lateral posterior portion of the pelvis there is but one
 body, with one spine, the lower parts of which gradually incline
 outwards from each side, and terminate with four legs. The faces
 are of the African type, with thick lips and large mouth, denoting
 the race from which the girl has descended; but in conversation the
 countenances brighten with intelligence, and those who have had the
 opportunity of seeing the girl could not fail to be pleased with
 the geniality of her manner and with the store of information which
 she has at her command. The question which naturally arises, and
 which it seems difficult to solve, is, whether this is one being,
 or whether, in some extraordinary manner, two persons have thus
 marvelously joined together. A very careful anatomical examination,
 made by the professors at Jefferson Medical College, America, has led
 to the discovery that the lungs, heart, and functions of digestion
 are those of two persons, apparently perfect and healthy in each,
 but that the whole of the lower organization of the body is that of
 one female, with the exception of the four legs. Each head is said
 to possess separate intellectual faculties, as entirely distinct as
 the brain power of two different individuals, and the volitions of
 the will are independent, but very much in harmony with each other.
 In proof of this the two mouths will at the same time converse with
 different persons upon topics of a widely different character, and
 will join in singing a duet, one taking the soprano and the other the
 contralto part. Experiments have been tried with a view to demonstrate
 the nervous system, which showed that whilst above the junction the
 sense of feeling was separate and distinct in each, below the point of
 union it was common. Thus, a hand placed upon the shoulder of either
 was noticed only by the one touched, but a pressure of the foot was
 instantly felt by each.

 Yesterday a private party of ladies and gentlemen had an interview
 with this extraordinary person at the Washington Hotel, and were both
 astonished and pleased. She seems remarkably cheerful, suffers no
 inconvenience or pain from peculiar physical organization, dances with
 freedom, and, for one of her race, sings with considerable taste and
 expression. * * * * *


The editor of the _Liverpool Daily Post_ says:

 THE NEW PHENOMENA.

 A numerous party assembled yesterday at the Washington Hotel to
 “interview” a most extraordinary natural Phenomena who is about to be
 exhibited in London as the “Two-Headed Nightingale.” * * * *

 Christine Millie is a phenomenon of the Siamese twin order, but far
 more wonderful, for instead of two bodies connected with a ligature,
 there is only one _torso_, the body separating a little above the
 waist. There are two distinct busts and pairs of shoulders, two heads,
 four arms, and four legs. Anatomical examination has proved that the
 young lady--she is nineteen years of age--has two sets of lungs,
 and two digestions. It is certain there are mentally two perfect
 individualities, for conversations may be carried on with each of the
 two persons so mysteriously blended in one; and, each having a very
 pretty gift of singing, they perform duets in parts. Christine Millie
 also dances very gracefully, and appears to have no difficulty in
 moving about, and in no way differs in appearance from two animated
 and engaging young negresses, who for sport have agreed to pass an
 hour tied together nearly back to back. The exceedingly amiable and
 merry disposition of the mysterious pair deprives the exhibition
 altogether of that painful element which was present even in the
 case of those practical philosophers, the Siamese Twins. Christine
 Millie “first saw the light” as a slave in North Carolina, and the
 lady on whose estate she was born, and by whom she has been most
 affectionately and successfully educated, accompanied her to England.
 All who met Christine Millie yesterday must have felt interested in
 her fortunes, and well disposed to meet her again.


From the _Liverpool Daily Courier_:

 ARRIVAL OF CURIOSITIES OF NATURE.

 Amongst the visitors who arrived at Liverpool from New York on
 Tuesday in the Inman steamer City of Brussels, was a party of
 ladies and gentlemen, whom the indefatigable Mr. Barnum, of showman
 notoriety, has nothing to do with, though here for the edification of
 the curious.

 The most singular and physiologically interesting member of the
 party is a young lady, between eighteen and nineteen years of age,
 or rather, two young ladies rolled into one, who is certainly a
 rival to the famous Siamese Twins, and very much more attractive in
 appearance than Messrs. Chang and Eng. Those who saw the Siamese
 Twins during their presence in England will have a vivid recollection
 of the painful look that their features bore, and the constrained
 movements of their bodies while walking in any direction. There is a
 total absence of this in the young lady who bears the name of Miss
 Christine Millie, whose four bright black eyes and dazzling rows
 of pearly-white teeth light up a fair Creole complexion with an
 animation that is really attractive. This singular _lusus naturæ_ is
 the offspring of parents who were slaves in North Carolina previous
 to the American civil war, and has several brothers and sisters who
 are like ordinary humanity. During the struggle the family suffered
 considerable privation; but as a curious illustration of the changes
 which have taken place in Southern society, through the war and
 the declaration of freedom from slavery, it may be mentioned that
 the father of Christine Millie is now the owner of the plantation
 on which he was once a slave. As to the young lady herself--for we
 have surgical authority for describing her--she has bodily only one
 person, though possessed of two heads, two pairs of shoulders, four
 arms, and two pairs of legs, amalgamated curiously with one trunk.
 We can only say that an hour’s audience with her yesterday afternoon
 proved her to be a cultured, self-possessed and accomplished person,
 who had a most singular attribute of being able to hold two totally
 distinct conversations at the same time with different persons, or
 the same person, can sing a duet very tastefully and tunefully in two
 voices, soprano and contralto, and can dance a mazourka with singular
 grace and facility. There was no difficulty made in exhibiting the
 upper portion of the dorsal connection, and it was done without any
 infringement of modesty.


From the _Liverpool Leader_

 “MOST EXTRAORDINARY.”

 In the steamship City of Brussels, from New York, on the 2d of May,
 1871, arrived a cargo which, in the words of Mr. Toole, may be termed
 “most extraordinary.” Of all the curiosities ever unearthed by the
 immortal Barnum, none can compare in the most minute degree with
 Millie Christine, a daughter or daughters--whichever the fastidious
 please--of the State of North Carolina. They first saw the light
 nineteen years ago, and the mother is presumably the founder of that
 gigantic Woman’s Rights Association in America, which has lately
 made formidable inroads upon English society. Here we have a young
 lady with one body, but two distinct minds, borne by two separate
 heads. All the intelligent men who saw her at the Washington Hotel
 the other day, can bear witness to the marvellous intelligence which
 predominates in both brains; the conversational powers of the two
 heads at once in communication with two different persons; upon
 different topics, would sufficiently testify it. But the marvel did
 not stop here; some of the sweetest duets in the language of music
 were sung by a high soprano and a pure contralto. The notes issued
 from two heads, and yet but one trunk supplied the _verve_. It may
 now be added that this extraordinary trunk has two pairs of perfect
 legs, terminating in symmetrical and very pretty feet, and that,
 moving upon their pedal extremities, the trunk exhibits the very
 poetry of motion. The polka, the mazourka, the schottische, are
 delineated by these two pairs of pretty feet, in perfect time and
 harmony, and the spectator is rewarded not by one smile, as in the
 case of ordinary young ladies, but by two distinct smiles, winked at
 you by two pairs of sparkling and roguish eyes, and thrown at you by
 two different sets of the purest ivory that ever adorned the mouth
 of an Indian Sultana. There are a lot of people here, or elsewhere,
 always ready to strain at the smallest gnat and swallow the biggest
 camel, who will doubtless put this young lady down as outside the
 pale of ordinary humanity. If this prejudice should carry one so far
 as to avoid her, they alone will be the losers. We can testify that
 no person of ordinary intelligence can be in her company for half an
 hour without yielding to the charm of her manner and the fascination
 of her double smiles. She has you on both sides. If you remove your
 head from one position you are immediately the victim of another
 pair of eyes, which fix you and, in fact, transfix you. We candidly
 admit that we were fascinated, and that we immediately lost sight
 of the phenomenon and became overpowered by the influence of this
 dual brain. The young lady will shortly hold _levees_ in London, and
 the public of Liverpool may hope to see her by-and-by. The eminent
 medical men of the United States testify that this remarkable freak
 of nature is united at the lateral posterior portion of the pelvis,
 while above that portion they are separated, have separate chests,
 two pair of fully developed arms, but only one trunk. With the
 double head they possess separate intellectual faculties as entirely
 distinct as in the brain power of two different individuals, while
 their faces indicate to a remarkable degree intelligence of a high
 order and great amiability.


 VISIT OF EMINENT MEN IN LIVERPOOL TO MILLIE CHRISTINE.

 On the 4th of May a reception for medical men was held at the
 Washington Hotel, Liverpool, and was attended by the following eminent
 members of that faculty: Dr. Nevins, Dr. Bickersteth, Dr. McGregor,
 Dr. Greegan, Dr. Slack, Dr. Gorst, Dr. Steele, Mr. T. Bickerton,
 F.R.C.S., etc.; Mr. Edgar Browne, M.R.C.S.; Mr. Jas. Pen Harris, Mr.
 W. H. Manifold, etc. Having had an opportunity of explaining the bond
 of union, these eminent men were unanimously of the opinion that
 Millie Christine is the most extraordinary phenomenon the world has
 ever seen.


 THE TWO-HEADED GIRL.

 LAUGHABLE ACCOUNT OF THE TWO-HEADED GIRL BY A WESTERN EDITOR.

 “Girls in this city are divided into two classes--single-headed
 girls and double-headed ditto. The single-headed ones are certainly
 the most numerous, but the double-headed ones appear to be the most
 attractive. This is evident from the fact, that while we can see a
 single-headed girl almost any time, we have to pay in order to be
 introduced to the maid with the duplex cranium. We say ‘maid’ because
 the last double-headed girl we saw was not married. There was one man
 who courted her successfully, as he thought, for a time, but before
 popping the question he kissed one face first, and could never get
 the consent of the other head. She is now waiting till a two-headed
 man comes along, and is gay with hope.

 “This duplex girl, however, must be in every way a desirable match.
 Though the assurance given that she eats with both heads may tell
 against her with parsimonious wooers, yet the fact that she buys
 dresses for one only must be an immense advantage. The same with her
 talking. The two-headed girl must be extremely circumspect, not only
 in her walk, but in her conversation. As she can never have a secret,
 she can have no opportunity to go around telling it. Neither will
 any one ever tell a secret to one head for fear that the other would
 split upon it.

 “The fact of having two tongues should not militate against her, as,
 if she had only one, she would probably keep it going all the time,
 while, if she uses two, the one deadens the sound of the other.
 Whichever way we look at the two-headed girl we see her to advantage,
 though we don’t mean to say the least that should be understood to
 disparage a girl because she happens to be born with only one head.”

After an absence of eight years Christine Millie returned to her
native land on October 1st, 1878. Her tour abroad was a continued
ovation of success. She visited the principal cities and towns in
England, France, Germany, Belgium, Italy, Hungary, Austria, Holland
and Russia. At every point the young lady was commanded to appear
before the nobility and rulers of these great countries. Kingly
presents and valuable jewels were given as tokens of appreciation not
only of her as a remarkable curiosity, but of her graceful bearing,
her contented disposition and of her artistic musical abilities.
Before she had landed, upon her arrival, a representative of the _New
York Herald_ greeted her, and the next morning that journal gave
forth to the whole United States the return of one of its children,
who had fully established herself to be the greatest curiosity of the
greatest country in the world. Since her return she has exhibited to
thousands in the cities of Boston, Philadelphia and New York. While
in Philadelphia she again appeared before the professors and students
of the Jefferson Medical College. Professor Pancoast for the second
time examined her. A portion of his lecture is extracted from the
_Philadelphia Evening Telegraph_.

 This afternoon, at 1 o’clock, Millie and Christine were given a
 scientific examination by Professor W. H. Pancoast, at his clinic,
 at the Jefferson Medical College Hospital. The well-like room was
 crowded, and Professor Pancoast busy removing a cancer from a patient
 when the reporter arrived. During the operation Baron Littlefinger
 and Count Rosebud, two most intelligent dwarfs--perfect little men
 in figure--were present, and appeared interested spectators of the
 operation. In introducing Millie and Christine, the Professor said
 that he considered them the most interesting personages that have
 ever come under the notice of scientific men, far more interesting
 than the Siamese Twins. In the midst of his discourse the young
 ladies entered, clad in green silk on their two bodies, pretty little
 bronze boots on the four feet, white kids on their four hands. They
 moved forward like an expanded V, with a crab-like movement that was
 not ungraceful. Born back-to-back, the Professor explained that the
 natural desire of each to walk face forward had twisted them in their
 present position. Separate entities, separate individualities, each
 can pursue separate lines of thought and conversation independent
 of the other. From habit their appetites call for food and drink at
 the same time. All the ills of flesh are not, however, necessarily
 theirs in common. One may have the toothache and the other be free
 from any ache. But in the examination conducted to-day the Professor
 discovered a remarkable development of sensibility since his previous
 examination eight years ago. Touching them on any extreme of the
 body, on any foot for example, both in common were conscious of the
 touch. Christine has been and is now the larger and stronger of the
 two. As children they used to have little struggles and quarrels for
 supremacy, but, as they could not get away from each other, they
 early concluded that the best way to get along in their novel path
 through life was to yield to each other. Their present happiness and
 affection for each other is an example for couples who are yoked
 together in marital bonds. Sometimes Christine rolls over Millie in
 bed without awakening her. Both can sleep separately. They can stand
 and walk on their outside legs, but they prefer to walk on all fours.
 Millie cannot lift up Christine’s legs, or Christine Millie’s legs.
 Since the Hungarian sisters, there has been no similar case reported
 reaching adult life for 170 years. The bond of union between these,
 which is just above the bones of the spine, is chiefly cartilaginous,
 but the spines are so closely approximated that there is an osseous
 union between them. To the question by Professor Pancoast, whether
 either was engaged to be married, each denied the soft impeachment
 with decision, though the Professor explained that physically there
 are no serious objections to the marriage of Her or Them; but morally
 there was a most decided one. During the Professor’s lecture
 the Misses Christine Millie and Millie Christine appeared very
 much interested in the diagnosis of their singular condition, and
 evidenced their superior intelligence by their apt and ready answers.

While abroad Millie Christine made herself mistress of the French,
German, Italian, and Spanish languages. Always industrious, she makes
her entire wardrobe, even to her dresses, for exhibition purposes. She
dresses herself without trouble. Having lived thus long together, they
express no desire to be parted and hope to leave this world as they
came into it--together.




                      THE MISSOURI PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY,
                      St. Louis, Iron Mountain & Southern Railway Co.
                        and
                      Leased, Operated and Independent Lines.
                      August Sundholm, P. & T. A.
                      G. H. Richie, Guy E. Thompson, Ass’ts.
                      S. W. Cor. Markham & Louisiana Sts. & Union Depot.

                        Little Rock, Ark., February 19, 1899.

Conductors S. L., I. M. & S. Ry. and Connecting Lines:--It is
customary to carry Millie Christine on one ticket.

  Respectfully,
  AUGUST SUNDHOLM, P. & T. A.


                      NORFOLK & WESTERN RAILWAY CO.,
                      Norfolk & Richmond Vestibuled Limited.
                      Fastest Train in the South.
                      VIRGINIA AND OHIO LINE.
                      West and North-West.
                      C. H. Bosley, D. P. A.,
                      Jno. E. Wagner. C. P. & T. A.,
                        838 Main St., Richmond, Va.
                      W. E. Hazlewood, P. A., 93 Granby St.
                        under Monticello Hotel, Norfolk, Va.

                        Norfolk, Va., April 25, 1903.

To Conductors, Norfolk and Western Railway Company.

Gentlemen:--For your information I beg to advise that manager of
Millie Christine, a dual woman, is in the habit of only purchasing one
ticket for her. This custom has been adhered to and recognized by all
lines.

  Yours truly,
  W. E. HAZLEWOOD, P. A.




Certificates of Eminent Medical Men


Hundreds of certificates might be given, but the following are
sufficient:

                    1,100 WALNUT STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA., Jan., 1871.

 I have examined Millie Christine and consider her a more interesting
 anatomical curiosity than the Siamese Twins, on whose bodies I made
 (assisted by a colleague) a post-mortem examination. I consider
 the union of the Carolina Twin more curious even than the famous
 Hungarian Sisters, who were born October 26th, 1701. Millie Christine
 is joined by the sacrum and coccyx. The lower part of the spinal
 cords are united together. There are separate bladders, but one
 common vagina, one uterus to be recognized, and one perfect anus. The
 bond of the union at this date measures 26 inches in circumference.

   WM. H. PANCOAST, M.D., etc.


                1,117 SPRUCE STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA., Jan. 20th, 1882.

 I have had the opportunity (in conjunction with Professors Gross
 and Pancoast) of examining very carefully the celebrated Carolina
 Twin. She and they are simply wonderful in their anatomical
 construction--far more so than the Hungarian Sisters or the Siamese
 Twins. Intellectually they are separate and distinct, sexually but
 one. Rectum and vagina in common and possessing but one uterus.

   T. H. ANDREWS, M.D.


                                        NEW YORK CITY, August 5th, 1871.

 The undersigned were among those who were invited to visit Millie
 Christine to-day, heartily concurring in all former medical reports
 relative to she and they being both two and yet but one person,
 stamping her as the world’s greatest and most interesting personage:

   Dr. ANDERSON,
   Dr. DAVIDSON,
   Dr. BRUCE,
   Dr. CROMPTON,
   Dr. CHADSEY,
   Dr. COOPER, University Medical College.
   Prof. CARMICHAEL,
   Dr. E. B. BELDEN,
   Dr. WOOSTER,
   Dr. BEACH,
   Dr. C. H. BROWN,
   Dr. J. C. BOULLE,
   Dr. I. C. MCCOY,
   Dr. S. W. DAVID,
   Dr. BARKER,
   Dr. DEMAREST.


                                   _Lancet_, Medical Journal of England.

 The following prominent scientific men of Great Britain are among
 the few who vouch for the genuineness of the marvelous Two-Headed
 Nightingale:

   SIR JAMES PAGET, Bart, Pres. R.C.S., F.R.S., &c.
   SIR W. W. GULL, Bart, M.D., F.R.C., &c.
   SIR W. FERGUSON, Bart, M.D., F.R.C.S., &c.
   SIR HENRY THOMPSON, F.R.C.S., M.D.
   HENRY FEE, F.R.C.S., &c.


 And leading surgeons and medical men of Russia, Austria, Switzerland,
 Germany, Spain, France, Italy and Belgium fully concur and endorse
 the statements above given.


                                 15 SOUTH CHARLOOT ST., 11th Jan., 1856.

 I have this day examined Millie Christine, and find that the band
 of union is between 15 and 17 inches in circumference, involving
 at least the bones of the sacrum and coccyx immovable, uniting the
 sacral nerves and spinal cord, so as to constitute one individual, or
 two girls in one nervous system. I also find both heads sprightly and
 intelligent, and deem her a much greater curiosity than the Siamese
 Twins.

   (Signed.)
   JOHN LEZARS,
   Professor of Surgery to the Royal College of Surgery, and Senior
     Operating Surgeon in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh.


                                           NEW ORLEANS, 10th Feb., 1858.

 I have this day examined the “Two-Headed Girl,” and find her to be a
 very remarkable anatomical curiosity. The spines are united, having
 rectum and vagina in common.

   J.C. NOTT, M.D.

 I fully concur in the above opinion.

   THOS. HUNT, M.D.


                                         ST. LOUIS, MO., May 28th, 1858.

 We, the undersigned, having made a critical examination of the _lusus
 naturæ_, known as the “Two-Headed Girl,” now being exhibited in our
 city by Mr. Vestal, would beg leave to state that this wonder, as
 regards the pelvic arrangements is, in our opinion, one; in all other
 particulars double.

   JOHN B. McDOWELL, M.D.,
   B. F. EDWARDS, M.D.,
   WM. CARR LANE, M.D.,
   J. M. SCOTT, M.D.


                                       ST. JOSEPH, MO., July 13th, 1858.

 The undersigned, physicians of St. Joseph, having been invited to see
 the _lusus naturæ_ now on exhibition in the city, fully concur in
 the statement that it is the greatest wonder of the age, having two
 heads, four legs, four arms and but one body, and one consolidated
 pelvis, and perfect sympathy of desire.

   W. I. HEDDEW, M.D.,
   J. H. CRAND, M.D.,
   J. A. CHAMBERS, M.D.,
   O. B. KNODE, M.D.,
   C. CATLETT, M.D.




 ROYAL GUEST.

 THE FAMOUS

 Two-Headed Nightingale.

 [Illustration: Royal Coat of Arms]

 _Four Times by Command before the Royal Family._

 _Thrice before the Prince and Princess of Wales and also before all
 the Crowned Heads of Europe._


 A ROYAL GUEST.--By Royal Command, Mlle. Millie Christine, the
 marvelous “Two-headed Nightingale,” visited her Majesty the Queen at
 Buckingham Palace.--_London Times._

 Mlle. Millie Christine, the famous “Two-headed Nightingale,” had the
 honor of appearing (by command) before H. R. H. the Princess of Wales,
 at Marlborough House.--_Pall Mall Gazette._

 H. R. H. the Prince of Wales, accompanied by Prince John of Glucksburg
 and Mr. Paget, attended by Col. Keppel and H. I. H. the Grand Duke
 Wladimar of Russia and Suite, attended by Col. Ellis, paid a visit
 to the exhibition of the “Two-headed Nightingale” at Willis’s
 Rooms.--_Morning Post._

 So much pleased was Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales with the
 “Two-headed Nightingale,” on her departure for the continent, she left
 orders that a couple of brooches should be presented to the two-in-one
 young ladies.--_The Standard._

 They have been well educated, and appear happy, lively, and good
 tempered.--_London Times._

 The “Two-headed Nightingale” sings popular duets very sweetly and
 cleverly.--_Daily Telegraph._

 Her care will no doubt be regarded with great interest.--_London Daily
 News._

 The Carolina Twin, Christine Millie, is the owner of a most valuable
 brooch, presented to her by H. M. G. Queen
 Victoria.

 MILLIE CHRISTINE A ROYAL FAVORITE.--Piccadilly Hall was
 closed last night, for Millie and Chrissie were commanded to appear at
 Marlborough House--her third time there.--_London Times._




MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT BY MILLIE CHRISTINE, THE TWO-HEADED NIGHTINGALE.

_Selections from the following, and many other songs, will be sung as
Duets by Millie Christine, at each reception._


O’ER THE WAVES WE FLOAT.

_Words by J. E. Carpenter. Music by Stephen Glover._

   O’er the waves we float, we float,
   Fairies two, in our fairy boat,
   Fanned by the breezes, rocked by the tide,
   In our nautilus barque we glide, we glide.
   When the strong cordage snaps in the gale,
   Safe o’er the surges we sail, we sail;
   In the bright calm we rest on the deep,
   And, lulled by the zephyrs, we sleep, we sleep.

   Cast by the winds from shore to shore,
   A moment you view us, and then no more.
   The nautilus shell, by human eyes,
   Is seen on the waters, that sink and rise,
   Over the billows away and away;
   Ours is the freedom that knows no decay.
   Braving the tempest, and stemming the tide,
   In safety forever, we glide, we glide.


 “As for Millie Chrissy, the two-headed girl, she is a perfect little
 gem or gems, or a gem and a half, we don’t know which. She sings with
 one or two voices very sweetly, and in dancing we never saw any one
 more graceful. We expected to see a monstrosity, but were agreeably
 disappointed; on the contrary, we found her pleasing in appearance,
 agreeable in her manners, and endowed with good conversational
 powers. Great care and attention must have been bestowed upon her
 education.”--_New York Times._

 “Take the children and go to Odd Fellow’s Hall, and see the wonderful
 two-headed girl combination while you have an opportunity, and you
 will thank us for the advice.”--_Washington Republican._


WHIP-POOR-WILL’S SONG.

A BALLAD.

_Composed by H. Millard._

   Oh, meet me when daylight is fading,
     And is darkening into the night,
   When song-birds are singing their vespers,
     And the day has far vanished from sight;
   And then I will tell you, darling,
     All the love I have cherished so long,
   If you will but meet me at evening,
     When you hear the first whip-poor-will’s song.

                      CHORUS.

    Oh meet me, oh meet me,
    When you hear the first whip-poor-will’s song.


    ’Tis said that, whatever sweet feelings
      May be throbbing within a fond heart,
    When listening to whip-poor-will’s singing,
      For a twelvemonth will never depart;
    So then we will meet in the woodland,
      Far away from the hurrying throng,
    And whisper our love to each other,
      When we hear the first whip-poor-will’s song.

              _Whip-poor-will, &c._

    And in the long years of the future,
      Though our duties may part us awhile,
    And on the return of this evening,
      We be severed by many a mile;
    Yet deep in our bosoms we’ll cherish
      The affection, so fervent and strong,
    We pledged to each other this evening,
      When we heard the first whip-poor-will’s song.

              _Whip-poor-will, &c._


 “There are a lot of people in England, as elsewhere, always ready to
 strain at the smallest gnat and swallow the biggest camel, who will
 doubtless put this young lady down as outside the pale of ordinary
 humanity; if this prejudice should carry any so far as to lead them to
 avoid her, they alone will be the losers.”--_Liverpool Leader._

 “This wonderful exhibition is of the most chaste character, and we can
 safely recommend it to fathers, mothers, sons and daughters.”--_Boston
 Transcript._


PUT ME IN MY LITTLE BED.

_Words by Dexter Smith. Music by C. A. White._

    Oh, birdie, I am tired now;
      I do not care to hear you sing;
    You’ve sung your happy songs all day,
      Now put your head beneath your wing.
    I’m sleepy, too, as I can be;
      And, sister, when my prayer is said
    I want to lay me down to rest,
      So put me in my little bed.

                    CHORUS.

             Come, sister, come,
             Kiss me good-night,
             For I my evening prayer have said,
             I’m tired now, and sleepy too,
             Come put me in my little bed.

    Oh, sister, what did mother say
      When she was called to heaven away?
    She told me always to be good,
      And never, never go astray;
    I can’t forget the day she died,
      She placed her hand upon my head,
    She whispered softly, “Keep my child,”
      And then they told me she was dead.

                    Come, sister, come, &c.

    Dear sister, come and hear my prayer,
      Now, ere I lay me down to sleep
    Within my Heavenly Father’s care,
      While angels bright their vigils keep.
    And let me ask of Him above
      To keep my soul in paths of right,
    Oh! Let me thank Him for His love,
      Ere I shall say my last “good-night.”

                Come, sister, come, &c.


 “Millie Christine dances very gracefully, and appears to have no
 difficulty in moving about, and in no way differs in appearance from
 two animated and engaging young mulatto ladies, who, for sport, have
 agreed to pass an hour tied together nearly back to back.”--_Liverpool
 Daily Post._

 “Each head is said to possess separate intellectual faculties, as
 entirely different as the brain power of two individuals, and the
 volitions of the will are independent, but very much in harmony with
 each other.”--_Liverpool Daily Mercury._


LITTLE FOOTSTEPS.

SONG AND CHORUS BY J. A. BARNEY.

    Little footsteps, soft and gentle,
      Gliding by our cottage door,
    How I love to hear their trample,
      As I heard in days of yore.
    Tiny feet that traveled lightly
      In this weary world of woe,
    Now silent in yonder churchyard,
      Neath the dismal grave below.


                        CHORUS.

    Little footsteps, soft and gentle,
        Gliding by our cottage door.

    She sleeps the sleep that knows no waking,
      By the golden river’s shore;
    And my heart it yearns with sadness,
      When I pass that cottage door.
    Sweetly, now, the angels carol
      Tidings from our loved one, far,
    That she still does hover o’er us,
      And will be our guiding star,

                        CHORUS.

        She sleeps the sleep that knows no waking, etc.

    Little footsteps now will journey
      In the world of sin no more;
    Ne’er they’ll press the sandbanks lightly,
      By the golden river’s shore.
    Mother, weep not; father, grieve not,
      Try to smooth your trouble o’er,
    For I’ll think of her as sleeping,
      Not as dead, but gone before.

                        CHORUS.

    Little footsteps now will journey, etc.


 “All the intelligent men who saw her at the Washington Hotel, the
 other day, can bear witness to the marvelous intelligence which
 predominates in both brains.”--_Liverpool Leader._

 “The exceedingly merry and amiable disposition of the mysterious pair
 deprives the exhibition altogether of that painful element which was
 present even in the case of those practical philosophers, the Siamese
 twins.”--_Liverpool Daily Post._


 “As to the young lady herself--for we have surgical authority for
 saying so--she has bodily only one person, though possessed of two
 heads, two pairs of shoulders, four arms, and two pairs of legs,
 amalgamated curiously with one trunk.”--_Liverpool Daily Courier._


UNDER THE DAISES.

A BALLAD, BY H. MILLARD.

    I’ve just been learning the lesson of life,
      The sad, sad lesson of loving,
    And all of its powers, of pleasure or pain,
      Been slowly and sadly proving;
    And all that’s left of the bright, bright dream,
      With its thousand brilliant phases,
    Is a handful of dust, in a coffin hid,
      A coffin under the daisies.
          The beautiful, beautiful daisies,
          The snowy, snowy daisies.

    And thus, forever, throughout the wide world
      Is love a sorrow proving;
    There are still many sorrowful things in life,
      But the saddest of all is loving.
    The life of some is worse than death,
      For fate a high wall oft raises,
    And far better with two hearts estranged,
      Is a low grave starred with daisies.
          The beautiful, beautiful daisies,
          The snowy, snowy daisies.

    And so ’tis better we lived as we did,
      The summer of love together,
    And that one of us tired, and laid down to rest,
      Ere the coming of wintry weather.
    For the saddest of love is love grown cold,
      And ’tis one of its surest phases,
    So I bless my lot, though with breaking heart,
      For that grave enstarred with daisies.
          The beautiful, beautiful daisies.
          The snowy, snowy daisies.


 “There was no difficulty made in exhibiting the upper portion of
 the dorsal connection, and it was done without any infringement of
 modesty.”--_Liverpool Mercury._

 “All who met Millie Christine yesterday must have felt interested in
 her fortunes, and well disposed to meet her again.”--_Liverpool
 Daily Post._

 “The two-headed girl would be a good juror--she could look at both
 sides of the case at the same time.”--_Cincinnati Enquirer._

 “Their reception at the Masonic Temple has been attended by thousands
 of our best citizens.”--_Baltimore American._


MOTHER WOULD COMFORT ME.

_Words and Music by C. C. Sawyer._

    Wounded and sorrowful, far from my home,
    Sick among strangers, uncared for, unknown,
    Even the birds, that used sweetly to sing,
    Are silent, and swiftly have taken the wing.
    No one but mother can cheer me to-day,
    No one for me could so fervently pray.
    None to console me, no kind friend is near;
    Mother would comfort me if she were here.

                     CHORUS.

      Gently her hand o’er my forehead she’d press,
      Trying to free me from pain and distress;
      Kindly she’d say to me, “Be of good cheer,
      Mother will comfort you; mother is here.”

    If she were with me, I soon would forget
    My pain and my sorrow; no more would I fret;
    One kiss from her lips, or one look from her eye,
    Would make me contented, and willing to die!
    Gently her hand o’er my forehead she’d press,
    Trying to free me from pain and distress;
    Kindly she’d say to me, “Be of good cheer;
    Mother will comfort you, mother is here!”

      CHORUS.--Gently her hand, &c.

    Cheerfully, faithfully, mother would stay,
    Always beside me, by night and by day;
    If I should murmur, or wish to complain,
    Her gentle voice would soon calm me again.
    Sweetly a mother’s love shines like a star,
    Brightest in darkness, when daylight’s afar;
    In clouds or in sunshine, pleasure or pain,
    Mother’s affection is ever the same.

      CHORUS.--Gently her hand, &c.


 “She has you on both sides; if you remove your head from one position,
 you are immediately the victim of another pair of eyes, which fix you;
 in fact, transfix you.”--_Liverpool Leader._


WATCHING THE DAYLIGHT FADE.

 _Christine._       Where shall we wander at evening,
                      Seeking retirement’s shade,
                    On its seclusion reposing,
                      Watching the daylight fade?

 _Millie._          Down by the brook we’ll wander alone,
                      Naught but the sky above,
                    There, while we hear the breezes moan,
                      We’ll sing the songs we love.

 _Both._            There will we wander together,
                      Chasing our cares away,
                    Down by the banks of the river,
                      Cheerfully singing our lay.

 _Millie._          Come we alone to seek delight,


 _Both._            La, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la, la;
                      Cheerfully watch the coming of night,
                    La, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la, la;
                      Come we alone to seek delight, &c.

 _Both._            See, the sun is slowly retiring,
                      Evening’s dark veil is spreading so fast;
                    See, the stars are faintly peeping,
                      Now the time of day is past.

                    See, the sun is slowly retiring, &c.

 _Christine._       Here will we wander together,
                      Seeking retirement’s shade,
                    On its seclusion reposing,
                      Watching the daylight fade.

 _Millie._          Here, by the brook, we’ll wander alone,
                      Naught but the sky above,
                    Here, while we hear the breezes moan,
                      We’ll sing the songs we love.

 _Both._            Here will we wander together,
                      Chasing our cares away,
                    Down by the side of the river,
                      Joyfully singing our lay.


FROM OUR MERRY SWISS HOME.

                      DUET.

    From our merry Swiss home we come, we come;
    Our hearts are light and free;
    With a smile we greet every eye we meet,
    Two merry hearts are we.

        The live-long day we chant our lay,
        La, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la; la, la, la, la;
        Two merry hearts, two merry hearts,
        Two merry hearts are we, are we,
        Two merry hearts are we, are we,
        Two merry hearts are we.

                      SOLO.

    When the advent of morning appears in the sky,
      We rise from our peaceful repose,
    To the valley, the meadow, the mountain we hie,
      To cull each fair flow’ret that grows.
        CHORUS.--From our merry, &c.

               SOLO, SECOND VOICE.

    Though humble our cot on the mountain may be,
      A life of contentment we live;
    We sigh not for wealth, from its cares we are free,
      For wealth cannot happiness give.
        CHORUS.--From our merry, &c.


THE DEAR, DEAR FRIENDS AT HOME.

Written and Composed by Professor W. WILSON, expressly for Miss
Millie Christine.

    What cheers us when we are far away
    From home and all we love;
    When storm and danger hedge us round,
    And all is dark above?
    When lightnings flash and thunders roar
    O’er ocean’s seething foam?
    It is the thought that heaven hears
    The prayers of friends at home.

                   CHORUS.

    The dear, dear friends at home,
    The dear, dear friends at home,
    Kind heaven will surely hear the prayers
    Of our dear friends at home.
    Our father, with his silvery hair,
    Our mother, kind and fond,
    Our sisters, and our brothers dear,
    The same kind thoughts respond.
    The wind blows fair, our vessel sails
    Right gaily o’er the foam,
    And soon again we hope to greet,
    The dear old friends at home.
      CHORUS. --The dear, dear, &c.


WARBLING WATERS.

                  Where the warbling waters flow,
                  And the zephyrs gently blow;
                  Where the warbling waters flow,
                  And the zephyrs gently blow.
                  The fairies dwell; the fairies dwell
                  In grassy dell, in grassy dell,
                  Where the forest flowers grow,
                  And the zephyrs gently blow,
                  Where the forest flowers grow,
                  And the zephyrs gently blow.

 SOLO, 1st VOICE--And a joyous home is theirs,
                  For it knows not mortal care,

 SOLO, 2d  VOICE--And its only tear
                  Is the dewdrop clear
                  That the bending lily bears.

            DUET--And its only tear is the dewdrop clear
                  That the bending lily bears;
                  And its only tear is the dewdrop clear
                  That the bending lily bears,
                  That the bending lily bears,
                  That the bending lily bears.


STRANGERS YET.

    Strangers yet, after years of life together,
    After fair and stormy weather;
    After travels in far lands; after touch of wedded hands,
    Why thus joined, why ever met, if they must be strangers yet.
                                Strangers yet, strangers yet.

    After childhood winning way; after care and blame and praise;
    Counsel asked and wisdom given - after mutual prayers to heaven;
    Child and parent scarce regret, when they part are strangers yet.
                                Strangers yet, strangers yet.

    Will it evermore be thus, spirits still impervious?
    Shall we never fairly stand, soul to soul, as hand to hand?
    Are the bounds eternal set, to retain us strangers yet?
                                Strangers yet, strangers yet.


WANDERING IN THE MAY-TIME.

    Wandering in the May-time, sweet it is to rove,
    Just before the hay-time, through the leafy grove;
    When the grass is bending, wave-like in the breeze,
    And the white-thorns sending perfumes from the trees,
    And the white-thorns sending perfumes from the trees.

                     SOLO.--_First Voice._

    Spring she is a maiden, waiting to be wooed,
    Hiding blossoms laden in her solitude;
    Coy she is, and meeker than the summer fair,
    But for those who seek her, gifts she has more rare,
    But for those who seek her, gifts she has more rare.

 (Repeat 1st verse.)

                     SOLO.--_Second Voice._

    Yes, her sweets will rifle all her brightest flowers--
    Of her wealth a trifle, they shall soon be ours;
    When the birds are singing welcome to the May,
    When the flowers are springing, we’ll be there to-day.

                              DUET.

    Just, just before the hay-time, birds begin to sing,
    Wandering in the May-time, welcome to the Spring;
    Just before the hay-time, sweet it is to rove,
    Wandering in the May-time, through the leafy grove,
    Wandering in the May-time, through the leafy grove.

    Just before the hay-time, sweet it is to rove,
    Wandering in the May-time, through the leafy grove;
    Wandering in the May-time, wandering in the May-time,
    Through, through, through the leafy grove.


Among the millions of human beings inhabiting the globe there is but
one two-header. Every one should see her, talk to her, hear her sing
and see her dance.




                      NASHVILLE, CHATTANOOGA & ST. LOUIS RAILWAY.
                      W. L. DANLEY, Gen’l Pass. and Ticket Agent.

                        Nashville, Tenn., Oct. 20, 1892.

CONDUCTORS N., C. & ST. L. RY.:

This is to certify that Manager Smith is authorized to purchase _one_
ticket good for ten seats Nashville to Atlanta, in connection Millie
Christine, the dual woman, this person being included. It is customary
to require but one ticket for her passage. Kindly be governed
accordingly.

  W. L. DANLEY, G. P. & T. A.


                      CHICAGO, MILWAUKEE & ST. PAUL RAILWAY CO.
                      OFFICE OF
                      DIVISION FREIGHT AND PASSENGER AGENT.
                      425 PIERCE ST., IOWA SAVINGS BANK BUILDING.

                        Sioux City, Iowa, Sept. 30, 1895.

TO CONDUCTORS:

It is customary for Millie Christine, the two headed woman, to travel
on one ticket. You will please govern yourself accordingly.

  Yours truly,
  E. W. JORDON, D. P. A.


                      THE PHILADA. & READING RAILROAD CO.

                        WILKESBARRE, B. STATION, Jan. 22, 1893.

TO CONDUCTORS:

It is customary for Millie Christine, the dual woman, to require but
one ticket. Please be governed accordingly.

  S. S. CHASE, C. T. A.


                      OLD DOMINION STEAMSHIP CO.

                        S. S. “JAMESTOWN,” Oct. 4, 1897.

The dual woman, Millie Christine, travels on this steamer on one
ticket as one person.

  FORD KUISKENE, Purser.


                      LOUISVILLE & NASHVILLE RAILROAD CO.
                      PASSENGER DEPARTMENT,
                      114 NORTH FOURTH STREET,

                        St. Louis, Mo., Feb. 4, 1889.

CONDUCTORS of L. & N. R. R. and connecting lines:

This is to certify that J. P. Smith, Esq., has purchased three (3)
tickets St. Louis to Columbia, S. C., in connection with Millie
Christine, the dual woman, this person being included. It is customary
to require but one ticket for her passage. Kindly be governed
accordingly.

  Very truly yours,
  JOHN W. MASS, D. P. A.


                      CENTRAL RAILROAD AND BANKING COMPANY OF GEORGIA.
                      H. M. COMER, Receiver.

                      Macon, Ga., Nov. 3, 1892.

CONDUCTOR NO. 1:

It is customary for Millie Christine, the dual woman, to require but
one ticket. Please be governed accordingly.

  J. C. HAILL, G. P. A.


                      NORTHERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY.
            THOMAS F. OAKES, HENRY C. PAYNE. HENRY C. ROUSE, Receivers.
                      TRAFFIC DEPARTMENT.
                      I. A. NADEAU, General Agent.

                        Seattle, Wash., July 28, 1895.

CONDUCTORS:

It is customary for Millie Christine, the dual woman, to require but
one ticket. Please govern yourself accordingly.

  I. A. NADEAU, Gen’l Agent.




THE WONDERS OF THE WORLD.


    The Pyramids first, which in Egypt are reared;
    Then Babylon’s Gardens and Ramparts appeared:
    Next Mausola’s Tomb of affection and gilt,
    With the famed Diana in Ephesus built,
    The Colossus of Rhodes made in brass for the sun,
    And Jupiter’s Statue, by Phidias done.
    Some the Tower of Pharos place next, we are told,
    Some the Palace of Cyrus, cemented with gold.
    Last--but not least--is MILLIE CHRISTINE.
    The Two-headed Nightingale, alive to be seen.
    Who will sing, who will dance, who will walk on two feet
    And delight all beholders whoe’er she may meet.


MISS MILLIE CHRISTINE, _the eighth_, has spent nearly eight
years in Europe, during which time she visited all the principal towns
and cities of England, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy,
Belgium, Holland and France, and in all those countries was honored by
command from the Royalty to visit them. MISS MILLIE CHRISTINE
speaks English, French and German.




Transcriber’s Note.

The first page of the printed booklet is titled “EIGHT WONDERS OF THE
WORLD” it has drawings of the seven wonders of the world surrounding a
photograph of Millie Christine, the “EIGHTH WONDER OF THE WORLD”. The
descriptions of these wonders at the beginning of this transcription
are the captions from each of the eight individual illustrations.

Words in italics are marked with _underscores_.

Words in bold are marked with =equals signs=.

Words in small capitals are shown in UPPER CASE.

Variant spelling, and inconsistent hyphenation have been retained.

Some characters in this booklet did not print fully, a few did not print
at all. These have been silently corrected.

Missing opening quotation marks have been added;
opening quotation marks, printed as closing ones, are here corrected
  to opening quotation marks;
  superfluous periods removed;
  and commas printed after abbreviations instead of periods have
  been corrected.

The songs are kept as printed.

Other changes made are:

On the opening “Eight Wonders of the World” page, in the description
  of the Colossus of Rhodes, the word “the” has been removed from
  “against the their enemy”; in the description of the Pyramids of Egypt
  “eard stone” has been changed to “hard stone”.

On page 7 the first occurrence of “cellar” was originally printed as
  “celler”.

On page 10 “sleepleess” has been changed to “sleepless”.

On page 16 “featurs” has been changed to “features”, and “strugle” to
  “struggle”.

On page 24 “zyphyrs” has been changed to “zephyrs”.
