---
title: The Cohansey tea-fight
collection: 21-anti-colonial/colonial-studies
region: global
counter: colonialism / empire
subjects: Historical fiction; Short stories; Greenwich (N.J.) -- History -- Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775 -- Fiction
source: Project Gutenberg
source_url: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/77716
language: English
license: public domain
author_catalog: Guernsey, Lucy Ellen, 1826-1899
perspective: colonized peoples
---
Transcriber's notes: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.


                     THE COHANSEY TEA-FIGHT


                               BY

                     _Lucy Ellen Guernsey_



                              THE
                        ATLANTIC MONTHLY

                   VOLUME XXXIII.—NUMBER 198

                          APRIL, 1874



                           _CONTENTS_



        THE COHANSEY TEA-FIGHT. _Lucy Ellen Guernsey_



                             BOSTON
                    H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY
                      219 WASHINGTON STREET
                   NEW YORK: HURD AND HOUGHTON
                         13 ASTOR PLACE
                 The Riverside Press, Cambridge

 TERMS—SINGLE NUMBERS, 35 CENTS         YEARLY SUBSCRIPTION, $4.00



                     THE COHANSEY TEA-FIGHT.


"IT is pouring cats and dogs!" said Violet, looking out of the window
at the storm. "There is n't a bit of use in thinking of it, is there,
aunt?"

"I should say not!" answered Aunt Elisabeth. "To be sure it may clear
up before five o'clock, but unless the weather improves, I think you
had better give it up."

"Give up what?" asked Grandmother Howell.

"Going to Annabella Floyd's tea-fight, grandmother," I answered.

"My dear!" said Aunt Elisabeth. She had a horror of slang, and she had
never heard this particular phrase, which had just begun to come into
use twenty years ago.

"A tea-fight! And what is a tea-fight?" asked grandmother.

"Oh, a little sociable tea-party all of girls, you know," I explained.
"Annabella Floyd, across the creek, has one this afternoon, but I am
afraid we can't go."

"Umph!" said grandmother. "I remember a tea-fight on Cohansey Creek
worth going to,—but it was a man's tea-fight, not a girl's, though a
girl helped get it up, after all."

"Oh, please do tell us about it, grandma!" said Violet and I together;
and Aunt Elisabeth added: "Yes, do, grandmother; it will help to make
the time pass pleasantly."

Violet and myself were making our annual visitation to Aunt Elisabeth
in Greenwich, New Jersey. We had been there so often that it was
like another home to us, and we knew every house and store and tree
in the broad, quiet street, and every face in the meeting-home, for
Aunt Elisabeth was a Friend, and we always went to meeting with her.
These visits were among the happiest times of my life. I loved Aunt
Elisabeth dearly, and all but adored my great-grandmother Howell. I
liked the place and the people and the quiet friendly ways,—yes, and
the meetings, too, even when there was no preaching and we had a silent
season. Violet sometimes found it rather dull, but I never did.

Aunt Elisabeth lived near the landing in a wide, comfortable stone
house, shaded by such enormous and aged willows as I think grow nowhere
else. From my window I could see the green at the end of the street,
with one gigantic buttonwood growing in the centre, the river, or creek
as we always called it, and the schooners and steamers on their way up
to Bridgeton, the metropolis of West Jersey; and a wonderful, quaint,
pretty, hospitable little metropolis it is. I have not seen that
prospect for many a long year, but I have only to shut my eyes to call
it all up before me as plain as day.

This particular day we were engaged at a small tea-party at Annabella
Floyd's, over across the river. We were very much bent upon going,
but during the morning such a storm of wind and rain had set in that
even Violet confessed the expedition must be abandoned. Under these
disastrous circumstances, it may be believed that we hailed with
delight the prospect of a story from grandma.

Grandma Howell was past ninety. She was somewhat infirm, but her mind
was as bright and her feelings as keen as they had ever been. She had
not the absolute patience and self-restraint of Aunt Elisabeth, her
granddaughter, and would sometimes wax warm in a debate, while her
sarcasm was not a weapon to be lightly encountered: but nevertheless,
everybody loved and respected Grandma Howell.

"Well, get your work and sit down, and I'll tell you the story!" said
grandma, who never could bear to see any one idle. "It all happened in
the year 1774. Think of that, children! Those willows over there were
quite small trees, I remember. Ah well, it seems a long time to wait.

"It was in the beginning of that same year that Aunt Betsy broke up
housekeeping and went to live with her nephew, Abiram Haskins, taking
me with her. Aunt Betsy was a widow, and Abiram's mother had died not
long before; and as he was a bachelor and had a large farm, he needed
some woman about the house. So he asked Aunt Betsy to come and take
charge, and she consented. His house stood near the end of the street,
a little back, and not very far from the creek. The house was burned
down afterward, but if you look sharp you may see traces of the cellar
in Richard Shepherd's field to this day. It was a good house, with
roomy cellars and chambers, and large rooms down-stairs; and when
Aunt Betsy's furniture was put in, it looked very well, only there
was always a stiff, scrimped look and a musty, woolly smell about it.
Abiram was a Friend, as his father had been before him, but he was n't
very zealous in religious matters, and had the name of sitting very
close to the world and its goods. However, his character was good at
that time, though I don't think anybody liked him but Aunt Betsy.

"I had lived with Aunt Betsy ever since my father died, and when she
moved I went with her. I did n't like the change at all, and said all I
could against it, though I knew all the time that I might as well talk
to the winds. Aunt Betsy was very quiet tempered, but she was more set
in her way than any person I ever saw.

"'Thee is wasting thy breath, Sybilla!' said she at last. 'I have made
up my mind and I shall act upon it. If thee does n't like the change,
thee must find a home somewhere else.'

"This threat, as I considered it, shut my mouth and roused my temper
at the same time. I said no more, but I made up my mind that I 'would'
seek a home somewhere else pretty speedily. You see, I did n't like
Abiram. I thought him hard-hearted and miserly, and besides, though
he had never said so in words, I knew that he wanted to marry me, and
that Aunt Betsy's heart was set on the match. Now, if you don't like
a man, the fact that he wants to marry you makes you dislike him all
the more. Moreover I did like somebody else, and I knew that he liked
me. That somebody was Lewis Howell. We had been neighbors always till
father died, and I think our love grew up with us, for I don't remember
when it began. Ah well, children, Lewis has been dead sixty-five years.
The little oak sapling that sprouted out of his grave over in Fairtown
burying-ground is a big tree now. It can't be long before they lay me
beside him.

"Aunt Betsy did not like Lewis. She said he was worldly and
unsteady—that his father had been a soldier in the old French War, and
that Lewis was just like him. Then Lewis was n't a Friend, but went to
the Episcopal church, for there was one here then. Aunt Betsy would
never let me see him if she could help it, and never would allow that
we were engaged. It was just a boy and girl fancy, she said, and would
soon pass away. She had an inward persuasion that she should see me
married to some steady Friend, who was able to take care of me, and not
to a wild, worldly young man, who cared more for fishing and shooting
than for anything else. Now when Aunt Betsy had an inward persuasion
of anything she was mighty apt to bring it to pass, and that was one
reason why I disliked the idea of going to live at Abiram's. I was
determined to marry no one but Lewis. I knew that he was neither wild
nor worldly, and that he was laying up money to make a home for me,
though he could n't lay it up very fast because he had to help his
father, who was lame and a good deal past his work. My father had
always loved Lewis, and I well remember hearing him say that he would
n't want me to do better than marry him. And then I did so despise
Abiram!

"Well, I thought it all over and tried to get the best light I could,
and at last I seemed to see may way clear. I would go with Aunt Betsy
and help her get settled, and perhaps stay through the heft of the
summer's work, and then, if I did n't find myself comfortable, I would
hire out to do either spinning or housework. I was n't a bit afraid of
making a good living. I could spin my day's work—a run and a half of
warp or two runs of filling—and get through by three o'clock, and I was
n't afraid to show my thread, either linen or woolen, beside anybody's
in Greenwich."

"You did n't do crochet work in those days!" remarked Violet, who was
making a dainty little blanket for some baby or other.

"No. It was n't the fashion, though we did make mittens and gloves
with a hook, too. But we had plenty of nice pretty work, netting and
knotting,—making tatting you call it,—and sprigging on muslin and
crewel work, and piecing bedquilts. Well, as I said, I made up my mind
that I would go with Aunt Betsy, but I would n't stay unless I found it
comfortable.

"It was n't comfortable at all. Aunt Betsy was close enough, but Abiram
was far worse. It was save, save, scrimp, scrimp, from morning till
night. I was fond of new milk fresh from the cow, and I used to take a
drink almost every night, but if Abiram saw me, you would think I had
stolen five pounds by the fuss he made. He said there was skim-milk
enough if I must have it, and every drop of new milk robbed the churn
of so much butter. I suspect Aunt Betsy gave him a hint about that,
for he came along one night when I was milking, and told me he hoped
I would n't mind what he said, but would help myself to all I wanted.
After that I never touched it again, and I took a real dislike to it.

"But the scrimping was n't the worst of it by a great deal. I began
to feel like a fly caught in a spider's web. I could hardly ever get
a chance to speak to Lewis—never alone—and Abiram was always in my
way, hanging round and giving me presents and trying to make himself
agreeable. Aunt Betsy watched me as a cat watches a mouse, and by and
by it began to be said about the village that I was engaged to Abiram.
I told Emma Parvin, who was my most intimate friend, to contradict it
everywhere, and so she did; but a great many believed it. Even Lewis
almost began to doubt, because he never could see me alone. About this
time he went across the creek, and took on with James Whitecar, who had
a deal of stock and horses. James did well by him, for Lewis was very
knowing in such matters, and he began to lay up money. Well, of course
we saw less of each other than ever, but his going was an advantage in
one way. Old Uncle Jacob, an old negro, used to paddle across and up
and down the river, fishing. He was a good friend to both of us, and
used to carry our letters back and forth. Then every morning at just
such an hour Lewis used to wave his handkerchief out of his window and
I used to wave one out of mine. So we knew that all was well."

Aunt Elisabeth had looked uneasy for a few minutes, and as grandma
paused to take up a stitch she said mildly,—

"Some people would say, grandmother, that it was not very wise to be
putting love-stories into the heads of these young girls."

Grandma looked up, and her still bright eyes twinkled a little.

"Elisabeth," said she; "does thee know that the white kitten had her
nose in the cream this morning?"

"Yes," answered Aunt Elisabeth; "I saw her."

"Did thee show her the way to the milk, Elisabeth?"

"No!" said Aunt Elisabeth, surprised.

"Oh!" said grandma. "I did n't know but some one had put it in her
head."

Aunt Elisabeth smiled and went on with her hemstitching.

"But there was another thing which annoyed me almost as much as
the love-making," continued grandma. "It was, as I said, in the
year 1774—the year before the war. The whole country was stirred
up against the British, and their unjust and illegal taxations and
other oppressions—though I do think the bad manners and arrogance of
the British officers and governors had almost as much to do with the
business. The tax on tea had caused specially hard feeling, and you
know how they served the cargo which was brought to Boston. When we got
the news of the Boston tea-party, as it got to be called, there was a
good deal of division of opinion. Most of the young men were on the
patriot side, and so were many of the old ones, but still those were
not wanting who called the business a shameful outrage, and stood up
for the British through thick and thin. Abiram was one of these and
Aunt Betsy another, and they used to abuse the patriots and uphold the
British till they made my blood fairly boil.

"Well, one day, along in the last of October, Abiram said he was going
to Philadelphia for a few days, and he had the impudence to ask me if
we had n't better be married right away, so I could go with him. And
while I was fairly struck dumb with rage and surprise, Aunt Betsy put
in her word and said it would be a very good plan, as I could buy my
wedding clothes myself, and she would give me money for a nice satin
gown and a gray crape shawl.

"Then, I can tell you, girls, I flared up. I told Abiram just what I
thought of him, and Aunt Betsy what I thought of 'her'; and I said I
would n't marry Abiram then or ever, if he should pave my way with
gold. I told Aunt Betsy she knew that I was engaged to Lewis Howell,
and that I should never marry any one else. Abiram was so angry he
turned all kinds of colors, but Aunt Betsy was as placid as you please,
and when I had fairly broken down, and was crying as if my heart would
break, she said calmly,—

"'Thee need n't be so violent, Sybilla. Abiram has no occasion to go
begging for a wife. If thee chooses to disgrace thyself by breaking thy
word to him and marrying a vagabond—'

"'I never gave Abiram any word, and he knows it!' said I.

"'Actions speak louder than words,' said my aunt. 'We won't say any
more about it now. Abiram, I have an inward persuasion that Sybilla
will come to a better mind. Thee must excuse her violence. She was
n't brought up with Friends, and has n't learned to rule her spirit.
Sybilla, thee had better stop crying and eat thy dinner.'

"But I would n't eat any dinner, and I never sat down to the table nor
spoke a word to Abiram till he went away. Aunt Betsy was as calm as
ever, but she kept me so close, I could n't even get a chance to send
a word to Lewis. However, old Jacob did smuggle one to me, in which
Lewis told me how Abiram had told James Whitecar that we were to be
married when we came home. Lewis said he knew I never would be false to
him of my own free will, but he did n't know what I might be tormented
into doing, and he begged me to leave my aunt, and come over to Deborah
Whitecar, who knew all the story, and would be the same as a mother to
me. Deborah herself added a few words to the same effect. Deborah was a
good, kind woman, besides being a preacher and very much thought of. I
knew she meant every word she said, and that I could be useful to her;
and beside that it was a great encouragement to have such a woman take
my part. Still I did n't like the notion of going right into the family
where Lewis was, and I thought I would wait a little. Beside that, Aunt
Betsy was lame and ailing, and I did n't feel quite free to leave her.
So I staid on, and certainly I did have a pretty hard time. Even the
neighbors began to notice how I was mewed up, and never went outside
the gate.

"The second day of November, Abiram came home in the best of spirits.
He had made his journey profitable, it seemed, and he was more of a
Tory than ever. He had actually brought me a satin gown that would
stand on end for richness, and a gray crape shawl. I told him he
might keep his gifts to himself, and went up-stairs to my room, where
presently Aunt Betsy came bringing the shawl and the satin.

"'Thee had better put these things away!' said she, laying them on the
bed.

"I took them just as they were, and opening the window, I dropped them
out and saw them fall plump into the tub of rain-water underneath,—for
then, instead of cisterns, we had great troughs standing under the
eaves. It was a silly thing to do, but I was so worked up I did n't
care one pin. For once I saw Aunt Betsy in a rage. She scolded me
roundly, and ended by declaring that I should marry Abiram within a
week or she would never see nor speak to me again. I should have gone
away that very night, only Aunt Betsy was taken so sick I did n't like
to leave her. What Abiram thought when he found his presents all wet
and spoiled, I can't say. He never said a word to me nor I to him. I
did my work, and waited on Aunt Betsy, but I could n't get any word to
Lewis, much as I wished it, for old Jacob was sick, and I had n't any
other messenger.

"Well, for two or three days Abiram was wonderful busy clearing out the
cellar. Now and then he would take his boat and run down the creek, and
he grew so queer and excited that I began to wonder what was going to
happen. I hardly ever got a chance to step outside the door, Aunt Betsy
kept me so close, and what with the work and waiting on her, I was
pretty well used up.

"One night,—it was the 20th of November and a fine moonlight, though
rather foggy,—I went to the backdoor for a breath of air, and I saw a
fine large brig coming up with the tide. She seemed to find her way
without any trouble, and presently came to anchor over there where you
see that pine stump—it was a fine tree then—not far from our house.
I stood watching, and presently I saw Abiram and two other men come
ashore from the brig. They came up the path toward the house, but I
did n't stay to meet them. I went back to Aunt Betsy, and when Abiram
called me to see to supper, he told me the strange men would stay, and
asked me if I would n't sit down and make tea. For you see I had n't
sat down to a single meal with him since he came home.

"'Tea!' said I. 'Where did you get any tea?' I knew ours had been out
some time, and you could n't buy an ounce for love nor money.

"'Never mind,' said Abiram, looking as pleased as could be. 'I've got
it, and plenty more of nice things. Now be a good girl and see to the
supper, and I promise not to say a word thee won't like to hear.'

"Well, I did n't want to make a fuss before the strangers, so I said I
would; and I made some nice hot cakes and fried a chicken, and turned
out the tea, but I would n't touch a drop, more than if it were poison.
The two men were English, as I made out by their talk, and one of them
was captain of the brig. He had been drinking a little, and he kept
throwing out hints which made me open my ears, and caused the other man
to swear at him for a fool.

"Well, I did up the work, and was just going up-stairs to bed, when
Abiram stopped me.

"'What is it?' I asked sharply enough.

"'I only wanted to say that thee need n't be scared if thee hears a
noise in the night,' said he meekly. 'I have got some goods aboard the
brig, and I am going to have them unloaded, because the captain wants
to get away.'

"Somehow it flashed across me all in a minute what the goods were. So
instead of going to bed, I blew out the candle and sat down behind the
curtain to watch. Presently I saw the men from the brig bringing up the
goods all covered with tarpaulins and stow them in the cellar. They had
nearly finished when one of the men let fall a square box, and I knew
by the sound that something had broken. The captain cursed him for a
clumsy fool. Abiram brought out a broom, and I could see them sweeping
and brushing something. Finally the business was finished, the men went
away, and Abiram came up-stairs and went to bed. He was generally the
first one up in the morning, but this time I stole a march on him, and
was down before six o'clock. I took the lantern and began searching
where I had seen them sweeping the night before, and sure enough, in a
little hollow by the side of the path I found about half a handful of
nice green tea!

"I gathered up the tea in my hands and wrapped it in a paper I had in
my pocket, and then I stole down to the creek, to the place where I
knew Abiram's little skiff was tied up. It was no sudden move. I had
been thinking all night, and I made up my mind that I must see Lewis
and tell him the whole story. For, absurd as it may seem, I was really
afraid Aunt Betsy would contrive some way to marry me to Abiram even
against my will.

"The tide was running out and helped me, and I was soon at James
Whitecar's landing, for I knew how to handle a boat. I found Lewis at
the barn, told him the whole story, and showed him the tea. You ought
to have seen how his eyes flashed.

"'So that is what he has been up to!' said he. 'We have been watching
him for a week, and suspected as much.' Then he called Stephen
Whitecar, James' brother, a great friend of his, and showed him the tea.

"'We'll take care of him!' said Stephen. 'Only thee keep quiet,
Sybilla, and don't let on that thee knows anything.'"

"Was Stephen a Friend?" I asked.

"Well, yes, he belonged to Meeting, and his mother was a preacher, as I
told you. So we talked it over, and Stephen was for calling his mother,
and having me stay, but I said I thought I had better go right back.

"'Don't tell me anything!' said I. 'And then I can answer no questions.'

"Lewis said I was right and he would row me back himself. On the way it
was settled between us that he should come for me the next day but two,
and then we would go and get married. The reason we waited was that I
should be of age in two days, and then nobody would have anything to
say. I hated to leave Aunt Betsy and go against her wishes, but there
seemed no other way.

"I was busy getting breakfast when Abiram came down. I thought it
best to be civil to him, and easily put him into a good humor. That
day everybody noticed that there was a good deal of riding round, and
going in and out of Doctor Elmer's and Mr. Philip Fithian's. He was a
minister, and a great patriot. I was on thorns, expecting I did n't
know what, and ready to start at every noise, but I kept about my work,
and waited on Aunt Betsy, and was so pleasant to Abiram that he really
thought I was coming round.

"The next evening about ten o'clock there came a great knocking at our
door. I was up in a minute, and looking out, I saw by the moonlight
about thirty Indians in war-paint and feathers standing round the
house. My heart was in my mouth for a minute, and then it came over me
what they had come for.

"'What do you want?' called Abiram from his window.

"'We have come for a cup of tea!' said a voice which I knew right well.
'Get up and give it to us like a good fellow, or we shall have to take
it where we can find it.'

"Abiram blustered and talked big, but it was no use. They told him if
he did n't open the doors, they would break them down, and at last,
rather than have his house attacked, he gave up the keys. They touched
nothing else in the house, but they carried all the tea out into the
meadow yonder, piled it up, and, set it on fire. It burned splendidly,
and perfumed the air for half a mile round. There were at least two
hundred people looking on, but nobody said a word, or offered to
interfere. It was all as solemn as a yearly meeting, and it had a right
to be, when two at least of the Indians were ministers. When the tea
was all burned, everybody went quietly home.

"Abiram was like a madman for a time, and then he broke down and cried
like a baby. He never held his head up after that, and presently he
moved away to Philadelphia. They tried to bring a suit against the men
who burned the tea, but it was of no use. The grand jury were too good
Whigs to bring in a bill, and finally the war came on and the matter
was dropped.

"I had engaged Eunice Hunt to come and take care of the house, and
wait on Aunt Betsy, and on the day appointed I went in and told her
what I was going to do. She scolded at first, and then she cried and
begged me to wait till spring, but I was firm. I thought I had waited
and suffered about enough. She declared she never would see me again,
but I told her I had an inward persuasion that she would change her
mind. Then I left her, and Lewis and I went up to Mr. Philip Fithian's
and were married. Afterward we moved over to James Whitecar's, and
I lived there a long time, all the same as one of the family, doing
the spinning and helping in the work. Some Friends blamed Deborah for
taking my part, but she said she had acted according to the best light
she had, and she was pretty well able to hold her own.

"The next year the war broke out, and Lewis, with his brother Richard
and Stephen Whitecar, went into the army. It was a great trouble to
Deborah to have Stephen turn soldier, but he did, and made a very
good one. My Lewis rose to be captain, and was much respected; but he
was wounded up at Wyoming, and died, leaving me with one little girl,
mother of your father and Elisabeth here. Stephen Whitecar wanted to
marry me when the war was over, and I knew Deborah would have liked it,
but I couldn't bring my mind to it, and after a while he married Emma
Parvin. Folks said he thought it was the next thing to marrying me.

"Aunt Betsy was very angry for a long time, but she came round, and was
as kind as ever, even getting me the satin gown and crape shawl she had
promised me if I married Abiram. He got very rich in Philadelphia at
one time, but he lost everything speculating in Continental money after
the war, and finally died poor and friendless.

"And now, as the wind has changed and it is clearing up, you had better
go and get ready for your tea-fight."

                                               _Lucy Ellen Guernsey._

                          ——————————————————
