---
title: A geographical and commercial view of northern Central Africa
collection: 21-anti-colonial/colonial-studies
region: africa
counter: colonialism / empire
subjects: Niger River; Great Britain -- Colonies -- Africa; Africa, West -- Geography; Great Britain -- Commerce -- Africa, West
source: Project Gutenberg
source_url: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78384
language: English
license: public domain
author_catalog: MacQueen, James, 1778-1870
perspective: colonized peoples
---
[Illustration: A MAP OF AFRICA North of the parallel of 7° South
Latitude; _Shewing the course & direction of the principal_ Rivers &
Mountains, _particularly of the_ NIGER & of the GIR _WITH THEIR
TRIBUTARY STREAMS,_ from the best Authorities.

DRAWN BY JAMES MCQUEEN Glasgow 6th. June 1820.

_Engraved by W. H. Lizars Edinburgh._

_Engraved by W. H. Lizars_

_Edinburgh, Published by Willm. Blackwood 1821._]


                                   A
                      GEOGRAPHICAL AND COMMERCIAL
                                  VIEW
                                   OF
                        NORTHERN CENTRAL AFRICA:
                    CONTAINING A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT
                                 OF THE
                         Course and Termination
                                 OF THE
                GREAT RIVER NIGER IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.

                               * * * * *
                           BY JAMES M‘QUEEN.
                               * * * * *

                               EDINBURGH:
               PRINTED FOR WILLIAM BLACKWOOD, EDINBURGH;
                 T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND, LONDON; AND
                         W. TURNBULL, GLASGOW.
                               * * * * *
                                 1821.


                               * * * * *
                     Printed by Balfour and Clarke,
                            Edinburgh, 1821.




                                   TO
                               HIS GRACE
                         THE DUKE OF MONTROSE,
                               THIS WORK
                       IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
                                   BY
                    HIS OBLIGED, MOST OBEDIENT, AND
                            HUMBLE SERVANT,
                             JAMES M‘QUEEN.




                                PREFACE.

                               * * * * *


The subsequent sheets regarding the Geography and Commerce of Northern
Central Africa, are with much deference submitted to the public. They
are the results of much labour, long research, and numerous inquiries,
carried on with a view to elucidate these important subjects.

When Mr. Park returned from his first journey, I was resident in the
Island of Grenada (West Indies). There I had Mandingo Negroes under my
charge, who were well acquainted with the Joliba. They knew the name
perfectly from hearing me pronounce it in reading Mr. Park’s book. I
also knew a Houssa Negro, who said he rowed Mr. Park across the Niger.
These things naturally attracted my attention; and being fond of
geographical subjects, I endeavoured to collect all the accounts which I
could concerning the features of the country on the Upper Niger, as well
from Negroes as from gentlemen of my acquaintance, who had obtained
their information from similar sources. Though it was scarcely possible
to reduce these, standing by themselves, into regular order, yet,
connected with other accounts, they became satisfactory, and formed the
commencement of my labours and collections on this subject. The
narratives of every one were filled with the accounts of high mountains,
great rivers, populous countries, and large towns. By these means, my
particular attention was fixed upon this interesting subject, and my
researches have been pursued day succeeding day, ever since the period
above mentioned. Numerous authorities regarding this interesting portion
of Africa have been examined with much care, and the most striking facts
elicited from their pages. This investigation in the geographical
department, has led to the conclusion which is now submitted to the
world. It is for the public to judge how far the work has been
judiciously and accurately performed.

It is nearly five years, since, in a small treatise, I pointed out that,
in the Bights of Benin and Biafra, the Niger certainly entered the
ocean. Various travellers, and researches made since that period, have
enabled me to delineate with greater accuracy the course of this
important river, and its numerous tributary streams through the interior
of the country. Perfect accuracy on these subjects is at present
unattainable, nor is it here pretended to. The delineation of the
general features of the country was all I had in view, and this I
flatter myself has been done with sufficient accuracy to establish all
the leading points which were contemplated.

The Public will no doubt feel surprised when, considering the number and
magnitude of the rivers in the Bights of Benin and Biafra, that no
attempt has ever been made to penetrate by means of the chief and most
powerful of these streams into the interior of the country. Yet such is
the fact. The rivers of interior Africa were believed to be like no
other rivers. By one they were stated to run, first increasing, and then
diminishing, till the current disappeared altogether. By another, that,
flowing in opposite directions, they at last met and stood still; and by
a third, that one of the greatest rivers in the world, with all its
tributary streams, was swallowed up in a lake, or absorbed by sands.
Such were the theories formed; and no farther inquiry was considered
necessary. Thus Central Africa has for ages been buried from the eyes of
the civilized world, and in a similar manner, unworthy and erroneous
theories are at work to mislead the public, and shut up the vast
continent of New Holland. The mighty rivers lately discovered in that
Continent are also represented as terminating in a lake or swamps,
chiefly because it has been said that the Niger does so terminate. Near
600 miles of the coast of New Holland, on the south-west side, remain to
be explored. In the north-east corner of the Great Bay, which
circumscribes the south-west part of that continent, no doubt is the
outlet of all the waters of that vast country, which, flowing from every
point of the compass, converge towards that quarter, and after forming a
lake or lakes, in all probability issue therefrom, and pour a mighty
tribute into the ocean. Whoever casts his eye upon the map of the world,
must be struck with the faithful resemblance which the Great Bay, and
the south-west coast of New Holland, bear to the Gulph of Guinea and the
south-west coast of Africa. To the same point in both Continents all the
rivers converge. Another Niger and another Gir will perhaps ere long be
found out, traversing the interior of New Holland, and therefore it is
of the utmost consequence that Great Britain should get possession of
the country round the mouths of these streams, which would thus give her
the complete command of all that immense country.

In the way to open up and establish a commercial intercourse with
Africa, there will no doubt be a diversity of opinions. On such an
important subject, involving so many interests, and such mighty
consequences, I would wish to be understood as offering my opinion with
great deference. Nevertheless, from what I have learned of Africa, and
from what I know of the Negro character, I am convinced that the plan
proposed and recommended in this work, or one formed upon a similar
basis, is that which will soonest render the trade with Africa the most
beneficial, either to Africa or to Great Britain.

In recommending the destruction of the system of slavery in Africa, I am
not so sanguine or inconsiderate as to imagine, or to expect, that this
can or ought to be accomplished in a moment. It can only be effected in
a gradual manner; and abolition can only be beneficial by being
accomplished in this way. It must be the work of much time. There is
also too much reason to fear, that Africa can only rise to freedom and
civilization through the medium of slavery in the first instance. The
great error committed by her Princes, and all Europeans who have
hitherto held communication with Africa, is, that they withdraw the
labours of Africa to cultivate other quarters of the world, in place of
fixing its exertions to the soil which gives it birth. It is this system
which has hitherto retarded the civilization of Central Africa. Let
those then, who are slaves in Africa, or who may in future become so by
the regulations of the native powers, be employed to cultivate Africa,
and the population of that Continent will, with its improvement,
gradually rise to freedom, knowledge and civilization. There is no other
safe way to accomplish the object.

There is one article of commerce which is particularly abundant in the
parts of Africa which have been considered, namely, rice, the particular
value of which I have omitted to mention. This article may be purchased
in the countries adjoining the Niger, at the low value of a halfpenny to
three farthings per lb. or about 90s. per cwt. Here it costs four times
the sum, and in the West Indies a still greater price. It is needless to
point out the advantages which would result from prosecuting this branch
of commerce.

I cannot help thinking, that the accounts which we have heard of nations
in the interior of Africa devouring their prisoners is incorrect, and
arises from a want of knowledge of their customs and language. It is
well known that the Negroes believe in the power of witchcraft to such a
degree as to sink under the idea, pine away, and die. I omit numerous
instances in the West Indies where the individual inflicting, and the
individual suffering, were each equally so convinced of the fatal power,
as neither reasoning, threats, nor punishment, could remove the
impression. Thus situated, the infatuated sufferer stated that his enemy
was devouring him. From Beaver’s African Memoranda, we learn that this
practice is quite common on the western coast of Africa, and is known by
the common appellation, that such and such a person “_eats another_,” or
is “_eaten by another_.” From this may arise the reports of there being
nations in the interior, and elsewhere, who eat each other and their
prisoners.

After these sheets were nearly all printed off, the kindness and
attention of Professor Jameson of the University of Edinburgh, put into
my hands the new work from the pen of Mr. Bowditch, regarding the
interior of Africa. From this, the important fact is obtained, that the
river which flows from the east is navigable, and navigated, at any
rate, to Lake Caudee, or Fittre, if not further; for instead of days
journeys, as related in his former work, we find that it _is sixty-five
days navigation_ from the island of Gangi, near Yaoora, to the borders
of Fittre Lake. Park navigated the Niger to Boussa, in the immediate
neighbourhood of Gangi; and we have it confirmed by the previous
authority, that the eastern river is navigable also. This confirms what
both Edrisi and Leo Africanus related concerning it. Leo Africanus also
clearly points out that there were several rivers besides the Niger, and
that all the others emptied themselves into it. The Negro kingdoms which
he enumerated and visited, were, as he distinctly states, situated
either upon “_the Niger, or other rivers which flow into it_.” That it
did not run to the Egyptian Nile, but from it, and that it was not lost
in a lake, but terminated in the ocean, Gregory of Abyssinia states most
pointedly. Flowing west from the Egyptian Nile, he says, “Descendit enim
versus regionem Elwah, et sic illabitur in _Mare Magnum_, i.e. Oceanum
Occidentalem.”

Also, from the work just quoted, it would appear that the river from the
east joins the Niger about and below Yaoora. In the itinerary of
Brahima, the route from Yahndi and Gamba, to the Niger, is given. The
last place on that route is Schal. “Here,” says Brahima, “is the river
which is named Coudha, _on the extremity of which is the great kingdom
of Your,” (Yaoora.)_ If this relation is correct, then it would appear
that the Great Eastern River is that which is called Coudha, Kaoda, or
Quolla, and that it flows into the Niger to the south of Yaoora, forming
the boundary of this state on that quarter. It is by no means improbable
that this is really the case. With one remark I shall conclude my
observations on these subjects. It appears, from all geographical
authorities in early times, that nearly all the great rivers in the
different continents were uniformly laid down as flowing from the same
source, or as being joined together in some part of their course. This
is the case with the great rivers in the Eastern World, in Africa, and
lastly in America, where the Rio de La Plata and the Great Maranon are
represented as uniting, and then separating from each other, and then
flowing in nearly opposite directions. Perpetuating such erroneous
ideas, has led into the confusion which has long reigned in the
geography of Africa.

In speaking of the magnitude of African cities and states, it must
always be borne in mind that these are considered chiefly according to
the accounts derived from the authority of Arab, Moor, and Negro
travellers, whose comparisons, again, are drawn from what they saw or
heard of in Africa. These accounts must not be taken as applied to, or
compared with, European Kingdoms and States. Several cities in Africa,
however, are certainly populous, and the number of this description is
undoubtedly also very considerable.

In the numerous authorities to which I have referred, and which I have
quoted, I have uniformly given their exact words, that my readers may be
enabled to judge for themselves concerning the truth of what I advance.
In the style and composition of the work, I have to claim the indulgence
of the public. Avocations of a different kind necessarily engage my
time; and my distance from Edinburgh, where the work was printed, has,
in a few instances, led into errors, which, however, are either very
obvious, or not very material.

The interest which is now excited about every thing connected with
Africa, must soon lead to measures by some European power, such as will
clearly and accurately develope every part of the interior of that long-
neglected and very remarkable country. I hope that this honour, and the
immense advantages to be derived therefrom, both political and
commercial, are reserved for Great Britain.

It is only necessary further to add, that the substance of the following
work, in what regards both the geography and the trade, were embodied
into separate memorials, and with a map of Northern Africa, (which has
been reduced and engraved for this work) upon a large scale, submitted
to his Majesty’s Government _in the latter end of June last year_.
Especially these were laid before the noble Lords at the Head of the
Admiralty and the Colonial Department, the Right Honourable the
President and Vice-President of the Board of Trade, and other
distinguished members of the Executive Government. To his Grace the Duke
of Montrose I feel particularly indebted for the interest he took in the
furtherance of a plan which, if prosecuted, would be attended with
incalculable advantages to the West of Scotland, and to Glasgow in
particular.

   GLASGOW, _March_ 22, 1821.




                               CONTENTS.

                               * * * * *


                    GEOGRAPHY OF NORTHERN AFRICA.

                             CHAP. I.

                                                                    Page

  Ancient Geography of Central Africa — General Observations —
  Accounts of the Interior by Ptolemy, Edrisi, Ibn-al-Vardi,
  Scheabeddin, Mackrisi, Batouta, Abulfeda, Ebn Haukal, Leo
  Africanus — Termination of the Niger, &c.                            1

                             CHAP. II.

  Joliba, two branches, source western, ditto eastern — River
  Zamma; course till junction — Snowy mountains — Balia — Lake
  Clonia — River Guinola — Kaniaba — Bammakoo — Magnitude of Niger
  — Rapids — Marraboo — Yamina — Sego — Jennë — Ba Nimma — Ba
  Maniana — Lake Dibbie — River Gozen Zair — High Mountains —
  Walet — Course of Niger, north-east — Ba Moriaca — Jinbala —
  Rakbara — Kabra — Timbuctoo — Bahar-el-Ahmar — Course of ditto —
  Houssa — Magnitude of Niger at Timbuctoo — Sidi Hamed — Course
  of river south-east — Mountains — Kaffo — Rocks — River bursts
  through a chain of mountains — Exceeding high ridge to
  south-west — Cabi, a Ferry — Yaoora — Great River from east may
  join here — Boussa — Park’s death — Cause of it — Wauwa — Gange
  — Nyffe — Wassanah — Magnitude of Wassanah — Magnitude of Niger
  or Zadi — Course to “Great Water” — Junction with the Sea, and
  where — General Observations                                        59

                            CHAP. III.

  Eastern rivers — Misselad or Gir, source and course — Dar Saley
  — Wara — Other rivers — Gir turns west — Lake Fittre — Magnitude
  of River; junction with the Shary — Bahr-el-Feydh — Bahr Djad —
  Course of Gir west — Gambarou — Birney — Bornou — River Tzad —
  Face of the country — Cano or Ghana — Kashna — Gulbe, supposed
  course of ditto — Position of Kashna — Junction of eastern and
  western rivers — Vancara or Owencara; what it is — Bito — Temian
  — Cannibals — Junction of Gir and Bahr Kulla, source and course
  of ditto — Mount Thala — Miri — Junchor and Bahr Salamat Rivers
  — Lake Haimat — Island at the junction of Gir and Niger — Lybia
  Palus — Lake of Jackson, or sea of Sudan; what that is —
  Robertson — River Loro — Fillanee — Water communication between
  the sea-coast and north-east parts of Africa — Course of the
  Niger to the sea in the Bights of Benin and Biafra — Boundary of
  Benin — Bahr Kulha; what it is                                      93

                             CHAP. IV.

  Bights of Benin and Biafra — Rio de Formosa — Delta of Benin —
  Innumerable Rivers — Rio Forcados — Gatto Creek — Cape Formosa —
  Rivers East — New Calabar and Bonny River; their great magnitude
  — Old Calabar and Cross Rivers — Rio Elrei — Salt Ground — Great
  Trade in Salt — Face of the Country in the Delta — Trade to
  these Places — Inundation of the Rivers — Time of ditto — Shews
  they are different from either the Congo or the Egyptian Nile —
  Currents in the Sea near the Coast — Number and Magnitude of the
  Rivers in the Delta — Breadth — Depth — Trade — Natives into the
  Interior — A Race of People almost White — Leucæ Ethiopians of
  Ptolemy — General Observations on the N.E. and North parts of
  Central Africa — Accounts of Travellers — Kong — What it means —
  Great Magnitude of the Niger, and his Tributary Streams — Length
  of Course — Compared to Magnitude of Bahr-el-Abiad at Shilluk —
  Cannot be the same Stream — No Connection with that River          128

                             CHAP. V.

  Country south of the Elrei — High land of Cameroons — An extinct
  Volcano — Chariot of the Gods — Old Cameroons — Jamoor and
  Malemba Rivers — Moöhnda, or Danger River — Gaboon River —
  Nazareth, Liverpool, Bristol, and Tawney Rivers — Congo River —
  Rivers West of the Rio de Formosa — Rio Lagos — Mory River —
  Country around it — Rio Volta — Boosempra, Ancobra, and Assinee
  Rivers — Mesurada River — Sierra Leone — Way to explore Africa —
  Distances of Places, how ascertained — How to command Africa —
  Fernando Po, a sure stronghold — Sierra Leone, a secondary place
  — A settlement inland of the greatest importance — Extent of
  country it would command — French settlement in Africa — Wish to
  extend their power in that quarter — Rivers, their great use in
  the Torrid Zone — East coast of Africa, important for Commerce —
  Rivers Zambezi and Zebee — Island of Socotora — Situation of
  Africa — Slavery — The Slave Trade — Extent thereof — Slavery
  and Superstition — Scourges of Africa — How to benefit Africa —
  Colonization — Advantage of Colonies — The chief strength of
  Britain — Eagerly coveted by France — Our efforts in Central
  Africa would civilize all Northern Africa — Must expect to meet
  difficulties — Perseverance will ensure success                    156

             TRADE AND COMMERCE OF NORTHERN CENTRAL AFRICA.

  Colonies necessary to Great Britain — France anxious to colonize
  Africa — New markets can alone relieve our trade — Old
  overstocked — Africa the best field — Superior productions —
  Country near the Niger — Powerful, populous, cultivated, and
  commercial states — Large cities — Numerous valuable productions
  — Africa long neglected — Formerly enriched other countries —
  Articles of export and import — Particular enumeration and value
  of those most in demand — Salt — Ostrich feathers — Spices —
  Precious stones — Gums — Drugs — Dye-stuffs — Gold dust — Ivory
  — Gunpowder, Fire-arms, &c. — Value of articles — Great profits
  on trade — Immense advantages of a water conveyance — Hardships
  attending the trade at present — Value of articles at the Gold
  coast and the interior — Extent and value of the trade at
  present — Would supply our West India Colonies with provisions —
  Obtain plenty of fine cotton — Would open up a trade to the Cape
  of Good Hope and India — Abolition of the slave trade would
  relieve and cultivate Africa — If not checked, our West India
  colonies must be ruined — Infringe the rights of no civilized
  nation in colonizing Africa — Three modes of establishing the
  trade — A chartered company the best — Regulations under which
  to be formed — Government must countenance and support such an
  undertaking — Plans to be adopted and pursued — General
  reflections on the climate of Africa, and the importance of the
  contemplated undertaking                                           211




                                ERRATA.


  Page   8. 3d line from bottom, _for_ Girgires,  _read_ Girgiris.

        27. 10th     do.           —   itineries,   —    itineraries

        28. 3d line from top,      —   Canal        —    Canoe

        33. 2d line from bottom,   —   Cetenum      —    Ceterum

        57. 3d line from top,      —   comes        —    come

        85. 3d line from bottom,   —   _Kabee_      —    _Kabeer_

       105. 3d       do.           —   bar          —    bark

       123. 15th line from top,    —   West         —    East

        —   3d line from bottom,   —   occurrence   —    occurrence
                                       of which,         which

       138.        do.             —   turnings     —    burnings

       177. 2d line from top,      —   outlet       —    outlets




                               GEOGRAPHY
                                   OF
                            NORTHERN AFRICA.

                               * * * * *

                                CHAP. I.

_Ancient Geography of Central Africa — General Observations — Accounts
of the Interior by Ptolemy, Edrisi, Ebn-al-Fardi, Sheabiddin, Mackrisi,
Batouta, Abulfeda, Ebn Haukal, Leo Africanus — Termination of the Niger,
&c._


The central parts of Africa, and, in a very particular manner, the
interior parts of the northern division of that great continent,
together with the course and termination of the great river Niger, are
still in a great measure unknown. Become the eager object of European
research, these cannot much longer remain hid. It is surprising they
have remained undiscovered so long. To explore and determine accurately
these important points, is the most interesting geographical problem
that now remains to be solved.

Unworthy and erroneous theories, and to which all information hitherto
received has been forced to bend, have long led astray the public mind,
and general exertions of Europe, from the true path by which the
interior of Northern Africa can be explored, and the only way by which
the course and termination of the Niger can be ascertained. The road,
however, is easy, and quite accessible. Nature has formed it. The Niger,
and his tributary streams, pursue their course through Central Africa.
From the west, and from the east, they converge to one point. After
uniting in one channel, the mighty current divides itself into several
streams, which enter the Atlantic ocean by navigable estuaries in the
Bights of Benin and Biafra.

Allowing we had no positive information of the course and magnitude of
the Niger lower down than Bammakoo, Sego, and Lake Dibbie, still the
fact of there being such a river continuing its course eastward from the
latter place, is sufficient to induce us to look for its exit on the sea
coast. We are quite certain that it does not enter the sea to the north;
and we may say we are equally sure that it does not finish its course in
any sea to the east. To the south, therefore, we must turn our
inquiries. In no part of Western or Southern Africa is there stronger
grounds to look for this estuary, than in the coast below Benin. There
the soil is all alluvial. For a great distance into the interior, stones
larger than a man’s fist are unknown. The country is flat, and inundated
during the swell of the rivers from the tropical rains. The land is
daily gaining on the sea from the quantity of alluvial matter brought
down from the interior. The whole country and coast, for a great extent,
is intersected with arms and outlets of rivers, communicating with each
other inland. The bottom of the sea, along a great extent of coast, is
all soft mud. From the Rio Lagos to the Rio Elrei river, no fewer than
twenty streams enter the ocean, several of them of surprising magnitude,
and navigable for ships. Large floating islands are borne down by their
waves, and carried into the ocean. The great magnitude of these rivers
will by and bye come more particularly under our review.

As the easterly course of the Upper Niger is now no longer a matter of
dispute, it would be perfectly superfluous to bring forward, in detail,
the authority of writers and geographers, from the days of Herodotus
downwards to this day, to prove this important fact. Its termination is
now the subject which engages the attention of all. The theories at
present most in vogue, are, _first_, that it flows eastward, reaching
beyond the parallel of 18° North Lat. and then, in about 20° East Long.
flows south-east, and is the parent stream of the Bahr-el-Abiad, or Nile
of Egypt; _second_, that it terminates in a large lake in the interior,
which also receives the waters of the Gir, or Nile of Soudan, coming
from the eastward; _third_, that the waters of both rivers are lost in,
and absorbed by swamps and sandy deserts, in a country called Wangara;
and _fourth_, that the Niger from his middle course flows south, and
joins the great River Congo, or Zaire.

Every one of these theories is grossly erroneous, contrary to every
authority on which reliance can be placed, and in opposition to every
feature of geography exhibited any where else on this globe. The
expedition to the Congo, so lately undertaken, and so unfortunate, has
nevertheless settled the question, that the Congo and Niger are
different streams. The lake said to receive and retain the waters of the
Gir and the Niger, can no where be heard of, either as a sea of salt or
fresh water, in the interior of Africa. Wangara, said to absorb these
rivers in swamps and sands, or rather those parts of Africa where
Wangara is said to lie, is, as the name signifies, a country of a
different description—a country intersected by many powerful rivers,
mountainous, fertile and cultivated, and inundated during the rains.
That the Niger flows to form the Bahr-el-Abiad, is contrary to all
probability, contrary to the good authority of Ptolemy, contrary to the
authority of the best Arabian geographers, and contrary to excellent
modern authority. Yet it is most surprising that an opinion, so
improbable in itself, and so directly opposite to all the authorities
mentioned, should even to this day continue to be believed and
maintained.

In following out this subject, and establishing by conclusive evidence,
the fact which I have advanced, it may not be unnecessary to consider
the general outline of the Roman and Arabian geography of this portion
of Africa, to which our attention is directed, before we consider
authorities of more recent dates. The coincidence will thus be more
apparent, and the fact more obvious. In the geography of Ptolemy we are
not to look for the accuracy of modern details. Nevertheless, his
general features of Northern Africa are worthy of attention. In his
days, it is obvious, from his enumeration of mountains, rivers, and
nations, that it must have been much better known than it now is; and,
therefore, we must the more regret that he did not then possess the
means which we now possess of fixing the positions of the places he
mentions with geographical accuracy. On this part of the subject,
however, it is not my intention to enter at great length, but merely to
select the undisputed and clearer parts which tend so strongly to
confirm the accounts of modern travellers concerning the course and
termination of the great and important streams already mentioned.

The most ancient Greek and Roman authors seem to have been very
imperfectly acquainted with the great Zahaara, or the countries beyond
it. Ptolemy himself seems altogether to overlook the desert, though he
minutely enumerates the countries beyond it. Strabo and Pliny conceived
that the streams which descended from the south-east side of Mount Atlas
formed the Niger, and which river was in these days believed to be one
with the Egyptian Nile. They stated that the streams descending from
Mount Atlas hid themselves, or rather run under the desert for a space
occupying 24 days journey, when, emerging, they continued their course
to the eastward, united in the Niger. This desert they describe as being
composed of _black dust_. Modern travellers all describe it as scorching
sands. Whether any alteration has taken place on it during the lapse of
so many ages, cannot be determined; but it is by no means improbable
that its extent is considerably increased, from the sands gaining on the
cultivated ground, as is well known to be the case on the side towards
Egypt. It is a curious fact, that, approaching the middle thereof,
reckoning from the Atlantic Ocean, abundance of water is found upon
digging some feet below the surface, and which the Arabs term, “_the sea
under ground_.” This remarkable circumstance might suggest to Strabo and
Pliny the idea already mentioned of the rivers from Mount Atlas running
under ground.

Ptolemy wrote on Egypt in the second century of the Christian era. Then
Africa was better known. The interior of the northern division thereof
he describes apparently from good authority, and with considerable
accuracy, only he seems altogether to leave out the Great Desert. Mount
Mandrus, the middle of which was in 23° East Long. from Ferro, and 22°
North Lat., and Rhisadirus Mountain more to the south, he places as the
barrier which divides the waters which flow westward into the Atlantic
Ocean, by the rivers Stachirus, &c. (the Senegal, Gambia, &c.) from
those which flow eastward in the Niger. Turning eastward from Rhisadirus
Mountain, we find Mount Caphas in about 10° North Lat. which divides the
waters which flow south into the _great gulf_, or Gulf of Guinea, and
those which flow north to join the Niger. In Caphas, we readily
recognize the Kong range. Eastward, in the same parallel, there is a
blank or opening, and then comes Mount Thala, situated in 10° North Lat.
and 38° East Long. from Ferro.

Before proceeding further, it is necessary to correct an obvious error
in the longitude, as reckoned by Ptolemy. He places Alexandria in 60°
30′ East Long. from Ferro, or 42° 29′ from Greenwich. This we know is
12° too much, Alexandria being in 30° East Long. from Greenwich, or 48°
from Ferro. It is evident, therefore, that we must deduct one-fifth
(decreasing this deduction in proportion as we go west) from the
longitude, as laid down by Ptolemy, in order to correct his reckoning.
By doing this, we shall see how accurately the positions of some places
agree with modern accounts.

South of Mount Thala, in 3° North Lat. and 33° East Long. we have Mount
Arualtes, and eastward of that in North Lat. 1° 30′, and East Long. 47°,
we have Mount Arangas. Turning north in 10° North Lat., and 50° East
Long. we have the chain of hills called the Garamantican rampart, which
divides the waters which flow west in the Gir, from those deserts which
stretch eastward to the Nile. Turning westward, in the parallel of 21°
North Lat. and extending along by the sources of the river Cinips, from
40° to 45° East Long. we have Mount Girgiris, and from 8° to 10° farther
west, in the same parallel of Lat. are the Usargala mountains. Next, in
North Lat. 32°[1], and East Long. 20° 30′, we have Mount Sagapola,
placed most erroneously in the map accompanying the work, in 20° North
Lat. and 15° East Long., in the south side, in place of the north side
of the desert.

The formidable barriers here enumerated, according to the delineation of
Ptolemy, encircle or enclose those extensive valleys, if I may use the
expression, through which the Niger, the Gir, and their tributary
streams, take their course, leaving only the opening between Mount Thala
and Mount Caphas, for the collected flood to escape to the southward.
How much these general outlines agree with modern accounts, our future
investigations, and the map accompanying this work, will shew.

It is in this portion of Africa that the greatest rivers flow, greater,
as Ptolemy must mean, than any other which flowed in the northern
division of that continent. In the middle of the country, says he, the
greatest rivers display themselves, viz. the Gir, joining together the
Usargala mountain and the Garamantican barrier or rampart. One branch of
this river makes the Lake Chelonides, in 20° North Lat. and 49° East
Long. (21° East Long. from Greenwich,) and another the Lake Nuba in
North Lat. 15° and East Long. 50°, or 22° from Greenwich, answering very
accurately with the Lake Fittre of modern authors. The course of the Gir
westward, Ptolemy distinctly marks, by enumerating the cities on its
northern bank, from Lynxana, in 20° 30′ North Lat. and 48° 30′ East
Long., unto Thycimath, situate in 19° 45′ North Lat. and 38° East Long.
Still more westward, he places his Gira metropolis in North Lat. 18° and
36° East Long. or 12° East from Greenwich.

Next is the Niger river, running east, and joining both Mount Mandrus
and Mount Thala, that is all the waters which are collected in the vale
between these mountains flow to form the Niger. The course east he
distinctly marks, by marking first the Lake Nigrites, and then the
cities on both the northern and southern banks, viz. on the north from
Pessidy, situate in 18° North Lat. and 19° East Long. to Panagra, in 16°
45′ North Lat. and 31° East Long. On the south bank from Thuspu,
situated in 17° 45′ North Lat. and 26° 30′ East Long. unto Dudum in 15°
North Lat. and 31° East Long. or about 6° east of Greenwich. At this
point the river is evidently declining south considerably, and a space
of 5° of longitude, by Ptolemy’s reckoning, intervenes between this part
of the Niger and the Gira metropolis, the last point mentioned on the
Gir river.

The Niger, we are informed, makes the Lake Nigrites in 15° East Long.[2]
and 18° North Lat. This is evidently the Lake Dibbie. The Nigira
metropolis is placed on the map at the junction of a river coming from
the north-east, and in 17° 45′ North Lat. and 25° 20′ East Long. which
is about 3° east of Greenwich, answering in longitude very nearly indeed
with the position of Timbuctoo. On the north side the Niger receives two
branches, viz. one from the Sagapola mountain, and another from the
Usargala mountain, which latter is probably that branch which joins at
the Nigira metropolis. That from the Sagapola mountain is evidently a
mistake, providing that mountain is correctly laid down; but a branch
springing south of the desert, and coming from that direction, does
perhaps join the Niger. Ptolemy, in his account of the Sagapola
mountain, seems to take no notice of the Great Desert, that mountain
being placed to the north of it. The Upper Niger he clearly brings from
the north-west.

On the south the Niger receives one branch _nigh to_ two places, viz.
17° North Lat. and 21° East Long. and also 13° 30′ North Lat. and 21°
East Long. The accuracy of this we shall by and by have occasion to
notice more particularly. Towards the Rising Sun it also receives one
branch above the Lybian Lake, which lake is placed in 16° 30′ North
Lat., and 35° East Long., or about 12° east of Greenwich. This branch,
no doubt, comes from the eastern part of, or from the country eastward
of Mount Thala. Ptolemy seems to indicate, when he says, above the
Lybian Lake, that this branch joined the Niger after the latter had
issued from the lake. Yet his exact meaning is not easily ascertained.
The point, however, is of considerable importance; for, if to the
westward of the lake, no stream coming from the east could join the
Niger but the Gir. Be this as it may, it is obvious that he means that
this branch from the eastward and this lake communicated with the Niger.
Whoever considers for a moment, must see that it could not fail also to
have a communication with, or rather that it must receive the waters of
the Gir. The latter stream, in its westerly course, is distinctly traced
to 18° North Lat. and 36° East Long., while the Lybian Lake is placed in
16° 30′ North Lat. and 35° East Long., only about 100 miles S.W. from
the Gira metropolis. This is curious and important.

The Niger from this point continues a southerly course, otherwise it
could not join Mount Thala, the middle of which is in 10° North Lat. and
38° East Long., or 13° 40′ east of Greenwich. Further, we have in
Ptolemy no accurate accounts of the course of this river. But that it
flows south and joins the ocean, he certainly meant, when he says, that
Lybia, wherein he had described the courses of the rivers mentioned, was
bounded on the south by that part of Ethiopia Interior called Agisymba;
and concerning these African rivers, he says, “Illorum vero qui _per
interiorem Æthiopam_ fluant, quique _fontes et ostia_ in continente
habent maximi sunt Gir et Niger.” (Lib. ii. E. 1. de maximis
fluminibus.) In this the southern course is very plainly marked, and
also their termination in the ocean.

With one observation I shall conclude this part of the subject. In Mount
Girgiris, situate, as has been already mentioned, Ptolemy states that
the river Cinips has its source in two places, viz. in the parallel of
21° North Lat. and in 40° and 45° East Long. This river flows north, and
enters the Mediterranean between the greater and the lesser Syrtes, in
42° 15′ East Long., or to the eastward of modern Tripoli. No such river
we certainly know flows through this part of Africa. It is therefore
probable that the springs in Mount Girgiris flowed, joined, and formed a
river running in a different direction. The river Cinyphus, which enters
the Mediterranean, is certainly one of those streams which rise north of
the desert, and have very short courses indeed, compared to what the
Cinips would have, if it flowed from Lat. 21° North, a course of nearly
800 miles. The river springing in Mount Girgiris certainly takes a
different direction, and doing this, it will correspond with the
accounts of the direction of the rivers in that part of Africa, as these
are described by modern travellers.

After Ptolemy, the early Arabian authors and geographers demand our
attention. From their careless and obscure manner of writing on these
subjects, it is impossible to reconcile all their statements.
Sufficient, however, remains to shew us our way. According to Leo, the
ancient Arabian chroniclers, viz. Bukri and Mishuudi, knew nothing in
the land of the Negroes till the year of the Hegira 380 (A.D. 1002,)
except Alguechet and Cano. These discoveries were evidently made from
Egypt, as Alguechet is an Oasis in the desert 120 Arabian miles distant
from Egypt, and seems to have been the first stage in the road to
western discovery. At the period last-mentioned, however, the Arabs from
Barbary passed the great desert, and all the countries to the south
thereof were quickly explored and conquered. Those formidable deserts,
which formed a rampart against the advance of the most powerful nations
of antiquity, were, to the roving Arab, strengthened by enthusiasm, and
fortified by predestination, no barriers whatever. Innumerable swarms
soon found their way to the southward, and planted, amidst powerful
colonies, the standard and religion of their prophet on the banks of the
Niger. They penetrated through the centre of the country, from sea to
sea, from the Mediterranean to the Gulf of Guinea. When the Portuguese
first discovered the latter part of the coast of Africa, they found the
population every where mixed with Arabs. The western parts of the
continent, however, namely, the countries along the north and south of
the Senegal, were less known to them to much later periods. These seem
to have been the refuge of the ancient inhabitants of Morocco, &c. who,
driven from their ancient abodes by the disciples of Mahommed, sought
refuge across the desert, and, being a more intelligent and hardy race
than the Negroes, were thus for a longer period enabled to repel the
attacks of their restless enemies.

The central and southern parts of Northern Africa became thus well known
to the Arabian writers, either from observation or report. In some
parts, however, they contracted, and in others extended, the continent
beyond its proper limits. “The ambient sea,” (Bahar Addolum, Sea of
darkness, or Atlantic Ocean,) says Abulfeda, “extends itself from
Mauritania until it has passed the desert of Lemptuna, (Great Desert,) a
vast wilderness of barbarians, to the country of the Nigritæ. Thence it
stretches yet farther southwards, till it has _passed beyond the
Equator_, after which it extends to the east, _behind the mountains of
El Komri_, from whence the Nile of Egypt has its source. Again, it
proceeds southward,” &c. Leo Africanus states, that the “south part of
Africa abutteth upon the Ocean Sea, which compasseth it almost as far as
the deserts of Gaoga.” These deserts of Gaoga, according to the same
authority, lie to the south and the south-west of the kingdom of Gaoga,
which kingdom extended on the west bank of the Nile from the confines of
Egypt, southward 500 Arabian miles, to the great bend of the Nile, about
Dongola. This, with the account from Abulfeda, shews how much the early
Arabian writers were deceived regarding the true position of the Gulf of
Guinea, and how far eastward they conceived that it pierced into the
African continent.

Belad-el-Soudan, was the general term applied to those parts of Africa
inhabited by Negroes, south of the Great Zahaara, and west of the
deserts of Nubia. “Belad-el-Soudan,” says Bakui, who flourished about
the year 1400, “or the Country of the Blacks, extendeth on the north to
that of the Berbers, on the south to deserts, on the east to Ethiopia,
and on the west to the ocean sea. It is burned by a perpendicular sun.
The inhabitants are naked, part Mussulmen, and part Infidels.” Speaking
of that portion of Africa which abounds with mines of the “most pure
gold,” Ebn Haukal says, “this land of the Blacks is a very extensive
region. Their skin is of a finer and deeper black than any other blacks,
whether Habeshis, (Abyssinians,) or Zingians, (Ethiopians;) and their
country is more extensive than that of any other nation of blacks. _It
is situated on the coasts of the ocean to the south_.” This distinctly
points out the northern shore of the Gulf of Guinea. Ebn Haukal was the
most accurate of all the Arabian geographers, and is with great reason
supposed to have visited every country which he describes. Regarding the
boundary south, Bakui seems not to have been so well-informed, when he
says, it is “by deserts” on that quarter. But he evidently carries his
Belad-el-Sudan no farther south than the mighty chain of Kong and the
chain in the same parallel of latitude, stretching eastward to El Komri.
By the word deserts, we are to understand not only sandy deserts, like
the great Zahaara, but likewise mountainous, rugged, and woody countries
less civilized, cultivated, and inhabited than others. Leo Africanus
enables us to clear up this point. He states, that the kingdom of Melli
is bounded south by “certain deserts and dry mountains,” which are
without doubt the bleak mountains in the Kong chain. But still more
expressly, and to the point, he states, that “the land of the negroes
lies between the Lybian Desert (Zahaara) and a _desert_ to the south,
which stretcheth to the main ocean.” But that it is not barren sands is
evident, for he adds, “_in the desert are infinite_ nations (except by
report) unknown to us.” The country south of Guangara, the same
authority informs us, is of a similar description. Hence the authority
of Leo and Bakui is reconciled, and the meaning of their respective
descriptions, and others of a similar nature, given by other Arabian
writers, are, by this elucidation rendered clear and plain.

Belad-el-Sudan, or the country of the blacks, is, by Arabian authors,
divided into several large portions, each of which contains a number of
kingdoms and states. The larger divisions which are more immediately
connected with our present investigation, are the land of Gaoga, the
land of Kanem, Ghana, Maly, Meczarat-al-Sudan, Lamlem, and Belad-el-
Tibri. The four first occupied the whole country south of the Great
Desert, and the deserts of Lybia, extending through central Africa, from
the Egyptian Nile to the sources of the Senegal. The three latter
divisions, or portions, lie to the south of the former.

Gaoga does not properly belong to the land of the negroes, which, in
fact, commences from the western borders of the former. Gaoga, 300 years
ago, comprehended all that country from the confines of Egypt to the
desert south of Dongola, and from the Nile to the limits of the great
empire of Bornou. In the latter direction, according to Leo, it is about
500 miles in breadth. The country is in general barren, and full of
burning deserts.

The land of Kanem. This was formerly a mighty and important country,
though now merged in the great empire of Bornou, and parcelled out into
smaller states, such as Bagherme, &c. “On the borders of the Nile,” says
the Egyptian historian Macrisi, “lies also the land of Kanem; the king
of which is a Mahommedan. _It is at a great distance from the land of
Maly_. The capital is Heymy. The first town on the side towards Egypt
(that is on the caravan route) is Zeilah, and the last, reckoning
lengthways, is called Kaka, about three months journey from the other.
The people go veiled. Their king remains behind a curtain when he speaks
to any one. Except on two mornings each year, at the time of Asseer, no
one sees him. Their main food is rice. It grows without culture. They
have wheat, Indian corn, (dhoura,) figs, lemons, and other fruits. Their
currency is cotton-stuffs, called Dandy, and cowries. Gourds grow to a
great size. They make ships (perhaps rafts) of them, upon which they
cross the Nile. To the south of them are forests and deserts inhabited
by wild creatures, like demons, approaching to the figure of a man, whom
a horseman cannot overtake, and which hurt people. In the night there
appears something like fire; it shines, and when any one goes towards
it, it retires to a distance from him, so that if he should even run, he
never can come up with it, but it always keeps before him, and if he
throws a stone at it, and hits it, sparks fly from it. These countries
lie between Barca and Mogreb (a general name for Southern Africa) and
extend to the south as far as the middle Gharb. Their religion is of the
sect of Imam Malek Ibn Anes.”— (Burkhardt.)

The manners, customs, and produce of the country, are much the same as
are now found in Bornou, at that time a province of Kanem. The wild
creatures like demons are no doubt the African ourang-outang and ape,
which abound in the forests of Southern Africa, particularly towards Dar
Kulla and countries south of Bornou, which places, from the great extent
of the land of Kanem, it evidently reached. That they hurt, and even
attack people, particularly women, we learn from various authorities.
Mollien, page 286, says, “it is dangerous to meet the African ourang-
outang, particularly if a person be unarmed;” and in pages 290 and 291,
he relates an account of an assault made upon a woman by a number of
apes, who beat her most severely, and afterwards fought a desperate
battle with the principal inhabitants of a village near Galam, who went
on horseback to attack these animals. The fire that appeared at night
was most probably the fire fly, so numerous near rivers and forests in
the torrid zone, and which perhaps formed those “_fiery rivers_” which
astonished Hanno, the Carthaginian navigator and his followers.

From the description here given by Macrisi, it is plain that the Nile
(the Gir,) or some, if not all its large branches, passed through this
land of Kanem. Ibn-al-Vardi confirms the account of Macrisi. The former
states that “Konem, or Kanem, is a large country, situated along the
Nile,” and, what is still more to the point, he says, “the inhabitants
were all Mussulmen _of the sect of Imam Malek_.” Cities fall and empires
disappear, but the sects, tribes, and religion of the Arabs survive the
roll of ages, and form our sure guides. Edrisi also states Kanem as a
large district, and adds, that some negroes stated that Kaugha was
subject to it. Kanem, though humbled, is still known. According to
Burkhardt, “it is a large district, inhabited by the tribes of Tendjear,
and Beni Wayl,” (p. 479.) It is situated east of Bornou, and near the
river Sharee, and Bahr el Gazalle. Sheeref Imhammed places Kanem north
of Bornou in the road to Mourzook, but Burkhardt is perhaps the best
authority.

Ghana, and the countries once subject to it, was, during the days of its
vigour, the richest and most important kingdom which the Arabs ruled in
interior Africa. It lay to the west of Kanem, and was situated upon the
Nile. It was perhaps what is now known under the name of Cano. Vancara,
Cassina, and many other surrounding kingdoms, obeyed the authority of
Ghana, whose sovereign was exceedingly rich and powerful. The
inhabitants had long boats on the Nile, with which they fished and
carried on communication with other cities. In its largest sense, the
land of Ghana must have been of great extent. Ghana, according to
Edrisi, was bounded on the north by the _broadest_ desert, lying out
between the countries of the blacks and Barbary. According to Ibn-al-
Vardi, it was bounded on the south by Meghrara, or Meczara. It was
through the negroes country of Meczara that the Nile of the negroes,
according to Edrisi, ran in its progress to the sea near the Isle of
Ulil. Meczara El-Sudan, in all probability, was a general term applied
by the Arabs to all the countries lying to the south of their first
established kingdoms in Africa. They seem, in their progress of
colonization, to have proceeded first westward down the Gir, and then to
have been met by fresh colonies; which colonies descending from Barbary,
urged their progress eastward and along the Niger, till they met their
countrymen on the Gir.

The Pagan country of Lamlem lay to the southward and westward of the
kingdom of Ghana. “The countries and dominions of Lamlem,” says Edrisi,
“lay near a certain river flowing into the Nile. It is not known whether
there is any inhabited place to the southward, (rather S.W.) of Lamlem,
it being bounded on that side by a “Desert.” Thus indicating that it is
bounded on the southward and westward by a mountainous and woody
country. According to Ibn-al-Vardi, Lamlem is an inland city, “where
gold is found.” This would lead us to look for it between the Niger and
the Kong Mountains. Edrisi, however, has left us a more particular mark
by which we can ascertain the true position of this country, which was
invaded by all its Mahommedan neighbours, and its population carried off
to be made slaves. “When any of all the inhabitants of Lamlem,” says
Edrisi, “come to have the use of their reason, he is burnt in the face
and temples; this they do to distinguish each other.” Now, according to
Bowditch, this is the practice of the people of Dagwumba, (famous for
the abundance of gold,) Yahndi and Moosee, countries S.W. of the Niger,
and in the immediate vicinity of the Kong Mountains, “where gold is
found.” “The people of Dagwumba,” says he, “have three slight cuts on
each cheek bone, and three below, with one horizontal under the eye.
Those of Yahndi, three deep indented cuts. The people of Moosee, three
very deep and long, and one under the eye.” (Bowditch, p. 183.) These
are unchangeable features, and cannot mislead us. In all other parts of
Africa, the people are marked on their bodies. Lamlem, therefore, lay S.
and S.W. of the Niger, towards Kong, and was near a river which flowed
into the Niger, or the Nile of these Arabian geographers.

Belad-el-Tibri, or the country of pure gold, seems a general name
applied to all that part of Africa, south of the Upper Niger, towards
the mountainous country of Kong, where gold is so abundant. “Belad-el-
Tibri, _or the country of pure gold_,” says Bakui, “is part of the
Sudans or the Blacks in the south of Africa. From Segelmessa (south of
Mount Atlas,) to this country, they reckon three months journey. Here
you see gold come out of the sand, as elsewhere plants out of the
earth.” This is sufficient to enable us to ascertain what is meant by
“Belad-el-Tibri,” and also where that country is. The Empire of Ghana,
Bakui also informs us, was situate near this rich and evidently
extensive district.

The land of Maly, which, according to Macrisi, is at “_a very great
distance_” from the land of Kanem, next demands our attention. The
celebrated Arabian traveller, Batouta, enables us to fix the position of
this important country. This man was perhaps the greatest land traveller
that ever lived. He had visited every country from China to Spain, and
traversed nearly all northern Africa. An abridgment of his important
travels was found by Burckhardt in Egypt. The work is become very
scarce. Batouta was a native of Tangier. From Segelmessa, he set out
with the slave caravan for Sudan, in the year of the Hegira 753, (A.D.
1375.) In 45 days they crossed the Desert, and reached the first town in
Sudan, called Abou Laten, or Eiswalaten, perhaps Walet. From Abou Laten,
he travelled to Maly, through a country abounding with large trees, in
the hollow of one of which he saw a weaver at work on his loom. Ten days
brought them to Zaghary, an extensive place inhabited by negro traders,
and some white people of the heretic creed of Byadha, supposed to be
Christians or Jews. Leaving Zaghary, but without mentioning the
distance, or the bearing travelled, he came to the Nile (Niger,) at a
village named Karsendjour or Kosegarten.

“From Karsendjour,” says Batouta, “the Nile flows down to Kabera, and
from thence to Zagha, the inhabitants of which are Moslems of old, and
strong in the faith.” In this we readily recognize Sego, whose people
are to this day very rigid Mahommedans. “From Zagha,” continues Batouta,
“the Nile flows down to Timbuctoo, _then to Kuku_, to Mouly, the last
place in the country of Maly, to Bowy, (Query, can this be the same as
Boussa?) which is one of the largest cities in Sudan, and the Sultan one
of the most powerful in that country. No white man enters it, for he
would be killed before his arrival.” From Karsendjour, the traveller
“proceeded to the river called Sansera, about ten miles from Maly, and
then entered Maly, where he remained two months, and received presents
from Sultan Mousey Solyman, an avaricious but very just king. The women
in this country never cover their nakedness till after marriage.”

From the mutability of names in Africa, it is impossible for us to fix
precisely the spot where Batouta first reached the Niger. The time he
took to travel from Segelmessa across the Desert, agrees very well with
the distance to Walet, and from 15 to 20 days would bring him to the
Niger about Yamina. His general route to this point was in all
probability south. From the Niger, his course was probably to the
eastward of south, which would soon bring him to the Ba Nimma, which
seems to have been his river Sansera. The Maly here mentioned, there
seems no reason to doubt, is the Melli of Leo, and the early Portuguese
Voyagers. According to Cadamosto, it was 30 days journey S.W. from
Timbuctoo, and from Leo, we learn that it was an extensive country,
“extending 300 Arabian miles along a river which falleth into the Niger.
It is bounded by Jinnéé on the north, Gago on the east, south by certain
deserts and dry mountains, and west by huge _woods and forests_,
stretching to the Ocean (Atlantic) Sea. The capital, Melli, contains
6000 families or more. They excel all negroes in wit, civility, and
industry. They are rich, and have plenty of wares. The country yieldeth
great abundance of corn, flesh, and cotton. Here are many artificers and
merchants in all places. The people of Melli were the first that
embraced Mahommedanism.” The identity therefore of the Maly of Batouta,
and the Melli of Leo, is very apparent. This country must either be
situated along the Ba Nimma, or on the Niger itself, as will be noticed
more fully as we proceed in tracing the latter. According to the
itineraries which Bowditch obtained from several Moors, there is at this
day a place called Mali, to the west of Sego. (Bowditch, pages 484, 487,
489, and 192.)

“In 764, (A.D. 1376,) Batouta left Maly, and came to a canal or branch
of the Nile, where he saw a great number of Hippopotami; _and from
thence, after many days_, he reached Timbuctoo. It is a town of the
kingdom of Maly, and a black governor, named by the Sultan of Maly,
resides there. Most of its inhabitants are traders.” From thence he
passed down the Nile in a canoe, till he came to Kuku, paying daily
visits to the towns on the banks of the river.” Kuku is a large city,
_one of the finest in Sudan_. Here, as well as in Maly, they use shells
for currency. From thence he reached the town of Berdamma, whose
inhabitants _are the guardians of the caravans_. Their women are
beautiful. From this he went to Nekda or Tedka, built of red stones. The
water with which it was supplied, runs over copper mines, and assumes a
red colour, whence it is called _Bahar-el-Ahmar_, or Red River. The
people have no employment except trade, and the copper outside of Nekda,
where slaves work. The copper is melted into long pieces, which are
carried to the Pagan negroes for sale, and to other places. The Sultan
was of the Berber nation. From hence the traveller returned to Barbary
in 1376, passing through Twat, Hekar of the Berbers, and Segelmessa,
from whence he went to Faz, where his travels ended.”

From Kuku, Batouta turned homewards. The road he took from thence
clearly establishes this fact. The people of Berdamma being the
_guardians of the caravans_, and the Sultan of Nekda being of the
_Berber nation_, fixes these places on the south side of the Great
Desert, and N.E. of Timbuctoo. How far Kuku is below Timbuctoo, we are
left to conjecture. From the former place he was 70 days in reaching
Twat. This Oasis in the Desert is 45 days journey from Timbuctoo, nearly
north. Allowing that Batouta rested no part of the 70 days mentioned,
but which it is probable that he did, and taking into consideration the
declination of the Niger southward below Timbuctoo, Batouta could
scarcely have been more than 25 days journey below the latter place.
About that distance from Timbuctoo, according to Sidi Hamed, there are
two very large towns on the south bank of the Niger. Batouta’s account
of the river called “Bahar-el-Ahmar,” is a curious circumstance, and
seems to confirm the account given by Adams of the river which, coming
from the N.E. joins the Niger at Timbuctoo, and called the Red River of
the Desert.

The two great points, however, here established by this narrative of
Batouta, is the account of the great kingdom of Maly, to which in these
days Timbuctoo was tributary, and the information that the great city of
Kuku, “famous amongst the negroes for magnitude,” was in this land of
Maly, the first place of note below Timbuctoo, and upon the banks of the
Niger. Modern geographers have placed Kuku N.E. of Bagharme, near 1200
miles from the Niger. Had such an important city been in these parts, it
would not have escaped the knowledge of Mr. Browne’s informants, nor the
researches and inquiries of the accurate and intelligent Burckhardt, who
gives the routes of travellers from Dar Saley to Mourzook, over the very
spot where Kuku has been erroneously placed, without once hinting that
such a city existed. This grievous error concerning the situation of
Kuku, has tended to confuse all the Arabian geography of Africa. The
authority for placing it in the part referred to is Edrisi. But that
author is very undecided and uncertain on that point. “Kuku,” says he,
“is famous amongst the negroes for magnitude. It is situated on the
banks of a river which, flowing _from the north part_, washes it, and
although many negroes relate that the city of Kuku is situated on the
banks of the Nile, _others place it near a river flowing into the Nile_.
The king of Kuku is absolute, dependent upon no one, he has much
attendance, and the greatest empire. The people are of a martial
disposition. The governors and nobility are dressed in satin,” &c.

The accounts given by Edrisi of the magnitude and importance of Kuku,
are fully confirmed, and correspond exactly with the description given
by Batouta nearly two hundred years later. The position of the city,
however, as mentioned by Batouta, must be relied on in preference,
because he saw what he describes, and Edrisi only wrote from hearsay,
and reports from travellers. Some of these reported that Kuku was not
upon the Nile, that is the Gir, but “near a river flowing into the
Nile,” which is the fact, by Kuku standing upon the banks of the Niger.
Edrisi had evidently very imperfect accounts of the river we call the
Niger, and not sufficient to enable him to distinguish it from the Nile
or Gir, which ran westward till it met the former. Scheabeddin informs
us, that the country between Abyssinia and Syene, through which the Nile
of Egypt passed, was called Coucou; and modern authorities tell us, that
near Lake Fittre is a country called Dar Cooka, but neither of these
were, or could be, the Kuku of Batouta. The city as it is at present
placed, is situated in the land of Kanem, whereas Batouta distinctly
states it to be in the land of Maly, which Macrisi informs us is at “_a
very great distance_” from the former.

There are some particulars regarding the kingdom of Melli, which require
further consideration. According to Leo, it was bounded south by a
_desert and bare mountains_. In this we readily recognize the high and
bleak hills of Kong. But he states that, on the west it is bounded by
_huge woods and forests_, which stretch to the ocean, that is to the
Atlantic. In this he seems evidently to have had in view the vast woody
and hilly country west of the Niger, and its course above Bammakoo.
Perhaps these vast countries were in those days but little known to the
followers of Mahomet, and therefore supposed to be little else but
continued woods and forests. Indeed Abulfeda calls these coasts
“uncultivated, uninhabited, and unfrequented countries.” Melli, however,
seems to have been a name which extended over a great part of the most
western portion of Africa. The name was quite familiar to the early
European navigators. Cada Mosto in 1455 was informed, when in the
Gambia, that the chiefs up that river, ten days journey distant, “were
subservient to the king of Melli, the great emperor of the negroes,”
(_Clarke’s_ Mar. Dis. p. 279.) According to Barbot, some navigators make
the limits of Sierra Leone extend “north to Cape Verga, making it border
on the kingdom of Melli that way.” (_Clarke_, Mar. Dis. p. 314.) The
early Dutch navigators in 1600 state, that the coast from Cape Verde to
Cape Palmas, was called Melligette, where the kingdom of Melli was
situated. This kingdom of Melli hath another under it called Bitonni,
which lyeth not far from the Rio Cestos. (_Purchas_, vol. ii. p. 928.)
This shews how far the fame and authority of Melli extended in those
days, and that, though the centre of its power was on the upper Niger,
it nevertheless overawed or claimed respect from the most distant parts
in the south-most portion of Africa[3].

Cada Mosto particularly mentions, that Melli was the great channel of
the gold trade with Timbuctoo, Barbary, Tunis, and Cairo. Salt was a
great article of barter for gold dust, and was brought from Tegazza in
the Great Desert. The people of Melli were the carriers of these
articles, and Cada Mosto and several other authorities mention a strange
circumstance, that this barter was effected with negroes whom the Melli
merchants never saw. The latter carried their salt to the banks of a
great water, and placing it there in parcels, left it. Other negroes
then came in boats from islands adjacent, and finding the salt, laid a
quantity of gold beside it equal to what they conceived the value of the
salt to be, and then retired. The Melli merchants returned, and if they
were satisfied with the quantity of gold, took it, left the salt, and
departed, without having seen or spoken to the other merchants.
(_Clarke_, Mar. Dis. p. 245.) According to Wadstrom, the negroes who
carry on this singular traffic, inhabit the interior countries to the
north of the Grain and the Gold coast. The _Great Water_ to which Cada
Mosto was informed the salt was carried for this singular trade, was
therefore, in all probability, the Niger in its upper course, and
eastern branch on the lake, which is probably formed at the confluence
of its branches.

Having thus briefly considered Batouta’s important narrative, the land
of Maly and Kuku, the most important city in Sudan, situated in the land
of Maly, we shall now proceed to give the account of the course and
termination of the Nile or Gir, according to the authority of different
Arabian geographers. It is the Gir of Ptolemy with which they were
acquainted, and to which all their descriptions apply. Scheabeddin, who
flourished about the year 1400, follows the ideas of Ptolemy about the
Mountains of the Moon being situated beyond the equator, from which
mountains the Egyptian Nile takes its rise. “It cuts,” says he,
“horizontally the equator in its course north. Many sources come from
this mountain, and unite in a great lake. From this lake comes the Nile,
the greatest and most beautiful of the rivers of all the earth. Many
rivers derived from this great river water Nubia, _and the country of
Djenawa_.” His account of the sources of the Nile south of the equator
are grossly erroneous, but the account related, in the Arabic mode of
expression, that a river or rivers flowing from it “_waters the country
of Djenawa_,” is most important, because Djenawa is the Arabic name for
the country we call Guinea, and by them used in a much more extended
sense and meaning. It in fact comprehends Africa from the Gold Coast to
the borders of the Great Zahaara[4].

Edrisi, however, who was born in Nubia, and wrote in Egypt, gives us a
more accurate account of the sources of what was then known as the Nile
of Sudan. “In part 4th of climate 1st, (climate 1st extends from the
equator to the tropic of Cancer,) viz. in that part of Ethiopia, south
and south-west of Nubia, says he, “is _seen the separating of the two
Niles_. The one flows from south to north into Egypt, and the other part
of the Nile flows from the east to the _utmost bounds of the west, and
upon this branch of the Nile lie all, or at least the most celebrated_
kingdoms of the negroes. The blacks mostly inhabit the banks of the
Nile, _or streams that flow into it. It waters the country from east to
west_.” Here the westerly course is most distinctly marked out by both
authors. By the term “separating,” we are not to understand the
separation of the two rivers, as if the one really flowed from the
other, but their separation as rising and taking different courses in a
region, not at a particular spot. Scheabeddin’s term “derived from,” is
tantamount to the same thing, and both are a mode of expression quite
common and familiar in all eastern countries, and particularly with
Arabian writers. Abulfeda also confirms this account of the westerly
course of the Nile. Leo also states the same thing, though he is
extremely confused between the accounts which he had heard, and that
which he must have seen, namely, that the Niger, a different river, ran
from west to east.

“In climate 1st, part 1st,” says Edrisi, “are the cities of Ulil, Salla,
Tocrur, Dau, Berissa, and Musa, all situated in the Negroes’ country of
Mecrara. In the island of Ulil, which stands not far from the continent,
_are those famous salt-pits, the only ones we know in all the countries
of the negroes_, whence they are every where supplied with salt. Men
coming to this island load their vessels with salt, and direct their
course to the mouth of the Nile, which is at the distance of _one day’s
sail_. Along the Nile they afterwards pass by Salla, Tocrur, Berissa,
and other provinces of Ghana, Vancara, and Caugha. These countries are
subject to intense heat. Therefore the inhabitants of the first, second,
and some parts of the third climate are black.” Meghrara, or Meczara,
says Ibn-al-Vardi, “is in the territory of the Sudans, or the Blacks.
The principal city is named Oulili. _It is situated on the shore of the
sea. There is salt pits, and a great trade in salt_.” Scheabeddin,
already quoted, indeed says, that the branch of the Nile which passes
westward through “the country of Djenawa, does not flow to the sea, but
only to the end of the inhabited part of the land of Ghana.” The end of
the land of Ghana, there is little doubt, is the termination of this
river, because it thereabouts joins the Niger; but that it does not
terminate in this place, Edrisi assures us, when he states that the
river runs through the Negroes country of Meczara, which Ibn-al-Vardi
says is south of the land of Ghana. He also agrees with Edrisi in the
farther course of the river, when he mentions that Tocrur, which is in
Meczara, is situated on the south-west bank. Scheabeddin’s meaning,
therefore, can only be, that, at the point mentioned, it joined another
river, or that its further progress was unknown to him. Had it here
terminated in a lake, he would scarcely have omitted to state it.

The salt pits, and a great trade in salt into the interior clearly fixes
the mouth of the river on the sea-shore. We shall search the west coast
of Africa in vain, for any thing resembling the account given by Edrisi,
except in the Delta of Benin. There the island of Fernando Po is exactly
one day’s sail from the mouth of a great river. Opposite this island,
and on the mainland, are numerous salt pits. To this day, to this hour,
a great trade in salt is carried on from these parts up the rivers far
into the interior. It is the chief employment of the natives, and has
hitherto been the principal trade which they followed, the slave-trade
excepted.

In all these accounts, from different authorities, the Nile of Egypt and
the Nile of Sudan are clearly and most distinctly stated to be different
rivers. But we have yet an earlier authority than any of these authors
mentioned, to shew that they are so. In Macrisi’s History of Egypt, we
have related the travels of Ibn Selym Assouany, a native of Egypt, who
travelled through Nubia, and upwards to the Bahr-el-Abiad, as early as
about the year 200 of the Hegira (A.D. 822.) “When on the banks of the
Bahr-el-Abiad,” says Selym, “I inquired at the Moggrebbin (negro)
travellers whom I met there, and who had travelled in Sudan, about the
Nile of their country, they stated that it rose _in mountains of sand_,
(confines of the Desert perhaps they meant) and that it collects in
Sudan into large seas, (or lakes;) that it is _unknown where it
afterwards flowed to_, and that its colour was not white.” Here is the
most convincing proof that the rivers were different. Standing on the
banks of the Bahr-el-Abiad, they must have known if it was the same
river which passed through their country (Sudan.) When they state that
they were ignorant of the termination of the Nile of Sudan, and that its
colour was not white, like the colour of the Bahr-el-Abiad, they in fact
distinctly state, that the latter was a different river from the former.

The interior of Northern Africa was visited by Leo Africanus, an
intelligent Mahommedan, about 300 years ago. His accounts, as these
relate to the general features of the country, the kingdoms,
productions, and trade, are in several instances of great importance.
There is a confusion, or rather want of accuracy in some particulars,
which is to be regretted. This arises perhaps from errors in translating
his work, and also from the transmutation of proper names from the
Arabic into the Italian, and afterwards into other languages. As several
parts of his narrative will be referred to more properly in another
place, the notice taken of it in this part of our subject shall
necessarily be brief.

His account of Melli we have already considered. The next kingdom of
importance is Genni or Jinnee, which is bounded north by Gualata, south
by Melle, and east by Timbuctoo. The length, he says, is 500 Arabic
miles, and its extent 250 miles along the Niger, bordering upon the
_Ocean Sea, in the same place where the Niger falleth into the said
sea_. This region, during July, August, and September, is yearly
environed with the overflowings of the Niger in manner of an island, all
which time the merchants of Timbuctoo convey their merchandise hither in
certain canoes or narrow boats, made of one tree, which they row all day
long, but at night they bind to the shore and lodge themselves upon the
land. This country was once subject to the Lybians, (Gualata) afterwards
it was tributary to King Soni Heli, (Morocco,) and next to Izchia, King
of Timbuctoo.” (_Purchas_, vol. ii. p. 827.) Either Leo or his
translator here confounds two things which are radically distinct[5].
The kingdom of Jinnee or Genni is totally different from the country
named, (at least in its extended and general meaning,) Gheneoa,
Ghenehoa, Genowa, Genawa, or Djenawa, which signifies Guinea, in its
most extended meaning. The kingdom of Genni does extend along the Niger,
and perhaps from it the whole country southward might derive the general
name of Genowa or Djenawa. The kingdom of Jinnee, however, in its
restricted and proper sense, does not border upon the _Ocean Sea_,
(Atlantic) but upon Lake Dibbie, whereas Gheneoa or Genawa, (Guinea)
does border upon the _Ocean Sea_, and “in the same place where the Niger
entereth that sea.” De Bry, in his Hist. Ind. Orient. states upon the
authority of the early European navigators, that “Benni, or Benin, is
esteemed to be part of the Gold Coast and Guinea,” (_Purchas_, vol. ii.
p. 965.) The words “Ocean Sea,” invariably mean the Atlantic Ocean, and
are never applied by the Arabs to designate a lake, though the word
“sea” frequently is. El Hagi Shabeeny establishes the fact that Genawa
and Guinea, are the same, when he relates “that fish oil, a great
article of trade, is brought from the neighbourhood of the sea, by
Genawa to Houssa and Timbuctoo; _dearer at Timbuctoo than at Houssa, and
dearer at Houssa than at Genawa_.” (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 28.): thus
clearly pointing out the quarter and the course of this trade. The
length also of Gheneoa, as recorded by Leo, viz. 500 Arabic miles (625
British) from north to south, would point out, that this country and the
kingdom of Jinnee were different, for that distance would extend from
Lake Dibbie almost to the mouth of the Rio Lagos.

Timbuctoo, according to Leo, was situated _on a branch of the Niger_,
and was founded in the year of the Hegira 610 (A.D. 1232.) In his days
Timbuctoo had subjected to its authority all the neighbouring states,
viz. Jinnee, Melli, Cassina, Gago, Guber, &c. Kabra, a large town on the
Niger, and the port of that city, was distant from it about 12 Arabic
(14½ British) miles. Here the negroes resorted in great numbers from all
quarters, and embarking with their merchandise, sailed westward to
Jinnee and Melli. Timbuctoo was then, and has ever since, been the great
emporium of the trade of Central Africa. The inhabitants were
represented as wealthy and industrious, particularly while they were
subject to Morocco.

The great city and powerful kingdom of Gago was situated (the capital)
about 400 Arabic miles distant from Timbuctoo, a little to the southward
of east. The merchants were exceeding rich, and every thing was
abundant. The country abounded with corn and cattle, but fruits and wine
were scarce. The position of Gago by this reckoning would be in about
10° or 10° 30′ N. Lat. and from 4° to 5° E. Long.[6] South of Gago also,
according to other authorities, lay the once powerful kingdom of Eyeo,
or Haiho or Hio, which once commanded Dahomy. Dalzel supposes that Eyeo
and Gago were the same. According to Bowditch, Hio lies in about 8½° N.
Lat. and 4½° E. Long. The people of Acca, or Akim, on the coast of
Guinea, carried on a great trade to Tonowah, Gago, and Meczara, and the
frontiers of Acca extended north to those of Tonowah. (_Leyden’s_
Africa.) From the Report of Sir George Collier, printed by order of the
House of Commons in June 1820, we learn that Dahomy at this day carries
on a great trade with Gago. The territories of this kingdom in early
times, no doubt, were of considerable extent, and comprehended several
adjoining kingdoms and states, which are now become independent or
subject to other powerful neighbours, such as Dahomy. Gago, in the days
of Leo, who visited it, was bounded on the west by Melli and on the east
by Guber.

Eastward of Gago lay the kingdom of Guber, 300 Arabic (370 British)
miles distant from the former capital. “Between the two kingdoms lay a
vast desert, much destitute of water, for it is distant from the Niger
40 miles. Guber is environed with high mountains, and containeth many
villages, peopled with shepherds. There is abundance of cattle, great
and small. The capital contained 6000 families, amongst whom were all
kinds of merchants. At the inundation of the Niger all the fields in
this region are overflowed, and then the inhabitants cast their seed
into the water only.” (_Purchas_, vol. ii. p. 829.) The position of
Guber, we are enabled to fix with considerable precision. According to
Bowditch, p. 211, Guber, or Goobur, is 10 days journey from the Niger
through the territories of Yaoora, and, skirting the eastern limits of
the kingdom of Zamfra or Zamfara, and in the direct road from Yaoora to
Cashna. From Goobur to the latter place is a journey of eight days, and
“_across a great river_.” From the accounts which Mr. Ritchie obtained
at Mourzook, Guber was the first place in the road from Cashna to
Timbuctoo, and Zamfra the next. (_Quarterly Review_, May, 1820.) These
accounts correspond very exactly with Leo, and shew that Guber, a
country environed with hills, is situated near the eastern river or the
Gir, for on a river it is situated, being inundated completely during
the floods. Leo has, in this instance, mistaken the one river for the
other; but which, the authority of Bowditch and Ritchie enables us to
correct. By looking at the map, and attending to the future narrative,
we will perceive, that a _desert_, or bare mountainous district, does,
according to Leo, lie westward of the Niger, and in the direction of
Gago.

The great province of Cano, certainly the once famous empire of Ghana,
is, according to Leo, “500 _miles eastward of the river Niger_. Here is
abundance of corn, rice, and cotton; the inhabitants are partly
herdsmen, and partly husbandmen. Here are also many deserts and _wild
woody mountains_, containing many springs of water. In the woods are
plenty of wild citrons and lemons. In the midst of the province is the
capital of the same name. The walls and houses are built of chalk. The
inhabitants are a _civil people_, and rich merchants. The king _was
formerly of great puissance_, and had mighty troops of horsemen at his
command.” In the days of Leo, it paid tribute to Izchia (Timbuctoo.
_Purchas_, vol. ii. p. 829.) Speaking of Ghana, Edrisi, says, “that the
palace was founded in 510 (A.D. 1132.) No other king has so many
captains, who, every morning, come to his house _on horseback_. He has
abundance of rich ornaments and horses. He has many troops, who march
each with their colours under his royal banner, &c. In Ghana are two
cities, situated on the two opposite shores of what they called a fresh
water sea; and it is the largest, most populous, and wealthiest, in all
the negro countries.” There is no difficulty in recognizing, in the Cano
of Leo, the Ghana of Edrisi. Four hundred years, however, had greatly
changed its fortunes and splendour. The distance of Cano from the Niger,
as placed by Leo, is, perhaps, too much; yet, if he calculates the
distance actually travelled, his error cannot be great. According to
Bowditch, p. 212, Kano is in the direct road from Yaoora to Bornou, and
28 days journey from the former. Bornou, he says, is 52 days journey
from Yaoora. From the accounts which Mr. Ritchie received, Cano is 12
days journey west from Bornou, (the capital,) and situated upon the
great river, which passes half a day’s journey south of the latter. This
river is called Tshadi. (_Quarterly Review_, May, 1820.) From this
account, Cano would be 40 journeys (Bowditch makes it only 28) from the
Niger, which, at 14 miles per day, is 560 geographical miles,
corresponding very accurately with the distance as given by Leo in
Arabic miles.

The great point established by these authorities, is the existence of
Cano or Ghanah upon a great river, _but not upon the Niger_, and the
_wild woody mountains_, with many springs of water, with the abundance
of corn, rice, and cotton, herdsmen, and husbandmen, all shew a country
very different from what has been supposed, and one where rivers must
increase, not decrease.

Cassena, or Kashna, according to Leo, is full of mountains and dry
fields, which, notwithstanding, yield great store of barley and mill-
seed (supposed Indian and Guinea corn.) The inhabitants, when he visited
it, were rude, and dwelt in forlorn cottages. By a mistake, Cassena is
placed east of Cano. This, however, is not the fact. Bowditch, Ritchie,
and various other authorities, shew it is west of Cano. Lucas places it
about five days journey north from the great river, and in this Bowditch
nearly agrees; but from the accounts obtained by Ritchie, Kashna was
upon a river, there named Gulbe, and as broad as from the gate of
Tripoli to the Bazaar in the sands, or _one-third of a mile_.
(_Quarterly Review_, May, 1820.) Perhaps this may be a tributary stream,
descending from the northward, and the mountains about to be mentioned.

Agadez is enumerated as a kingdom by Leo, but it is so well known, that
we shall pass it over in this place. The southern parts were inhabited
by shepherds and herdsmen. Agadez was said to be distant from Cano about
160 leagues. The kingdom of Zegzeg, mentioned by Leo, is about 150 miles
from Cassena, and its south-east parts border upon Cano. The inhabitants
are rich, and have great traffic into other nations. Their houses are
built like the houses of Cassena. The fields abound with water, and are
exceedingly fruitful. Some parts of the country are plain and some
mountainous. _The mountains are exceedingly cold_, but the plains are
intolerably hot. Because they can hardly endure the sharpness of the
winter, they kindle great fires in the midst of their houses, laying the
coals thereof under their high bed-steads, and so betake themselves to
sleep.” (_Purchas_, vol. ii. p. 830.) This country appears to be
situated in about 19° or 20° of north latitude, and corresponds very
nearly with the position of the Usurgala mountains of Ptolemy. The
excessive degree of cold shews the great height of the mountains, and
lays before us these interior parts of Africa, under very different
features indeed to those we have been called upon to behold. From these
mountains numerous and powerful streams certainly flow, and must take
their course southward. Accordingly, in the maps by Ortelius in 1570,
and others of a latter date, various rivers are represented as
descending in this direction, and forming a junction with the Niger.
From the accounts obtained by Ritchie, Zegzeg lay in the road from
Kashna to Timbuctoo, and west of Nyffe. (_Quarterly Review_, May, 1820.)
If so, then it is several degrees farther to the southward, and, from
the degree of cold mentioned, the height of the mountains must be still
greater. Though the boundaries mentioned by Leo are not sufficiently
clear, yet, being in this instance supported by other authorities, the
position given is, perhaps, the safest to rely on. Yet, if Leo is
correct, that Zegzeg touches southward upon Zamfra, it must be more
southerly than the Usurgala mountains of Ptolemy. According to Ledyard,
Zamfra lay to the east of Kashna. From Bowditch, page 211, it would
appear to lie S.W. of Kassena; and Leo says Zamfra borders eastward upon
Zezgeg; in which case, the position as given to Ritchie, would appear to
be the most correct. Amongst such conflicting testimony it is difficult
to be perfectly accurate. Zamfra was, in the days of Leo, inhabited by a
rustical people, subject to Timbuctoo. Their fields abounded with rice,
millet, and cotton.

The kingdom of Guangara, according to Leo, adjoineth south-westerly upon
Zamfra, and eastward it had the kingdom of Bornou. From Bowditch, p.
212, we find that this is the case; for there seems no reason to doubt
that Oongooroo is the Guangara of Leo. South of this country lay a
region greatly abounding in gold. From the accounts given by Leo of
their mode of travelling thither, and mules being the chief beasts of
burthen, it is evident that the country was exceedingly mountainous and
rugged. Guangara, there is the best reason to believe, is the Vancara of
the early Arabian geographers. This country, according to Edrisi, was
“famous for the excellency and abundance of its gold,” and, according to
Ibn-al-Vardi, it was “the country of gold and aromatics.” The Nile
surrounded it on three sides, and, after the inundation subsided, the
gold was found in abundance. They called it an island, and said it was
300 miles in length, and 150 miles in breadth.

The large province of Bornou, according to Leo, extended eastward from
Guangara 500 miles, till it reached the limits of Gaogo. It (that is
Bornou) is distant, says he, from the fountain (lake) of Niger almost
150 miles. This distance agrees very nearly with the Lake Caudee, or
Fittre. The south part adjoineth the Desert of Seu, and the north part
stretcheth to that Desert which extends toward Barca. The monarch was
very powerful, and had frequent wars with a powerful people south of the
Desert of Seu. The position of Bornou, as here given, is we know
sufficiently accurate. Leo clearly brings the river, which passes
through it from the eastward, and from the Lake Fittre. Beyond that he
had no accurate idea of the Misselad to the S.E. though he states it was
reported that the Niger really rose in the Desert of Seu, (that is S.E.
of Lake Fittre,) while others said that it was derived from Nilus,
which, after disappearing for a space, at last burst up in the Lake
mentioned. From the accounts received by Ritchie, we learn that the
capital of Bornou is half a day’s journey north of the great river. The
port of the city is called Gambarou, where there are the remains of
castles and houses formerly inhabited by Christians, (_Quart. Rev._ May,
1820,) the refugees, no doubt, who sought shelter in the interior of
Africa from the fury of the early Mahommedan conquerors.

Gaogo and Nubia are the next kingdoms enumerated by Leo. But, regarding
these, nothing remarkable is stated, and it is sufficient here to state,
that in those parallels of latitude, they extended from the confines of
Bornou to the Nile. All these kingdoms Leo visited, and, in the features
of the country, manners and customs of the inhabitants, and in the trade
and productions of each of them, he could not be mistaken. Therefore his
information is valuable; and we shall see, as we proceed, that modern
authority bears him out in most of his leading facts.

One thing is plain, from the consideration of all these ancient
authorities, that the interior of Northern Africa is traversed by many
mighty rivers, and is also filled with stupendous mountains. Every one
of these authorities also agree in the westerly course of the rivers
which rise westward of Darfur, and that the great stream which absorbs
the whole of them is a distinct river from the Egyptian Nile.

Their confusion regarding the Gir and the Niger being the same, or one
stream, we can clear up and account for. For these reasons I have dwelt
upon this part of my subject longer than was at first intended. In his
account of the great natural features of a country, such as rivers,
mountains, lakes, inundated roads, or dry deserts, an Arab cannot be
mistaken, and his authority is a guide sufficiently safe. In his names
of places, in his bearings and distances, it is very different, and it
is there that in following him great caution is necessary. These
distances and bearings are, and become so different,—as their journeys
are undertaken by the slow, unwieldy caravan, the saint begging his way
on foot, the single unencumbered traveller, the messenger urging his way
on horseback, or the Moor or Arab mounted on his camel or fleet
dromedary—these are so different, that unless each mode is specifically
mentioned, there is no possibility of approximating the truth but by a
careful attention to, and comparing a variety of them with each other.
The distance also from place to place is frequently calculated from
capital to capital, sometimes from the capital of one state to the
confines of another; sometimes the name of the capital is placed for the
name of the kingdom, and the name of the kingdom for the name of the
capital; and sometimes both or either are named after some particular
thing for which they may have become famous. The name of a river is also
frequently substituted for a country, and the name of a country for a
river in it. Without being able to determine the distances accurately,
it is consequently impossible to fix the bearings correctly, even where
these are faithfully taken, which, however, are very seldom found to be
the case, particularly when not upon any one of the four chief points of
the compass.

These things, together with the ignorance of the Arabic and Negro
languages amongst those who have hitherto attempted to explore, or
endeavoured to obtain information concerning Northern Africa, have been
the sole cause why the geography of the interior has remained so long a
mystery. As those are understood, however, the other is elucidated, and
as those are rendered clear, the geography of Africa, like the geography
of every other quarter of the globe, appears simple and natural. Thus,
for instance, Belad-el-Sudan signifies all Africa south of the Great
Desert inhabited by negroes, and, therefore, the _Sea of Sudan_ can be
no other than that sea on its southern shores, or the great Gulph of
Guinea. Bahr-el-Gazalle is not a river, but a fine valley adapted to
pasturage. Houssa, according to Horneman, is not a name applied to a
particular district, but a great portion of Africa north of the Niger,
comprehending many kingdoms and states. Wangara, there is good reason to
believe, besides being the name of a province, is also a term applied to
all Africa south of the Niger, if not also the countries between it and
the great Desert; in short, of all the country through which rivers
flow, in contra-distinction to the Zahaara or Great Desert. Such was the
explanation given to Mr. Hutchison, (_see Bowditch, p._ 206,) and such
the accounts given to Mr. Ritchie, (_Quart. Rev._ May, 1820,) as well as
other authorities. Dar Kulla, or rather Deaar Kulla, signifies a country
full of houses, (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 479.) and the same authority,
pages 444 and 487, informs us, that Bahar Kulla, or Bahar Kulha,
signifies the sea altogether, or an alluvial country.

In like manner, all the names applied to the river we call the Niger,
are used to distinguish it from the Nile of Egypt. The latter is
invariably called the “Neel Shem,” or the “Neel Masser,” while the Niger
is termed “Neel-el-Abeed,” (Nile of Slaves,) “Neel Assudan,” (Nile of
Sudan,) and “Neel-el-Kabeer,” or great Nile. (_Jackson’s Shabeeny, p._
443, and _Transactions of African Association_, p. 222.) Regarding the
different seas which surround Africa, the Western Ocean is called Bahar
Kabeer, or Bahar Addolum, the Great Sea, or the Sea of Darkness. The
term _Bahar el Mâleh_, is applied generally to a salt sea; but the term,
says Mr. Jackson, and only term applied by the Moors to the
Mediterranean Sea, is the “_Bahar Segrer_,” literally the Small Sea,
(_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 489.)

Bearing these things in mind, we shall, without much difficulty, clear
up many points apparently very confused in African geography. That the
Niger enters the Atlantic Ocean we have many direct testimonies.
Although Ptolemy was unacquainted with the outlets of the river, he
evidently believed that it had one in that direction. Edrisi and Ibn-al-
Vardi distinctly state that such is the case; and unless the
transcriber, or translators of Leo, have supplied a word which he never
wrote, namely, the “Ocean _Sea_,” that celebrated traveller, who made
very diligent inquiries of the merchants who came to Timbuctoo from
those coasts, states the same thing. Mr. Horneman was very pointedly
informed that the Niger ran southward of Nyffe till it joined the Bahar
Kulla, or Bahar Kulha, and Park was told the same thing. Windhus was
informed at Morocco, in 1721, that “the Niger, or Black’s River, _had a
passage into the Southern Sea_.” According to the Report of the
Committee of Council, Mr. Barnes states, that “the Niger discharges
itself into a large lake; that he has heard from the black traders that
there are white inhabitants on the borders of that lake—that they dress
in the style of the Barbary Moors, and wear turbans, but do not speak
Arabic.” There is scarcely any room to doubt that this alludes to the
Portuguese, and other European settlements on the coast of Guinea
towards Benin.

Besides these authorities, El Hage Shabeeny says most pointedly, that he
“always understood the Niger run into the sea, _the Salt Sea, or Great
Ocean_,” on the coast of Genawa, or Guinea. (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p.
40.) Mr. Beaufoy was informed by an intelligent Moor, that “below
Ghinea, (that is Genawa, Djenawa, or Guinea,) is the sea into which the
river of Timbuctoo disembogues itself, and that boats _went with the
stream to_ Ghinea.” Mr. Grey Jackson, who had received much information
concerning the interior of Africa, states, that it is “_the general
African opinion_, that the Neel-el-Abeed (Niger) discharges itself into
the Salt Sea,” (Bahar el Mâleh,) which he clearly and unequivocally
shews is a different sea from the Mediterranean. (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_,
p. 518 and 489.) The Moors told Bowditch and Hutchison at Coomassie,
that the Niger ran into the Bahar le Malee, or Baramela, (page 205,
_Bowditch_,) which Mr. Jackson, page 489, clearly shews is a corruption
of the Arabic words Bahar el Mâleh, or the Salt Sea. By reports
collected for the African Association, from 1790 to 1798, they were told
that “the Niger was lost in the sands to the south of Timbuctoo,” which
could only mean the sea-shore on the Bight of Benin. The natives on the
coasts of Benin and Biafra, assert that all the rivers in the Delta come
from one great river which descends from the north. (_Robertson’s
Notes_, and other authorities.) As these sheets were preparing for the
press, a further confirmation of this important point was received in
the account given by a sailor named Scot, belonging to Liverpool, who
was wrecked about Cape Nun, and carried into slavery by the Arabs of the
Desert. While in this state, he was carried, along with a tribe, across
the Desert into Sudan, and with them he crossed Lake Dibbie, or what he
calls “Bahar Tee-eb,” the sea of fresh water, or the sea where boats can
go. There he was told by some negro boatmen who rowed them over the
Lake, that, _very far to the south there “lay a great salt water sea;
that the one they were on run into it;_ that there was no end to it;
that there were plenty of _Saffina el kabeer_ (large ships,) upon it,
and that they called it _Bahar el Kabeer_,” that is, the great sea.
(_Edin. Philosoph. Journ._ No. 7.) As we proceed, other authorities will
be adduced.

With these general observations, I shall proceed without further remark
to the chief object in view, namely, to trace the course, and to point
out the termination of the Niger and its tributary streams. In following
out this subject I shall endeavour to be as concise as possible. The
best authorities also are taken as my guide. “The Niger,” said Park in
the last dispatch that he wrote which has reached Britain, “can
terminate no where else but in the sea.” In this he was correct. In the
sea it must and does terminate.




                               CHAP. II.

_Joliba, two branches, source western, ditto eastern — River Zamma;
course till junction — Snowy mountains — Balia — Lake Clonia — River
Guinola — Kaniaba — Bammakoo, Magnitude of Niger — Rapids — Marraboo —
Yamina — Sego — Jinnë — Ba Nimma — Ba Maniana — Lake Dibbie — River
Gozen Zair — High Mountains — Walet — Course of Niger north-east — Ba
Moriaca — Jinbala — Rakbara — Kabra — Timbuctoo — Bahar-el-Ahmar —
Course of ditto — Houssa — Magnitude of Niger at Timbuctoo — Sidi Hamed
— Course of river south-east — Mountains — Kaffo — Rocks — River bursts
through a chain of mountains — Exceeding high ridge to south-west —
Cabi, a Ferry — Yaoora — Great River from east may join here — Boussa —
Park’s death — Cause of it — Wauwa — Gange — Nyffe — Wassanah —
Magnitude of Wassanah — Magnitude of Niger or Zadi — Course to “Great
Water” — Junction with the Sea, and where — General observations._


The Niger, or Joliba, seems to be formed, in its early course, by an
eastern and a western branch. The latter rises about 80 miles south-east
of Timbo, in the woods between Kouranko and Soliman. This spot is in
about 9° north latitude, and 10° west longitude. The distance from the
source of the Senegal is about 110 miles, and from Sierra Leone not
above 150 miles. The mountains hereabouts are said to be very high, and
are also said to be perpetually covered with snow. From its source the
stream flows north-east. In Balia, above Bourré, a frontier town of
Kankan, and celebrated for the abundance and superior fineness of its
gold, the river first becomes navigable. Here the merchants from Foota
Diallon embark in their journey to Sego and Timbuctoo, which occupies
them four months. At Tankarari, below Bourré, the river is already “two
gun-shots broad.” Kankan is 15 days’ journey west from Maniana, the
capital of which is called Tokoro. (_Mollien_, p. 301-303, and others.)

Continuing its course north-east, this branch, in about 11° north
latitude and 6° 45′ west longitude, joins a mightier stream flowing from
the east. This branch, there is good grounds to believe, rises in the
snowy mountains eastward of Kong. Taking a circular course, it flows
southward beyond the parallel of 9° north latitude, from whence it runs
first west and then north-west and north, till its junction with the
western branch. Nineteen days’ journey (190 miles,) north north-west of
Coomassie, where it is crossed by travellers from Ashantee, in the route
by Kong to Jinnë, it is said to be half-a mile broad, and _running
westward_. It is called by the natives “Coomba,” and by the Moors
“Zamma.” (_Bowditch_, p. 182.) The French maps, constructed in 1756, by
Robert de Vagondy for the King of France, lay down this branch tolerably
accurate. In the parallels and parts mentioned are the sources of the
Niger eastward of Kong, viz. in 10° north latitude, and from 1½° to 2¼°
west longitude. The mountains must be of a stupendous height, for the
natives state that the cold is very severe in Oalla to the north-west of
Inta, and the hills in those parts covered with snow. (_Robertson’s
Notes_, p. 182.) After this junction, the Joliba continues to flow
north-east, either through or along by the frontiers of Mandingo, and
must be a powerful stream. A native of Mandingo told Tuckey, that his
country “lay on a river _as broad as the Zaire_, (half a British mile,)
but full of rocks.” (_Tuckey_, p. 141.) Travellers from Kong to the Rio
Pongos state, that in their journey west they pass one very large river,
which can be no other but the Niger in this part of his course.
(_Bowditch_, p. 210.) At Tembo, Messrs. Watt and Winterbotham were
informed that thirty days’ journey from thence, in _the route to Sego_,
the “road lay along a great water, _across which the eye could not
reach_, and which was sweet and good to the taste.” It is by no means
improbable that this _great water_ is a lake formed by the Niger at the
confluence of the two branches. The features of the country render such
a thing very probable. The mountains on either hand are of a stupendous
height. To the westward Mollien found the east wind, from having swept
over them, excessively cold and piercing, (page 292.) These are features
altogether new and unexpected in the geography of tropical Africa.
Amidst such mountains the rivers must soon become very large, such as we
find amidst the Andes of South America, where the Beni, after a course
of only 300 miles, is found to be two miles broad.

While preparing these sheets for the press, chance threw in my way a
copy of the third part of the Geography of Joannis Bleau, printed at
Amsterdam in 1662. In the general map of Africa, he lays down a large
lake in north latitude 10°, and east longitude 10° from Ferro, which
corresponds very nearly with the place we have been considering. From
this lake (situated north-east from Sierra Leone) issues the river
Guinola, (perhaps Guinbala, another name for the Joliba,) which flows
first in a north-west, and afterwards in a northerly direction, and then
north-easterly, till it approaches near the Niger, from which river a
branch descending joins the latter, and from the united streams are
formed the rivers Senegal, Gambia, and Rio Grande. The latter features
we know to be incorrect, though it was believed to be the true
delineation in those days; but the lake and circular course of the
Guinola to the north are curious features. These were no doubt founded
upon positive information, but made to bend to the theory then in vogue.
Mandingo, he states, lay between 9° and 11° north latitude, which agrees
very well with modern information. The capital city, Sango, was 100
leagues from Cape Palmas; and, he adds, “Multorum in Mandingæ regione
fluminum ortus existet, quæ varias ingressa vias, tandem Gambeæ amni
miscentur.” (P. 122.)

The Stachirus of Ptolemy is generally supposed to be the Gambia, or more
probably the Rio Grande. According to this authority, the Stachirus in
11° north latitude, and 17° west longitude from Ferro, makes the lake
Clonia. The reader, by turning to the map, will perceive this position
given; for the lake Clonia corresponds with the junction of the two
rivers, and the lake which, in all probability, is there to be found at
this day. Ptolemy has mistaken this branch of the Niger, which he
certainly had heard of, for the Stachirus, the sources of which he
accordingly carried too far to the eastward; nor was his error to be
wondered at, when we find geographers so near our own day continuing the
same error. The extended course of the Stachirus of Ptolemy has only to
be bent northward in these parallels and meridians to direct its waters
to the Niger; and we then have from Ptolemy the upper course and eastern
branch of this important stream. These are very curious and important
circumstances. The west coast of Africa is laid down by that early
geographer several degrees too much east of Ferro, which occasions the
great contraction of all the western parts and rivers, and the
consequent errors in his longitudes in all the upper course of the
Niger, and about the sources of the Senegal, Gambia, &c. The great
southern branch of the Niger he has, in error, evidently joined to these
latter streams. The Arabian geographers also had no idea of the extent
of Africa to the south-west; but conceived that the continent stretched
due south, or rather to the eastward of south from the Straits of
Gibraltar. Hence the confusion into which they were led regarding the
remote parts of western Africa.

Continuing its course north-east along the eastern base of those hills
which separate its waters from those of the Ba Fing, and having passed
Kankary (perhaps the Kankan of Mollien) and Kaniaba, the Niger reaches
Bammakoo, situate in 12° 48′ north latitude, and 3° 40′ west longitude.
Here Park first fell in with it in his second journey; and he says, that
at this place it was larger than either the Senegal or the Gambia, near
the sea. The breadth of the stream is one mile. It was then in flood,
but _did not overflow its banks_. Thus, though the depth was no doubt
greatly increased, the breadth could not be increased in proportion. A
short distance below Bammakoo, the river passes over several rapids,
which fill its bed during 30 miles of its course. Here the stream is two
miles broad. These rapids are occasioned by a chain of hills extending
south-eastwards of Kong. Three of these rapids are more formidable than
the remainder. The velocity of the water, said Park, when descending the
stream at this place, was such “_as to make me sigh_.” Notwithstanding
this, the river can still be navigated past these ledges of rocks; for
Park informs us, that the King of Bambarra’s, and other canoes, pass
this place in their voyage up the river, with slaves to the great slave
markets of Kaniaba and Kankary. The magnitude of the Niger at Bammakoo
shews, not only that its sources must be more remote than they have
hitherto been supposed, but that it must collect its tributes from a
much more extended range of country than the mere extension of one
branch to the south-west. The Ba Nimma and Ba Maniana, united, and after
a course of perhaps 300 miles, are only half as large as the Niger. The
Senegal, at its mouth, and after a course of 1000 miles, is not so large
as the Niger at Bammakoo. These rivers afford us a scale to determine,
that the sources of the Niger must be far removed from Bammakoo, (much
further than 2° of latitude, the distance hitherto allowed,) and that
its waters must be collected from a wide range of country, extending to
the south-west, south, and eastward.

From Bammakoo the Niger bends his course in an east-north-east
direction, flowing in a clear navigable stream. High land extends to the
north below Bammakoo. In the above direction the Niger passes Yamina,
Sego, Sansanding, and Silla, all situate in the kingdom of Bambarra.
Bending its course more to the north-east, the Niger approaches Jinnë,
and soon after lake Dibbie, or the dark lake, called also Bahar
Dehebbie, the sea of water abounding in gold; Bahar Tibber, the sea of
gold dust; and Bahar Tee-eb, the fresh water sea; without doubt, the
_Negrites Palus_ of Ptolemy. This lake extends from south-west to north-
east, and is described to be of great magnitude. Canoes, in passing it,
lose sight of land for a whole day. From Scot’s account its breadth may
be about 60 miles, and depth 20 fathoms. (_Edin. Phil. Journ._ No. 7.)
Either near the lake, or running directly into the lake, the Niger
receives from the south the Ba Nimma and Ba Maniana, in an united stream
about half as large as the Niger. The Ba Nimma rises south of Marraboo,
and comes from the neighbourhood of what is properly called Kong. Its
course will be about 300 miles. The Ba Maniana rises more to the
eastward, and has a shorter course.

About the entrance into lake Dehebbie, the Niger, we may almost
certainly state, receives a very considerable branch from the north-
west. According to Sidi Hamed, at Wablet, (Walet,) a town situate a
little to the south of the desert, and about 240 miles west of
Timbuctoo, there passes a river which flows eastward. Its breadth at
that town was about 250 yards. It was called by the Negroes “_Gozen
Zair_,” but by the Moors “_el Wad Tenij_.” The mountains, to the south-
west of Wablet, were represented by Sidi Hamed to be “at a great
distance,” and as high as Mount Atlas, near Suse, or 12,000 feet above
the level of the sea, but not caped with snow. Amongst these the river
no doubt has its rise. In the course of this river,—and that there is
such a river Sidi Hamed could not be mistaken, because he travelled, in
his route to Timbuctoo, during the space of four days along its banks,
and through a country so hilly and woody that his party were forced to
turn off directly north to the confines of the desert, in order to
travel with greater freedom. In his route from Benown and Jarras to
Sego, Mr. Park passed no river running west; but, as he proceeded south-
east, he passed numerous small streams, all bending their course north-
east. These, to the eastward, must join the river mentioned by Sidi
Hamed in its course to the east; and the united streams, forming a large
river, must join the Niger. And, if the accounts given by Scot are
correct, as there seems no just grounds to doubt, that in his course
across the desert to lake Dehebbie he crossed no river, then the “Gozen
Zair” of Sidi Hamed must join the Niger south-west of Scot’s route to
the lake, and consequently about the confluence of the Niger with the
lake. The stream from Wablet to this point would have a course exceeding
240 geographic miles in length. It is very remarkable, that Ptolemy
brings the chief stream of the Niger in this very direction, and in this
manner, to the Palus Negrites. From this lake Mount Mandrus lay north-
west. It appears also extremely probable, that the river in question was
the Nile of Batouta, and that the Joliba was his river Sansera. From the
direction in which he travelled, the Gozen Zair must have been the first
he met with after leaving the desert. In this point of view also, the
Joliba would be the river, along which, according to Leo, the kingdom of
Melli extended 300 miles. On these important subjects, however, I would
not wish to give a decided opinion. One way or the other, it makes no
material error in the grand geographical features of interior Africa,
which it is my object to delineate. It is a curious circumstance, and
deserves to be noticed, that D’Anville, in his early maps, lays down a
river issuing from lake Maberia, or Dibbie, and flowing in the above
direction to join the Senegal. The course he has evidently mistaken from
the usual misapprehension of Arabian information. Few people had better
information than he had; and he, no doubt, had received positive
information that there was a river in those parts.

Issuing from the lake Dehebbie, (the position of which will afterwards
be more particularly noticed,) the Niger keeps a northerly course, and
soon after receives from the south the Ba Moriaca, which is certainly a
considerable river. The junction, in all probability, takes place at no
great distance from the north-east corner of the lake, on the south-east
side of which is a chain of hills. The junction of the Ba Moriaca is a
very remarkable feature in the delineation of Ptolemy; and his
description corresponds in a surprising manner with modern accounts. “On
the south,” says he, “the Niger receives one branch above (_supra_)
Daradum, _nigh to the two positions_, 21° east longitude, 17° north
latitude, and 21° west longitude, 13° 30′ north latitude (_Tab. Quart.
Af._ cap. 6.) Here not only the junction of the Ba Moriaca, but also the
junction of the Ba Nimma, Maniana, and Joliba (if it is true that all
these are united before entering the lake) on the south, and also the
great northern bearing of the course of the river at this place is very
plainly marked. The junction of both being laid down in the same
meridian, but nigh to two places, distant 3° 30′ latitude from each
other, shews this in a very striking manner. His longitude of 21° east
also corresponds, when corrected, nearly with the meridian of Greenwich.
All the parts we have here considered are represented as being very
widely and deeply flooded by the Niger during the rains. From the
junction of so many rivers, it is obvious that such must be the case.
Still keeping his north-east course, the Niger passes Rakbara, and soon
after it turns suddenly east, and, in this direction, approaches Kabra,
the port of the celebrated city of Timbuctoo. The great curve which the
Niger makes in its course from Jinnë to Kabra is well known. It is
called “_el Kosie Neel_,” the arch or curve of the Nile. (_Jackson’s
Shabeeny_, p. 439.) That such is the case, is also very obvious from the
time occupied in travelling betwixt these places, according as the
journey is performed on land or by water. By the latter, it is a voyage
of 20 days, but by the former only a journey of 12 days. (_Bowditch_, p.
193.)

In the present maps, the position of both Lake Dehebbie and the city of
Timbuctoo seem evidently to be placed too far west. Bammakoo, we have
seen, stands in 3° 40′ west longitude. From thence, or Marraboo, which
is a little lower down, Park was altogether 62 hours in passing down the
stream from the latter place to Sansanding. During this period the river
was in flood, and the force of the current carried the canoe downwards
at the rate of fully five miles per hour. This would give a distance of
320 miles. Throwing off 120 for the windings of the stream, leaves 200
made good in horizontal distance to Sansanding. From this place to Lake
Dehebbie is a voyage of six days by water, when the river is low, which,
taking at only 100 miles made good for horizontal distance, would place
the Lake in the meridian of 1° 20′ east longitude. Jinnë is two days
sail above the lake: from the former, through the Lake to Timbuctoo, is
20 days passage, which, at the most moderate computation, taking into
consideration the difference of latitude, would place Timbuctoo in 3°
east longitude, and 16° 30′ north latitude, if not still farther east.

Below Lake Dehebbie, or Dibbie, is the kingdom of Jinbala, said to be an
island by some authorities; but this is probably wrong. The Arabs use
the words isle and peninsula as synonymous terms, and call the land
between the junction of streams, or the separation of their branches,
islands. Of this numerous instances might be given. Besides, Bowditch
(p. 193,) states pointedly, and upon good authority, that Jinbala was
not an island, but a town on the northern bank of the river. All this
country is greatly flooded during the inundation. This may probably be
heightened by the junction of the Ba Moriaca with the Niger, and which
stream joining, as it probably does do, the Joliba soon after the latter
leaves the Lake, might, in the Arabic idiom, occasion the appellation of
island to be applied to the country between the two rivers and above
their junction.

Timbuctoo, the great emporium of the trade of Central Africa, is 12
Arabic (14½ British) miles from the Niger. Descending from the north-
east, a great river passes very near the city, and joins the Niger at
Kabra. This is a remarkable feature in the geography of Ptolemy, which
seems borne out by modern accounts. We have already shewn that the
“_Negira metropolis_” of that geographer stood where Timbuctoo now
stands. Though the existence of this river is doubted by some, still the
authorities which mention it are so explicit, that there seems no
sufficient reason for disbelieving them. Leo Africanus states, that
Timbuctoo was situated near “a branch of the Niger.” Batouta, as we have
seen, in his journey homeward, crossed a river near the confines of the
Desert, and north-east of Timbuctoo, called “Bahar-el-Ahmar,” the very
name by which the river in question is known at Timbuctoo. D’Anville
lays down a river passing Timbuctoo, and descending from the north-east.
Adams says it was called La Mar Zarah, which Burkhardt and others
rightly conjecture is a corruption of the Arabic words “Bahar-el-Ahmar
el Zahaara,” or _the Red River of the Desert_. The river, according to
Adams, approaches within a short distance of the city on its south-east
side, and is about three quarters of a mile wide. When low, the water is
brackish. Sidi Hamed says, that one hour’s ride on a camel south of the
city, brought the traveller to the great river, and after two hours’
ride, that they came to the great river Zolibib, or Niger. Two miles
south of Timbuctoo, the Bahar-el-Ahmar passes between two mountains, and
is contracted to half a mile in breadth. (_Adams_.) The water is said to
be of a very red colour—hence the name. _Bowditch_, p. 194, says, he was
informed that during the rainy season this stream overflowed its banks
so as to force the inhabitants to retire from the suburbs to the centre
of the city. Leo also says, that during the inundation the waters of the
rivers were conveyed in canals to water the country.

On this river travellers embark to go to Houssa, a distance of about 20
days’ passage according to Bowditch, (p. 196.) On the third day after
leaving Timbuctoo, you come, says Shabeeny, to Mushgreelia, where there
is a ferry, and where the traveller embarks if he goes by water, or
crosses the stream if he goes by land. “If you go this way,” says
Shabeeny, “you _must cross the river before you reach Houssa_. (p. 38,
_Jackson’s Shabeeny_.”) This would indicate that Timbuctoo lay on the
west side of the river. Bowditch (p. 196,) gives the same account of the
distance to the town where the traveller embarks on the river, and he
supposes Houssa to be east north-east of Timbuctoo. It is obvious that
both him and Shabeeny speak of a different river from the Niger, which
cannot be crossed in going from Timbuctoo to Houssa, which latter, all
accounts agree, is on the north side of the Niger, and distant from it.
Between Timbuctoo and Houssa, according to Shabeeny, there is a great
trade carried on by means of this river. “There are more boats on it
between Mushgreelia and Houssa,” says he, “than between Rosetta and
Cairo. The boats are like those of Tetuan and Tangier, but larger. Its
waters are very red and (_hellue_) sweet, or pure. Ferry-boats are
numerous on it. The water in the wells near it are best after the river
has overflowed. Houssa is a journey of a day and a half from the south
bank of the river.” (P. 38, 39.) The wells in the neighbourhood being
sweetest after the commencement of the inundation, is a proof that the
stream flows near the confines of the Desert. Adams travelled during ten
days, at the rate of 18 miles per day, upwards by the side of this river
in a north-east direction before his party struck off north-west to
reach Taudeny. Sidi Hamed says, that for 20 days’ journey north north-
east from Timbuctoo, the country is mountainous, populous, and well
cultivated, and that he passed numerous small streams in that space
flowing south and west to the great river. Ritchie was informed by a
schoolmaster at Tripoli, who had been at Timbuctoo, that the country,
during the space of 15 days’ journey north of that city, abounded with
provisions and water, and that the Oases of Tuat, 45 days’ journey north
north-east of Timbuctoo, was very fruitful, and abounding in grain and
water. (_Quarterly Rev._ May, 1820.)

In such a country, it is evident that rivers may and must be formed. It
would be a very remarkable circumstance if all the authorities quoted
should have been mistaken in this particular. The gentleman who found
out and examined Adams in London, assured the writer of this, that Adams
was very particular about his bearings, and his reasons for being so
were, that, expecting to effect his escape, and anxious to return home,
he was very careful to observe the direction in which he travelled.
Adams, in his account of Timbuctoo, mentioned that cocoa-nuts were found
there. This made his narrative to be doubted. Leo Africanus, however,
mentions that cocoa-nuts grew in the neighbourhood. The brackish sandy
soil, near the Desert, is a country where we may expect such fruit to be
produced. Whether the river in question is the same as that which passes
Agadez or not, it is difficult to determine. It is evident that it comes
from the point of the compass where the mountains Usurgala of Ptolemy
lay. Bowditch was told that this river ran north-east from
Timbuctoo—separating soon after, one branch ran eastward and one
northward, the latter, first to Yahoudee, a place of great trade, and
from thence to another river called Hotaiba, and which river ran towards
Tunis. (_Bowditch_, p. 187.) It is curious, that in the map by
Ortellius, in 1570, he has a city named Yghidi, laid down upon the edge
of a lake, in 20° 30′ north latitude, and 32° east longitude, from
Ferro. It is evidently the Yahoudee of Bowditch, who, in the route from
Timbuctoo to Fezzan, also mentions, as the seventh station on the road,
a place called _Hotailee_, named perhaps from the river, or rather the
river named from the town. In this account, the geographical line of the
bed of the river is evidently put for the direction in which it flows, a
circumstance quite common in the narratives given by Moorish and Arabian
merchants. Separate streams are also here taken as one, a circumstance
which frequently occurs in the accounts obtained from similar sources.
No river runs towards Tunis; but a stream descends from the mountains of
Eyrè southwards towards Agadez.

The river in question, or the Bahar-el-Ahmar, in all probability
descends past the neighbourhood of Tuggurt, from the eastern boundaries
of the Oases of Tuat, from whence it may receive a supply of water. That
country is represented as well watered, and a stream is found at
Tuggurt, which may be the Bahar-el-Ahmar, or connected with it. Shabeeny
says the river near Houssa is much narrower than the river at Jinnë. It
is sometimes broader than the Thames at London, and sometimes narrower;
it does not very deeply overflow its banks.

There are various accounts of the course of the Niger eastward from
Timbuctoo. That given by Sidi Hamed, an intelligent Arab, is the
clearest hitherto received. The whole narrative is extremely plain and
simple. There is nothing in it to destroy the credibility of the author.
Other authorities confirm his accounts. In the middle course of the
river, he is taken as our chief guide. He travelled with a caravan
consisting of 3000 men, 3000 asses, and 200 camels, laden with heavy
goods. Ten geographic miles is the utmost which can be allowed for the
horizontal distance made good each day, during their progress. In such a
country, even this is perhaps too much; but this calculation accords
very nearly with other authorities regarding particular points. This
scale is, therefore, followed in calculating all distances on every
route near the Niger, or to the southward of it. To the northward, as
the country is less rugged, 13 miles, on an average, may be allowed as a
day’s journey. In the countries that are cultivated, this scale will be
found sufficiently accurate. In the open desert, the length of a day’s
journey is much greater, and may extend 20 miles.

We have no accurate accounts of the magnitude of the Niger near
Timbuctoo. Ritchie was informed that it was so broad that a gun could
not take effect across it. The stream is, in all probability, a good
deal contracted in these parts. From Kabra, the river called here Issa,
and also Zolibib, flows in an easterly course for 60 miles. A very high
mountain to the east here bends the course of the stream more to the
S.E. In this direction, it flows in an open majestic stream, through a
hilly and woody country, for 150 miles. About the middle of the latter
bearing, the course of the stream declines to the S.W. like the arch of
a bow. At this distance from Timbuctoo, two “very large towns,” both
walled, were seen on its southern bank. Many canoes plied on its bosom.
On the N.E. side rose mountains. For 30 miles farther, the river pursued
a winding course S.E. About this place is the part where travellers from
Ashantee and Dagwumba cross the Niger in their route to Houssa.
According to Bowditch, p. 206. the ferry must be about 24 days’ journey
below Timbuctoo, and the stream here about two miles broad. At this
place the inhabitants begin to be friendly to the king of Wassanah, and
enemies to the sovereign of Timbuctoo. In this part of its course the
Niger comes to a very high ridge of mountains, thickly covered with
trees, and so abrupt and steep, that there is no path between the stream
and the hill. “_It ran against the steep side of the mountain_,” said
Sidi Hamed. From the summit of this ridge, “_a large chain of high
mountains was seen to the westward_.” In passing through the ridge
mentioned, the course of the Niger forms an arch, or curve, declining
S.W. Six days are necessary to cross this chain, which there is no
avoiding. Having crossed the ridge, the traveller in his S.E. progress,
comes to the river again, at a place where it is narrow and full of
rocks, “_which dashed the water most dreadfully_.” This is no doubt the
place below Kaffo, mentioned by Amadou Fatouma, (Park’s guide,) where
rocks in the river had formed it into three channels, through one of
which, smoother than the others, their canoe passed safely. Allowing 6
miles for each day’s journey, this ridge would be 36 miles in breadth.

From this ridge, the stream continues to flow in a S.E. direction for
120 miles. Its windings in this part are numerous, which indicates a
more level country. To the westward, “_high mountains are very plainly
discernible_.” From the eastward, in this part of its course, flow many
small streams, which empty themselves into the Niger. This would
indicate elevated land at no great distance in that quarter. The stream
“looked deep,” but “was not very wide.” At this distance, 395 miles
below Timbuctoo, is a ferry, and in all probability it is the celebrated
ferry called Yaoora, so well known, and so much frequented by all
travellers from the countries S.W. to the countries N.E. of the Niger.
Considering the distance and direction that Sidi Hamed had travelled,
and considering the bearing and distance from Yahndi to this place, as
given to Mr. Bowditch by various authorities, namely, 42 journeys N.E.
the point will be found to accord with sufficient accuracy. Here the
stream is said to be about _three miles broad_. (_Bowditch_, p. 202.)
Near Yaoora, D’Anville and De Lisle, lay down a river as joining the
Niger on its southern side. For this they, no doubt, had good authority.
The features of the country also render this extremely probable. On this
river, and not on the Niger, they erroneously lay down Cabi, Yaoora, and
Boussa, the first nearest the Niger, and the last at the greatest
distance from it, but at the distances from each other as given by later
accounts. At this point there seems a want in Sidi Hamed’s narrative.
When he says he came to a ferry at this point, where he rested seven
days, it is not said whether the ferry was across the Niger, or across a
river which there joined the Niger on its eastern side. Perhaps Riley
never thought of asking him the question. It is to be regretted that he
did not, as it is very probable that a great river from the eastward
does join the Niger about this place. The reasons for thinking that this
is the case, will be considered more at large hereafter. Sidi Hamed says
he saw many canoes crossing the river, and though there no doubt was a
ferry across the Niger at this place, still the ferry he mentioned,
might have been one across another river which he had to cross in his
further progress S.E.

Before proceeding farther down the river, a few observations become
necessary at this part of the subject. Yaoora, we learn, is in the
country of Houssa, and the first state of that country on the Niger. To
the country of Houssa, Amadou Fatouma was engaged to conduct Park. Below
Kaffo, says he, was Carmassie, below Carmassie, was Gormou, and below
the latter, was Houssa. At Yaoora they reached that country, and at
Yaoora, accordingly, this guide left the unfortunate traveller. It is
very remarkable that Leo Africanus, and other Arabian authors, make no
mention of Houssa, either as a city or a great country. Yet there must
be a city of that name. All the negroes from the interior make mention
of it, and speak of it as of great magnitude. They also talk familiarly
about snow in their country, which shews the mountainous nature of it,
and also the great height of these mountains. Bowditch was told by
numerous authorities that the city of Houssa was situate 17 days’
journey (say 220 miles) N.N.E. from the Niger, at the point where we
have already noticed the travellers from Ashantee, Inta, &c. cross the
river in their route to it. Hornemann was indeed informed that Houssa
was the name of an extensive portion of interior Africa, eastward of the
Niger, and comprehending the kingdoms or provinces of Kashna, Daura,
Cano, Nora, Nyffe, Cabi, Zamfra, and Guber. Of these, Cabi and Nyffe
alone touched upon the Niger. These states bounded Kashna on the S.W.
and South, according to Hornemann. Cabi is stated by various authors as
being the port of Houssa on the Niger. L’Hage Mahommed says that Butoo
on the Niger, is the port of both Kashna and Houssa. By the port of
Houssa, they may mean the first city of that country which is reached in
the voyage on the river upwards from the Sea. The distance of Butoo from
Kabra is about 46 days’ journey, which would bring it below or beyond
Yaoora. Eastward of Butoo, L’Hage Mahommed says that the navigation of
the river is interrupted by falls and cataracts. Butoo, there is some
reason to suppose, may be the Bito of Leo Africanus, which, according to
the authority of _Joannes Blaev_ (taken perhaps from Leo) p. 107, is
bounded east by Guber, which latter place Bowditch informs us, is 10
days’ journey N.E. from Yaoora. Should Bito and Butoo be the same place,
then it would appear to be on the Gir; and therefore may, on that side,
be accounted as the port both of Kashna and Houssa. On the other hand,
the rocks said to be in the river east of this place, corresponds in
some measure with the account of rocks or rapids at Boussa. By the
authority of Bowditch, we learn that Nyffe is one day’s journey below
Yaoora, while another account, which appears more distinct, says that it
is below Boussa and Wauwa. This shews the great extent of the country of
Houssa; and as the name is often used to designate the country, not the
city, so the accounts of travellers are confused, or rendered confused,
by not adverting to this circumstance.

Below Yaoora, 4 days’ journey, or about 40 miles, is situated Boussa,
where Park unfortunately perished, _four months_ after he left
Sansanding, and when he was so near accomplishing the object of his
important journey. From the time he took to descend the river to this
place, it is evident he must have stopped a considerable time at
different places in his way, and the probability is, that he found the
country interesting. One account says his death was occasioned by an
hostile attack on the part of the natives, from a high rock which
overhangs the river where the stream was very confined and rapid; and
another, that the natives pressed after him to warn him of his danger,
but which he mistook for a meditated attack, and, in endeavouring to
escape, rushed into the cataracts or rapids where he perished. The
former account is, however, deemed the most correct, as the canoe and a
negro remaining in it being saved, shewed that the current was not
irresistible and overwhelming. Park and one of his companions jumped
into the river to escape by swimming, but, unfortunately, they did not
succeed. One of the bodies floated down the river, and was taken out of
the stream at Gangi, an island in it, and buried there by direction of
the king of Wauwa, a kingdom situated below Boussa. The Cape, or
headland against which the canoe struck, would indicate the termination
of a ridge or chain of mountains at this place. Amadou Fatouma’s
description of this rock and passage like a door, was not mentioned by
those eye-witnesses which related to Mr. Bowditch this fatal
catastrophe.

In this manner perished our unfortunate country-man, after all his
honourable toils and labours, and when he was so near being crowned with
complete success. The account which his guide gives of the events which
led to his destruction are by no means satisfactory. Treachery
occasioned the fatal event; and there is too much reason to believe that
this guide was the traitor and betrayer of his former master. He, I
suspect, it was that kept back the presents which Park had sent to the
chief of Yaoora, and who communicated, at the same time, a message that
Park never intended to return; a message, the very reverse of what Park
was sure to have sent. These things irritated the chief; and in the
deception under which he laboured, he took those rash measures which
deprived society of an excellent man, and his country of an useful
subject. The falsehoods of Amadou Fatouma, put forth to screen himself,
we are, in one instance, enabled completely to expose. Passing Kabra, he
says, they were followed by several canoes filled with men with hostile
intentions. On these Mr. Park and his party fired, and killed a great
many of them. This account was so contrary to Park’s disposition, and so
improbable in itself, that it bore the strongest marks of falsehood. In
a letter received at Mogadore, in the month of March 1806, by Seedi
L’Abbes Buhellal Fasee, from his liberated slave at Timbuctoo, the
writer says, “a boat arrived a few days since from the west at Kabra,
having two or three Christians in it. One of them was (_rajeel Kabeer_)
a tall man, who stood erect in the boat which displayed (_shinjuk bied_)
a white flag. The inhabitants of Kabra did not, however, understand the
signal to be emblematic of peace, and _no one went to the boat_,
although it remained at anchor the whole day, till night. In the morning
it was gone.” (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 319.) Here there is no account
of hostile attacks or slaughter of the natives, all of which, had they
been true, the writer must have known, and would most certainly have
related. Mr. Jackson translated this letter himself, therefore there can
be no imposition. Mr. Park left Sansanding on the 17th November, 1805,
and the letter quoted must have been written early in December that
year. The falsehoods advanced by Amadou were evidently contrived to
justify the attack made by the people of Boussa upon Park, while his
great anxiety to prevent Isaaco from proceeding to Yaoora was no doubt
occasioned by his fears, lest, by going there, the latter should come to
the knowledge of his treachery.

From the plain and simple narrative of Sidi Hamed, it is quite clear
that the country below Timbuctoo, on the south and south-west side of
the Niger, is extremely mountainous. On that side they seem to have
attracted his particular attention. The very high “_chain_” which he saw
to the westward, from the summit of that ridge which he passed over, and
near which place the Niger bursts through the chain, is a remarkable
feature, and leaves us scarcely any room to doubt that it is the
continuation of the Kong range, or a main branch thereof, extending in a
northerly direction towards the high lands, north and west of Kashna,
and those north of Bornou, upon the confines of the northern deserts,
and which must be the same as the Usurgala and Girgiris mountains of
Ptolemy. The ridge here mentioned by Sidi Hamed is within a short
distance of the high land of Zegzeg, to which it is no doubt joined. A
branch of the Kong range, more to the southward, may extend eastward,
and cross the course of the Niger about Boussa, or even lower down,
until it is merged in the chains of hills to the eastward. The
mountainous nature of the country we have been considering is mentioned
by various authorities, particularly by Ledyard and Lucas, who were
informed, that, south of the Niger, the mountains were of a most
stupendous height all the way to Ashantee and the Gold Coast. It is
probable that the very high mountains last mentioned by Sidi Hamed are
the dry barren range, 40 miles distant from the Niger, and in the route
from Gago to Guber, mentioned by Leo, and the Desert placed by Bowditch
in these parts. In that journey this chain must be crossed, and its
great height may render it barren and destitute of water. On the north-
east side of the Niger, with the exception of the chain he crossed, it
would appear from the narrative of Sidi Hamed, that the country, near
the river, was less mountainous. This agrees with other authorities, and
will be considered more particularly hereafter.

But, to return to the river:—Continuing its course south-eastward, for
150 miles below the place mentioned, or Yaoora, the Niger reaches
Wassanah, a city twice as large as Timbuctoo, and situated on its
eastern bank. Here the river turns nearly south, and is so broad that it
is scarcely possible to discern a man on the opposite bank. From 300 to
400 canoes, each capable of containing from ten to twenty persons, plied
constantly on the river. Crocodiles and alligators were numerous in the
stream. The land on its banks was well cultivated, low, flooded during
the inundation, and, consequently, produced excellent rice in abundance.
On the western side were many towns and small settlements. Oxen, cows,
asses, and elephants, were numerous, but there were no camels, mules,
sheep, or goats. The King’s guards were armed with musquets; the
sovereign and principal inhabitants wore shirts and trowsers of European
manufacture. The inhabitants were all Pagans, a circumstance which Sidi
Hamed pathetically laments, and which is perhaps the chief cause why
this celebrated city has not been mentioned by other Arabs; it being
well known that in their trading journeys they generally take those
routes where they meet inhabitants professing their own faith. Sidi
Hamed was 51 days constant travelling, exclusive of the 6 days taken to
cross the chain of mountains, in his journey from Timbuctoo to Wassanah.
This would place Wassanah in 10° 40′ north latitude, and 9° 40′ east
longitude. Ten miles per day, however, is certainly more than such a
caravan could make good. That was the utmost which Bowditch and a small
travelling party could make good in their journey from Cape Coast to
Coomassie. We cannot err far, however, in placing Wassannah in 11° north
latitude, and 9° 30′ east longitude.

Though the accounts given of the progress of this river below Wassanah
are less positive, still these are plain and satisfactory as to the
great point at issue. From this city, according to Sidi Hamed, the
Niger, called here by the natives Zadi, (which seems a very general name
for a large river in Southern Africa,) flows first south and then west,
till it reaches the _great water_, where were found “_pale people, who
come thither in great boats_, and brought muskets, powder, tobacco, blue
cloth, and knives, which they exchanged for slaves, ivory,” &c. These
pale people had in their great boats “_guns as big as men’s bodies_, and
with which they could kill all the people in a hundred negro boats.”
With these people the inhabitants of Wassanah traded. Many people had
been down at “the great water” with slaves and teeth, and come back
again. The brother of the King of Wassanah told Sidi Hamed that he was
soon to set out on such a voyage with 60 boats and 500 negro slaves, and
wished the latter to accompany him. It would, he said, take three moons
to reach the “great water,” and to return by land he would be absent
twenty moons—a striking proof of the slowness of, and difficulties
attending African communications.

The description here given of the European trade, and European vessels
(for it could be no others,) engaged in it, and all the articles of that
trade, are extremely accurate. Sidi Hamed, a native of the northern
parts of the Great Desert, wholly unacquainted with such a traffic,
never could invent such a story as this, nor had his informants any
reason to deceive him with fictitious accounts; therefore, the
authenticity of his narrative is clearly established, and the course of
the Niger, and certainty of its being navigable, satisfactorily
ascertained. That it is a different river from the Congo, is established
by this fact, for the latter river cannot be navigated by any vessel in
its lower course, by reason of rocks, rapids, and cataracts. Sidi Hamed
arrived at Wassanah early in May, and stopped there two moons.
Consequently, it must have been after the inundation, and when the
heaviest rains were over, that the son of the King intended to set out
on his journey. The current would then be less rapid. The progress of
such a fleet, creeping along the banks of the river, and stopping at
almost every place in its way for the purposes of trade, or to procure
provisions, would necessarily be extremely slow. The voyage also only
continues during the day. As the level country was approached, the
windings of the river would be more frequent and extensive, and,
consequently, greatly protract the voyage. More than a third of the time
would be occupied in stoppages; from 20 to 22 miles per day is the
utmost extent passed over during such voyages; and the horizontal
distance made good on general bearings does not perhaps exceed 14 miles.
Lagos, the great slave trading station, was evidently the place where
these traders reached the “great water.” On the general bearings, the
distance from Wassanah to Lagos cannot be less than 700 miles. Park took
four months in one canoe to travel an equal distance from Sansanding to
Boussa. The time therefore mentioned to Sidi Hamed as necessary to
descend from Wassanah to the _great water_ was no more than was
absolutely necessary, considering the slowness of African travelling.
Time, to an African, however, is an object of no consideration.

In his journey from Yaoora to Wassanah, Sidi Hamed makes no mention of
any mountains or rocks in the river, though “_he travelled most of the
time in sight of it_.” From this account, it would appear, that the
course of the stream was here more direct, and the country more open.
Yet it is possible that there may have been obstructions which he had
not seen, or neglected to mention, from no questions being put to him on
that head. The canoes which Sidi Hamed describes, as plying on the Niger
at Wassanah, and descending the river to the sea, are exactly the same
as Bowditch and other authorities were informed did go down from the
interior, and which Robertson and others saw come down from the interior
to these parts of the sea coasts. These canoes are all large, and have
apartments for the trader and his wives separate from the slaves and
servants. Wassanah, from the previous accounts, will stand on the Niger
about 100 miles below the place where Park perished, and evidently out
of the track of the great trading routes chiefly frequented by the
Arabs.




                               CHAP. III.

_Eastern rivers — Misselad or Gir, source and course — Dar Saley — Wara
— Other rivers — Gir turns west — Lake Fittre — Magnitude of River;
Junction with the Shary — Bahr-el-Feydh — Bahr Djad — Course of Gir west
— Gambarou — Birney — Bornou — River Tzad — Face of the country — Cano
or Ghana — Kashna — Gulbe, supposed course of ditto — Position of Kashna
— Junction of eastern and western rivers — Vancara or Owencara; what it
is — Bito — Temian — Cannibals — Junction of Gir and Bahr Kulla, source
and course of ditto — Mount Thala — Miri — Junchor and Bahr Salamat
Rivers — Lake Haimat — Island at the Junction of Gir and Niger — Lybia
Palus — Lake of Jackson, or Sea of Sudan; what that is — Robertson —
River Loro — Fillanee — Water communication between the sea coast and
north-east parts of Africa — Course of the Niger to the sea in the
Bights of Benin and Biafra — Boundary of Benin — Bahr Kulha; what it
is._


Before examining more particularly the accounts of the country from
Wassanah to the sea, and the outlets of the Niger from other
authorities, it is necessary to turn our attention to the immense supply
of waters which it receives from the eastern and the north-eastern parts
of Africa. With our present information, it is not easy to fix with
accuracy the points where these waters form a junction with the Niger.
Nevertheless, it is hoped that this may be done with sufficient
accuracy, to shew the great geographical outlines of the rivers of
northern Africa, which are the object of the present research. Let us
take the chief or parent stream first.

On the north side of the chain, which gives birth to the Bahr-el-Abiad,
or chief branch of the Egyptian Nile, springs the Misselad of Browne,
the Abou Teymam, or Om Teymam of Burkhardt, and the Gir of Ptolemy. It
is satisfactory to learn, from the authority of Burkhardt, the discovery
of this long lost name. It is called by the natives of these parts Djyr,
which, in the Egyptian pronunciation, sounds Gir. Mr. Beaufoy was
informed, that the river of Bornou rose “from the same source,” or, in
other words, in the vicinity of the Egyptian Nile. Leo also heard the
same thing reported. Edrisi states the matter distinctly; and Ptolemy
evidently brings it from the southernmost point of his Garamantican
rampart, in 10° north latitude. The Gir flows first in a north-north-
west direction towards the kingdom of Dar Saley or Borgo. Inclining more
to the north-west, it passes the parallel of Wara, the capital of Dar
Saley, three days’ journey to the west of that city; and, according to
the accounts obtained by Dr. Seibzen, it is in this part of its course
as large as the Nile in Egypt, or near half a mile broad. From the
eastward, according to Burkhardt, it must have previously received the
Oul Rashid, Abou Redjeyle, and Om Ettyman, besides other streams, which
flow from the kingdom of Darfur. The country between Wara and Darfur is
mountainous and rocky. Deep lakes are formed by the rains which remain
throughout the year, and afford retreats for the crocodiles and
Hippopotami. The natives of Dar Saley use canoes in passing their
rivers, a proof of the magnitude of the same. The country about the
sources of the Misselad, is represented as extremely mountainous, and
giving birth to numerous streams. Westward of Wara is several very high
mountains.

Running northerly from the parallel of Wara, the river soon after turns
west, and, flowing in that direction a distance of 11 days’ journey,
(Browne,) it falls into lake Fittre, certainly the Nuba Palus of
Ptolemy. The coincidence is very remarkable. Lake Fittre is two days
journey south-east of the Bahr-el-Gazalle. The size of this lake varies
in the relations given by different travellers. Some make it four days’
journey in circumference, others 15. The difference may proceed from the
one account relating to the magnitude in the dry, and the other in the
rainy season, and estimating by different scales. This lake is also
called by the Arabs Caudee and Bahr-el-Noëh. According to a tradition,
the waters of the deluge were absorbed in it. A very high mountain is
situate near it. (_Bowditch_, p. 203.) It is evidently the same lake as
that mentioned by Leo, as lying 150 miles east of Bornou. From Dar Saley
to lake Fittre, the country, it would appear, is rather flat than
mountainous, and much flooded during the rains. (_Burk._ p. 484.)
Towards the Bahr-el-Gazalle the land is woody, and the soil clayey.
(_Browne_.)

Issuing from lake Fittre, the river takes a western course. According to
the accounts obtained by Ritchie, it is hereabouts one mile broad, and
very deep. (_Quart. Rev._ May, 1820.) At the distance of 12 days’
journey from the lake, (_Bowditch_, p. 203,) the river is joined by a
large stream descending from the north-east, and called the Sharee or
Shary. Burkhardt also was informed that it flowed from north-east to
south-west, and was as large as the Nile in Egypt, (2000 feet broad,)
full of fish, and abounding in crocodiles. This stream, there is reason
to believe, is also called the river of Baghermee. From its magnitude at
its junction with the Gir, the sources must be remote, and towards the
eastern parts of the mountains of Tibbou of Bilmah. In these parts,
according to Burkhardt, (p. 488,) the country is flat, flooded during
the rains, and fine water is abundant found even during the dry season,
upon slightly digging the sands. Therefore it is called _Bahr_. The
sweetness of the water shews that it is entirely free from the saline
particles of the desert, and, therefore, on the confines of those
countries where rivers spring forth. Perhaps this is the stream which
forms the Chelonidæ Paludes of Ptolemy. A considerable river, called the
Bahr Djad, runs into the Shary on its western side, before the junction
of the latter with the great river. Also, on the eastern side, the
Shary, in like manner, receives a still more considerable stream, called
Bahr-el-Feydh, or _inundating river_. (_Burk._ p. 478 and 479.) On this
river, or near it, according to the same authority, is situated Kanem in
the Bahr-el-Gazalle. Edrisi mentions a river called the Nile, three
days’ journey from the town of Angimi, in the province of Kanem.
According to Bowditch, (p. 213,) six days’ journey east of the confines
of Bornou, and close to Aweeac, travellers pass a very large river,
called by the negro merchants Zerookoo Kerooboobie. It is evidently the
Shary, which is said to be 15 days’ slow march eastward of the confines
of Bornou. (_Burkhardt_.)

From the junction of the Shary the great river continues a westerly
course, and, it is probable, under different names. The exact course is
not readily delineated. Nevertheless we cannot err far in the chief
features. At no great distance from the junction of the Shary, the
mighty stream approaches within half a day’s journey of the capital of
Bornou, and passes the port of this city named Gambarou. Here it is
joined by another river from the northward; but whether this river is
called Kamadkoo, (the same as the Kammadoo mentioned to Mr. Hutchison,
_Bowd._ p. 213,) and the great river, Tshadi or Tzad; or, that the great
river bears the former name, and the river from the north the latter, it
is difficult in the present state of our information to determine.
Hornemann was informed that the river of Bornou was called Zad, and that
it was a mile broad. Burkhardt was also informed, that the river was
called Tzad, and he was told that it flowed at a short distance from the
capital; therefore, the Tzad may be taken as the proper name of the
great river, particularly as we find it bears that name in its lower
course. The river, coming from the northward, as conjectured by
Burkhardt, probably springs from Mount Dirka, in the great range of
hills south of the desert of Bilmah. These mountains lie nearly under
the tropic of Cancer, and in about 21° east longitude, corresponding
with the chain Girgiris of Ptolemy. The river that he mentions springing
from Mount Girgiris in two places, 5° of longitude separate, may be the
river we have mentioned, or the Shary. The resemblance is very striking.
Across a desert 200 miles broad, and south-east from Fezzan, lies the
country of Tibesti, full of fertile vales and mountains, affording
excellent pasturage. Though it never rains in this country, still
springs are abundant. In this country, therefore, and to the southward
and eastward of it, in all probability, rise all the rivers which flow
south from the river, which passes the capital of Bornou to the Shary.
From the extent of country through which these flow, it is evident that
they must be powerful streams.

A native of Bornou informed Dr. Seitzen, that the river, within a mile
of the city, was as large as the Nile in Egypt, abounding with
hippopotami and fish. It was navigated by vessels having sails and oars.
It overflowed its banks, and, during the inundation, a virgin female
slave, richly dressed, is thrown into the river by order of the king.
Bowditch, (p. 218,) was informed, that a small river, called Gaboöa, ran
southwards near Bornou; and Burkhardt was told, that the river formed a
lake of a considerable size, on the west side of which stood Birney, the
capital of Bornou, a city of such magnitude, that travellers, in
describing it, state, “_Cairo was a trifle to it_.” Other authorities,
however, deny the existence of any lake; and, whether the river Gaboöa
mentioned to Bowditch, is the same as that alluded to by Burkhardt, it
is difficult to determine. They may be the same; and the smallness of
the Gaboöa may be estimated in comparison with the great river.

All the countries through which the rivers we have mentioned flow are
very mountainous and woody, and greatly inundated by the tropical rains.
They are also populous, powerful, and well cultivated. The inhabitants
are great traders. Bornou is a mighty empire. Its authority is
acknowledged to the banks of the Niger. The sovereign is represented as
more powerful than the emperor of Morocco. Wangara and Kashna are
subject to him. This country is situated a great deal farther to the
southward and the westward than has hitherto been allowed. Burkhardt is
of opinion that it lies not much to the eastward of south from Fezzan.
According to Browne, (p. 448,) from Cubcabea in Darfur, by Wara to
Bornou, is 60 days’ journey. This places it much to the westward. Two
things prove its southern position: First, its territories are said to
extend to within 20 days’ journey of the Bahr-el-Abiad. Second,
elephants are found there, which animals, it is well known, cannot live
in the dry countries to the northward. The country of Bornou is, in
general, level, and very rich and fertile. It produces maize, rice,
beans, cotton, hemp, indigo in abundance, grapes, apricots,
pomegranates, lemons, limes, melons, &c. and plenty of sheep, goats,
camels, horses, buffaloes, and horned cattle. There are also lions,
leopards, wolves, foxes, elephants, and the rivers abound with fish,
crocodiles, and hippopotami. This country is what was known to the early
Arabian geographers as the land of Kanem, a very extensive region and
powerful state, ruled by the Beni Wayl, one of the most ancient and
powerful of all the Arabian tribes.

From the port of Bornou, the Gir (for we shall retain the ancient name)
continues its course west, declining southward; and, from the accounts
received by Ritchie, at a distance of 12 days’ journey, reaches Cano, no
doubt the ancient Ghana. Bowditch calls it Kano, or Kanoo, and makes the
distance 24 days’ journey. Ritchie’s informant, however, might mean the
frontier of the kingdom, while the distance given to Bowditch, extends
from capital to capital. The river here, according to Ritchie, is called
Tshadi. Bowditch, (p. 211,) says he was informed that the river skirted
Kano and Oongooroo, or Vancara. In the Geography of Joannes Bleav, (p.
105,) it is particularly mentioned that the kingdom of Cano extends,
_for a part only_, along the channel of the Nile on the right hand. This
would serve to shew, if correct, that the course of the stream turned
more to the southward, leaving the territories of Cano. This is by no
means improbable. A difficulty, however, here occurs, as we shall see
presently. Ritchie’s informant appears to make the river continue
westward to Kassena, which he stated was only 5 days’ journey from Cano;
here again he seems to mean the frontier of the former kingdom, for
Bowditch was informed that the distance was 10 days’ journey. Ritchie’s
informant, Hadji Hamet, states that Kassena, (Cassena, or Cashna) was
upon the river here called Gulbe; and as broad as from the gate of
Tripoli to the Bazaar on the sands, or _one-third_ of a mile. It would
appear, however, that when speaking of the Gulbe, he is speaking of a
different river to the great river. The name of the latter above Kashna,
is Tshadi. The name far from and below it is Tshadi also. It is not at
all probable that he would mention the river in Kashna under a different
name to that which the same stream bore, both above and below that city.
Besides, the magnitude of the Gulbe, only one-third of a mile, would
shew it to be a different river from the Tshadi, which, and much nearer
its source, is represented by various authorities as three times the
breadth of the Gulbe. Hornemann also heard that in the country of Houssa
and Kashna, there was a river called Gulbe.

Mr. Lucas was informed that Kashna was 5 days’ journey, about 65 miles
north of the great river. Bowditch, (pages 207 and 211,) gives it the
same distance; for he states that, three days’ journey from Goobur, and
13 from the Niger, travellers, in their route to Kashna, pass “_a large
river_.” The point to be determined here is, what river is it that is
here mentioned? It is not the Niger. If it was the Gir continuing to
flow westward, then that stream would join the Niger at the place where
the ferry mentioned by Sidi Hamed is placed: but, on the other hand, it
may be a stream descending from the north, and which, passing Kashna
under the name of Gulbe, flows south to join the Gir, the latter river
having previously bent its course in that direction. Sheeref Imhammed
says that the Nile, or the great river, flows west through the kingdom
of Kashna with a rapidity no vessel can stem; and that its breadth at
the island called Gongoo, where the ferry men reside, is so great, that
the sound of the loudest voice from the northern shore can scarcely be
heard. Its depth is 24 feet. Still, however, this river may be said to
run westward through the kingdom of Kashna, and not reach the Niger at
the point supposed. It may also there join the Niger, and yet, previous
to its doing so, receive the waters of the Gulbe from the northward.
Whoever casts his eye upon the map, and considers the nature and extent
of the country to the northward of Kashna, must perceive that it is not
at all probable such a great space can be destitute of rivers. The
cultivated country commences from the Tropic, 450 miles to the
northward. A river descends from the Tropic of Cancer, and passes
Agadez. D’Anville calls it Wad-el-Mezzeran, and makes it rise in about
26° north latitude. He says the caravans from Tripoli to Nigritia
(perhaps kingdom of Kashna,) perform seven days’ journey along its
banks. The authors of the Encyclopedia Britannica affirm, that this
river joins the Niger. In the French maps of 1757, drawn by Robert de
Vagondy for the king of France, this river is laid down as joining the
Niger about 250 miles below Timbuctoo. It is also curious, that in all
the old maps of Africa, (particularly that by Ortelius, in 1570, and
that by Joannis Bleav, 1662.) various rivers are laid down as flowing
from the northward and joining the Niger. Cassena, in particular, is
laid down by Ortelius on a river; and the river of Agadez is laid down
as running into lake Guber. For these things, these authors certainly
had positive, though not perfectly accurate information. Upon the whole,
however, comparing their accounts with those of the most recent date,
there seems the best reason to believe that Kashna does stand upon a
river descending from the north, but whether it is the same with that
which passes Agadez or not, I cannot take upon me to determine. The
probability is, that it is the same.

Kashna, it would appear, stands in 15° north latitude, and 11° 30′ east
longitude. At this rate Cano, 130 miles, or 2° farther east, will stand
very nearly where Ptolemy has placed his Gira metropolis. This city
stood in 18° north latitude, and 36° east longitude, which, corrected as
before mentioned, is about 13° east of Greenwich. This correction agrees
very well with what Ptolemy says in another place, namely, that this
city was in time 1⅛ hour, (or 17° nearly) west of Alexandria, which is
exactly 13° east of Greenwich.

Though, from the reasons mentioned, there is a very great probability
that a river, or the great river from the east, does join the Niger
above or near Yaoora, still the silence of Sidi Hamed and Bowditch, with
others, upon that important point, leaves a doubt on the subject. That
junction, perhaps, takes place lower down, and if so, must be below
Wassanah. That such a junction does take place, must be self-evident,
and is, moreover, positively stated. Bowditch was informed that the
Moors call the Niger Quolla at Jinnë, and Sansanding, &c. and describes
the Joliba as falling into the Quolla, east of Timbuctoo (p. 191.) Here
the names are evidently misplaced, no uncommon thing with Arab
travellers. (Burkhardt, p. 489,) states that the Tzad of Bornou, and the
Joliba were connected together. Leo Africanus also states the same
thing, when he says that, during the inundation, “a man in a bark may
pass over all the land of the Negroes.” (_Purchas_, lib. 6. c. 1. p.
765.) In the present state of our information, the greatest difficulty
is to determine the exact point where that junction takes place. The
accounts concerning this portion of Africa are, as regards these more
minute points, very confused and unsatisfactory. The grand features,
however, we are still enabled to trace with considerable precision.

It is quite common for the Moors, the Arabs, and the Negroes, in their
descriptions of countries through which they pass, to reverse the course
of rivers, by placing the geographical line, or bearing, of the bed of
each as the course of the stream. It is also very common for them to
describe, as one, different rivers which may in their course approach
near each other, and to state as a continuation of a river, any stream
that joins another coming from an opposite direction. Of these, numerous
instances might be given from the narratives of all their authors and
travellers. A few may here suffice. Abulfeda says “the Egyptian Nile
goes on to the land of the Zingians (Ethiopians;”) and Scheabeddin
states, that “many rivers derived from this great river, water Nubia,
&c.” Now the Nile does not go to these countries, but is formed by
various streams flowing from them. Three Moors described to Bowditch the
course of the Niger to Egypt thus: One began it, or made it rise at the
mouth of the Senegal,—one in Bambouk, and continuing it along the
Senegal, came to the Niger above Sego,—where the third made it rise, and
then all three carried the course of the stream down to Yaoora, thence
to Noofee, thence to Rakah, thence to Bornou, thence to Dar Saley,
thence to Darfur, thence to Sennaar, and thence to Egypt; thus embracing
and marking as one, four distinct rivers, all running in different
directions. In short, they identify the course of the rivers with the
direction of their journey: But having one or more sure points to direct
us, such as the course of the Niger east, and the course of the Gir
west, it will enable us to decypher with ease, many apparent
inconsistencies in accounts given by the Moors, Arabs, or Negroes; and
explain their meaning about the Joliba and the river of Bornou being one
stream, as well as other things of a similar description.

The eastern parts of Sudan, or Central Africa, which we have been
considering, exhibit features very different to what has hitherto been
believed. The mountains are numerous, and, as in Zegzeg, of a stupendous
height. Around Agadez, the country is delightful, fruitful, and
populous. Kashna is beautifully diversified with hill and dale,
delightfully wooded, and well cultivated. Here and there to the
northward, strips of desert countries, and a bare ridge intervenes, but
the fruitful land prevails. The rivers, which are found in almost every
part, are of great magnitude. Ritchie was informed that, in that part of
its course due south of Fezzan, the great river is so broad, that people
can scarcely see an object on the opposite bank. Cities of very
considerable magnitude rear their heads on every side, and at short
distances from each other. Commerce is active; cultivated fields, flocks
and herds, every where meet the eye. None of these things could be found
in a country wild or full of sandy deserts, or inhabited by mere
savages.

In this part of Africa, all accounts agree, the streams bend their
course to the southward. Amadou Fatouma, “who was the greatest traveller
in this part of Africa, told Park that he was certain that the Niger did
not terminate either in Kashna or Bornou, as he had been in both these
places; but that, after passing Kashna, the river turned, _and_ ran to
the right hand (south.”) Its further course was to him unknown.
Hornemann was informed that the Niger flowed southward from Houssa. Park
was informed (so was Hornemann) that the Niger declined south, till it
joined the Bahr Kulla. Scheabeddin evidently points out the southerly
course of the Niger, when he says, that, except the Nile of Egypt, which
runs north, all the other “rivers of Africa have their direction to the
east, to the west, and _to the south_.” There could be no other great
river known to the Arabs in his days that flowed south but the Niger.

Taking it as certain that the Gir, or Tshadi, joins the Niger below
Wassanah, we will return to that part of its course where it must turn
to the south-west. This will be between Cano and Kashna. This
necessarily leads us to consider the kingdom or province of Guangara,
mentioned by Leo, and, no doubt, the same as the Vancara of Edrisi, and
the Owencara of Ibn-al-Vardi. This country is certainly not only
situated upon a river, but at the junction of one or more rivers.
Bowditch, (page 212,) informs us that it is called Oongooroo, being a
negro corruption of the Arabic name. It lay between Kano and Bornou, and
was skirted by a river on the north: at present, it seems much reduced
in its opulence and extent. According to Leo, it extended westward as
far as Zamfra or Zamfara, which, we learn from Bowditch, adjoins Guber
on the north-west. On the east it is bounded by Bornou, to which power
it is subject. Edrisi calls it an “empire,” which shews its former
extent; formerly it was subject to Ghana. It was then a very rich
country, and carried on a great traffic with the neighbouring and
distant countries in gold dust, found in the country itself, and also
brought from mountainous districts to the southward. This district is
much flooded in August, when the inundation is highest. According to
Edrisi, it is “most famous for its excellency and abundance of gold;”
and, according to Ibn-al-Vardi, it is “the country of gold and
aromatics.” The gold, they inform us, is collected after the flood
retires; then the inhabitants “slightly dig the earth, and not one of
them is disappointed in his labour.”

These Arabian authors call this district an island, and say it was 300
(Arabic) miles long, and 150 miles broad, surrounded by the Nile all the
year, says Edrisi—but only on three sides, says Ibn-al-Vardi. The former
calls it an “island,” the latter an “isle or peninsula.” It has been
already noticed that these writers use the words isle, or peninsula, or
lands lying about and between the junction of rivers, as synonymous
terms. Two examples may suffice. Ibn Selym, the old Arabian traveller
already quoted, says, regarding the Egyptian Nile, that “an _island_ is
enclosed between the Bahr-el-Abiad and Bahr-el-Azreek, the upper end of
which is unknown, as is likewise the extremity of these rivers;” and
again, concerning the branches of the Bahr-el-Azreek, “they have fewer
side-channels and _islands_” than the other rivers. (_Burk._ p. 499.)
This affords us a complete elucidation of what the Arabian geographers
meant by the Island of Vancara. With this explanation also we unriddle
much of the Arabian geography. Edrisi says the frontier of Vancara lay
south-west of Ghanah about 8 days’ journey. Ibn-al-Vardi says this
country was situate “_on the shore of the great Bahr_,” (river or lake,)
which would seem to point out the lake into which the Gir, or Tshadi,
enters. Vancara therefore seems to comprehend the country in the middle
course of the Gir to the lake, and may also be intended to include the
country betwixt the Gulbe and the Gir, the Gir and the Niger, and might
extend to another large river about to be mentioned. The land betwixt
them is, in the oriental style, denominated an island.

East of Bito, and south of Guangara, is the large district of Temian,
inhabited, according to Leo and others, by a wild savage people, who are
represented as cannibals. I notice this here for two reasons; first,
because it is said that this country is bounded _south_ by the Niger,
which shews how much both it and the Gir decline south even according to
ancient authorities. It is uncertain which river is meant; but as Bito
is represented as being east of Guber, and Temian east of Bito, the
river which bounds Temian on the south is more probably the Bahr Kulla
than the Niger. Second, I notice this kingdom because various other
authorities mention a nation of cannibals in this part of Africa, and
also that they are near the Quolla or Niger. Mr. Bowditch, (page 202,)
was informed that their country was called Canna, Dall and Yum-Yum, and
subject to Quollaliffa, or Quollaraba, a powerful kingdom on the Niger,
below Noofee or Nyffe. Hornemann was informed they were called Yem-Yems,
and that their country lay to the south of Cano. Yam-yam was also heard
of by Burkhardt, as a Pagan country very far distant from Dar Saley.
Browne also was told of this Pagan country very _remote_ from Darfur,
and called by the Arabs Gnum-Gnum, whose inhabitants eat their prisoners
taken in war. (_Browne_, p. 310.) This is no doubt the country called
Temian by Leo and others, and which is said to be bounded _south_ by the
Niger.

Descending south-west, the Gir approaches its confluence with the Niger,
and near which it is probably joined by a very large river called Bahr
Kulla. The proper name of it however is perhaps different. This must be
a very large river. It may take its name from the country from whence it
flows, and in which it takes its rise, namely, Dar Kulla. All accounts
agree in placing this country nearly south-west of Darfur. The branches
which form the river in question rise on the west side of the mountains
of El Komri, which give birth to the Bahr-el-Abiad, or Egyptian Nile.
The country hereabouts is extremely mountainous and woody; large rivers
must consequently soon be formed. Browne informs us that in this part of
Africa the rivers were numerous and large, and that they were crossed in
ferry-boats hollowed out of a single tree, and managed partly by poles
and partly by double oars. Burkhardt also informs us, from good
authority, that Dar Kulla, and the countries around, “were throughout
mountainous, and that several very large rivers flowed through them,
_which were never dry_,” a strong Arabic expression, denoting rivers of
the first magnitude. The rivers, according to Browne and others, take
courses first north-westerly; in this point corroborating the earliest
authors, and corresponding very accurately with the features of the
country as delineated by Ptolemy. The sources are east of his Thala
mountain, north of his Aranga mountain, and west of that chain which
intervenes between these springs and the Misselad. The Bahr Kulla is
perhaps the branch which Ptolemy mentions joins the Niger from the east
above the Lybian Lake.

Bounding the range of Mount Thala, in a westerly course, the Bahr Kulla
declines southerly till its junction with the Gir, where the united
stream soon after joins the Niger, if the two streams do not join it at
the same place. Many Moors and Arabs who travel in the interior of
Africa, state, that the Niger joins the Bahr Kulla, and flows to form
the Bahr-el-Abiad. Bowditch, Park, and Hornemann, were each told this;
and an Arab pilgrim, in the suite of the Morocco Princes, told Captain
Dundas of the Tagus frigate, that the Niger communicated with the Nile
of Egypt, through the sea of Sudan. All these accounts only tend to
prove the course of a river in the direction already mentioned, and its
subsequent junction with the Niger. Better authority enables us to shew
the junction of the Bahr Kulla and Bahr-el-Abiad to be a
misapprehension, arising from the manner in which the Arabs frequently
express themselves on these matters. Of the junction of the river which
comes from Dar Kulla with the Niger, there is no doubt; but it is
probable that the words Bahr Kulla, or Kûlha, have a very different
signification than this particular river.

Betwixt the river of Kulla and the Misselad there is a great extent of
country where rivers rise, and flow to join the Gir in its middle
course. Of these, however, we are imperfectly informed. The chief seems
to be that called Bahr Salamat, which runs north-west, and passes
through Lake Haimat. Numerous other streams, however, spring in those
parts, and pursue their course in a westerly direction, but which no
traveller has yet completely explored. The chief of these streams are
the Miri, the Junchor, and the Terruge, the latter between the Miri and
the Salamat. The two first are certainly large streams; in their upper
parts their courses are north-westerly, and there is little doubt but,
as Major Rennel supposes, they join the great river in Vancara. Hence it
is easy to see that this country must be greatly flooded during the
height of the floods in August. It is curious that, carrying their lower
courses on the bearings mentioned, that the positions and bearings, and
distances of Reghebil and Ghanara, (both situated on fresh water streams
or seas,) as given by Edrisi from Ghana, and from each other, should
correspond so very exactly.

Browne mentions a singular circumstance, that merchants from Darfur, who
go to Dar Kulla across the Misselad to trade, do not return till the end
of two years, and that they occupy from 80 to 90 days in going there,
and as much on returning. This would indicate that the country was at a
much greater distance than in the immediate vicinity of the Mountains of
the Moon. In fact, at ten miles per day, it would reach almost to the
flat country near Benin. There may, however, be some error even in the
reckoning, or some particular obstructions to travelling, which indeed
must necessarily be very slow through such a woody, hilly, and well
watered country as intervenes. He mentions also that the inhabitants are
partly copper-coloured, which would indicate a mixture of Arabs; and
that this country was towards the west and centre of Africa. On the
other hand, the kingdom being invaded by the arms of Dar Saley, would
shew that the distance from the latter is not very great.

The junction of the Gir with the Niger, I suppose, takes place in about
10° east longitude, and 9° north latitude. Jackson, in his favourite
theory, that a water communication exists between the Nile of Sudan and
the Nile of Egypt by means of the Bahr Kulla and the Bahr-el-Abiad,
states the belief to be, that such a union of waters takes place in Bahr
Kulla, Wangara, or the Sea of Sudan. That this union, by the junction of
the streams about these parts of Africa, does take place, there is
little room to doubt. But Mr. Jackson seems at length to have renounced
the idea that the Bahr-el-Abiad is a continuation of the Niger.
(_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 443.) Almost all accounts, ancient and modern,
speak of a large lake in the central parts of Africa, but its exact
position it is very difficult to fix; indeed, it would seem that there
are more than one lake in these southern parts of Africa. Some
authorities, however, by identifying the ocean with the lake, or lakes
with the ocean, may thus create the apparent uncertainty. In the map by
Ortellius, in 1570, this lake is called the Lake of Guber, which would
lead us to look for it about the place where that kingdom is placed.
There can be no doubt that the lake in question is the Lybian Lake laid
down by Ptolemy in 16° 30′ north latitude, and 35° east longitude, or,
when corrected, from 11° to 12° east of Greenwich. This is east of the
course of the Niger at Yaoora, above 3° 30′, which would bring the
position of this lake directly in the course of the Gir to the
southward. Ptolemy has placed it in 16° 30′ north latitude; but we have
seen that he was 3° wrong in the position of the Nigrites Palus, and a
similar allowance may fairly be made for the position of his Lybia
Palus. This would place it in about 13° north latitude. It is remarkable
that Hadji Hamet informed Mr. Ritchie that “at Nyffe there was a _large
sea, not salt but sweet_, and that the river Tshadi (river of Bornou or
Gir,) came out of that sea and flowed to the Egyptian Nile. He could not
tell whether the river of Timbuctoo flowed into that sea or not.”
(_Quart. Rev._ May, 1820.) The misapprehension concerning the true
course of the Tshadi is here so obvious, that it scarcely requires
pointing out; the fact, however, of the Gir flowing into this lake, and
the coincidence with the Lybia Palus of Ptolemy, is very remarkable and
important. The lake being formed by the Gir, and not by the Niger,
sufficiently accounts for no notice being taken of it by Sidi Hamed in
his journey to Wassanah.

Jackson states that this lake, which he takes for the Sea of Sudan, is
450 miles eastward of Timbuctoo, and that “the Neel-el-Abeed (Niger)
_passes through it_.” (_Jack. Shab._ p. 486.) This, supposing that city
to be in 3° east longitude, would bring the position of the lake to be
in 10° 30′ east longitude, 1° or more to the west of the point
mentioned. It must however be observed, that, in tracing the course of
the Niger below Timbuctoo, I have followed the bearings given by Sidi
Hamed. It is possible that it may be carried 1° too far east, and the
course of the Gir not carried sufficiently to the westward. Perfect
accuracy in these things at present is impossible, nor does the want
materially alter the grand features it is my chief object to delineate.
Jackson says that “a lake is formed by the waters of the Neel-el-Abeed,
of which the opposite shore is not visible. It is navigated by large
vessels, which sometimes _come to Timbuctoo, manned by a particular kind
of people_. On its eastern bank begins the territory of white people,
denominated by the Arabs N’sareth,” (Christians.) From this description
it is quite evident that the “lake” here mentioned is a different lake
to that represented as being situated 450 miles east of Timbuctoo. It is
clearly the sea on the Gold coast, and Bights of Benin and Biafra—“a
lake whose opposite shore is not visible,” and on the eastern or north-
eastern bank of which “is the territory of Christians.” The fact of
large vessels coming up from this lake to Timbuctoo, “_manned by a
particular kind of people_,” is an additional proof that the navigation
of the Niger is unobstructed from the ocean to Timbuctoo.

The Sea of Sudan, however, or this interior lake, if it really bears
that name, is certainly a different expanse of water from the _Bahar
Sefeena_ of Park, which Jackson labours to prove is the same. His Bahar
Sudan, he asserts, is east of Timbuctoo 450 miles. From Sego to Bœdoo,
according to Park, is 30 days journey, in a southerly direction. “One
month’s travel,” says he, “_south_ of Bœdoo, through the kingdom of
Gotto, (Moosee) will bring the traveller to the country of the
Christians, who have their houses on the banks of the Ba-Se-Feena. This
water is incomparably larger than the Lake Dibbie, and the water
sometimes ran one way and sometimes another.” (_Park_, vol. ii. p. 229,
8vo. ed.) The words Ba-se-Feena are very properly shewn, by Jackson, to
be a corruption of the Arabic words Bahar Sefeena, signifying literally
“_the sea of ships_,” or the sea where ships are seen. The direction,
the distance, and every other particular mentioned, however, clearly
point out the European settlements on the Gold coast. The water running
sometimes one way and sometimes another, obviously relates to the flux
and reflux of the sea, a phenomenon which could not fail to arrest the
attention of a negro from the interior. The water here mentioned never
can be taken as a lake in the interior to the _eastward_ of Timbuctoo;
and it is strange that a person of Mr. Jackson’s discrimination in
African affairs should attempt to confound two things so clearly
distinct. The Bahar Sefeena and Bahar Sudan may be the same; but, if
they are so, it is certainly the Gulph of Guinea which is represented
under the appellation.

But to return to the junction of the Niger with the rivers from the
eastward. From Robertson’s Notes in Africa, lately published, we learn,
by information which he received on the coast at Greghwee, from people
belonging to the interior, that, _forty_ days’ journey from Greghwee,
and in a north-east direction, lay the country of Fillanee, on the river
Kakoa, which flowed into a lake called Issebee, near the sea. Still
farther, in the same direction, and betwixt the Fillanee and another
people called Boolamas, lay the great river Loro, which, descending from
the north-west, was at this point joined by _several other great
rivers_, coming from the north-east. At this position there is a large
island called Wadamsera, the capital of which is called Oendera, or
Wandera. The inhabitants were great traders, and carried on a brisk
trade with the opposite banks of the river: what is more remarkable,
they were partly Negroes and partly Arabs, but all Mahommedans. It is
impossible not to recognize in this account the junction of the Gir and
the Niger. The Fillanee country lay 400 miles north-east of Greghwee;
between it and the Boolamas lay the river Loro. This term Boolamas does
not apply to any particular nation, but it is evidently of the same
signification as Boolas, which, according to Bowditch, is a term of
reproach which the inhabitants of the sea-coasts, who account themselves
more civilized, apply to the slaves brought from these interior parts,
as well as to the population thereof in general. One hundred miles
farther to the north-east of Fillanee would bring us to the river in
question, beyond which are these Boolamas, or savage people, which will
correspond with that country already mentioned where it is said they
devour their prisoners. The direction and distance from Greghwee, as
given to Robertson, would thus agree very accurately with the point
where the junction is supposed to take place, and where, it is extremely
probable, that an island may be formed. The fact also mentioned, that
the population of this island are all Mahommedans, a circumstance
unknown in the middle course of the Niger, proves the existence of an
easy communication between this place and the north-east parts of
Africa, which could only be by water. Park’s guide distinctly informed
him, that, on going down the Niger, as far as he knew it, they would
touch on the Moors no where else but at Timbuctoo. Shabeeny also
distinctly states that “no Arabs are found on the banks of the Nile.”
(_Jack. Shabeeny_.) Sidi Hamed shews this to be correct, when he laments
so pathetically, that the population of Wassanah were ignorant of the
true faith. The fact of a water communication with the distant N.E.
parts of Africa, is otherwise clearly established. Robertson met on the
coast, two intelligent Arabs, who came from a country which lay _five
moons_ journey distant, in a N.E. direction from Lagos. These men stated
that “they _came a great part of the way by water_, in canoes hired from
the chiefs of the country through which they passed.” From the
description which they gave of their country, where “all the gentlemen
could read and write, and where _camels_, horses, and cattle of all
descriptions were plenty,” (_Robertson_, p. 288, 289.) it is evident
their country must be Bornou. Other authorities, from accounts similarly
obtained, give us the like information.

Descending southward from its junction with the Gir and other rivers,
the Niger, pursuing his course first south, and then south-west,
approaches the low lands in the country of Benin. Here the stream
separates, as is the case with other large rivers, into several large
branches, which take their course to the sea in different directions.
Those again divide into numerous small branches, which intersect the
coast in every direction. The inhabitants of Bonny or Bannee river, who
traded into the interior by means of that river, state, that the Bonny
“_came out of a large river in the interior, which made all the rivers
in that country_.” (_Robertson_, p. 298.) This is positive testimony to
an important circumstance, which the natural features of the country
rendered probable. From other accounts which Robertson obtained, it
would appear that the Niger, before it approaches the sea, forms a lake
called Issebee, from whence the river issues in three streams, which
bend their course south-easterly to the sea, and a fourth which flows
westerly to Lagos. This lake may be 200 miles east from the latter
place, considering the time the travellers took to descend from it to
the sea in August when “_the water ran fast_.” Of its magnitude we are
wholly ignorant. It is well known that the same term in Arabic denotes
both a lake and a large river, and the Arabs use the same often without
discrimination. From a circumstance regarding this lake, namely, that,
during the night, the canoes near the shore were carried backwards
almost as far as these had advanced down the middle of the stream during
the day, (an occurrence which was believed to be the work of some evil
spirit,) it would appear that it is merely the reach of a great river.
Such a phenomenon Tuckey found at every reach in the Congo. The lake
Issebee, therefore, may only be the undivided trunk of the mighty Niger.
If the accounts is correct, this lake, or separation of the stream, will
be in about 7° 20′ north latitude, and 6° 40′ east longitude.

The country through which the Niger here flows is very level. The
mountains, however, are at no very great distance northward from Benin.
These mountains are represented by the natives as stretching eastward
from the Kong range, and forming a kind of amphitheatre to the
northward. Encircling Benin, they descend south-easterly, till they are
merged in the high land, stretching north from Cameroons. This is
particularly mentioned by Joannes Bleav[7], and also by Robertson. The
general features of the country render this very probable. A small
stream joins the Niger at Wauwa. Near Goodeberry, we are informed by
Bowditch, there runs a river called Leeäsa, but what course it takes we
are uncertain. It is possible it may be the Kakoa, on which is situated
the Fillanee, as mentioned by Robertson. There is, however, no certainty
on this point, and the Kakoa may be a branch of the Niger, or even the
Niger itself, though different circumstances lead me to suppose that it
is a distinct river, which joins the Niger in or near the territories of
Benin.

Before turning our attention to the coast, it is of consequence to
consider the explanation which Mr. Jackson gives of the Arabic words
Bahr Kulla. The term, he says, in proper Arabic, is _Bahar Kûlha_, which
term signifies the Ocean; and also, an alluvial country. If this
explanation is correct, and which there seems little reason to doubt, we
have the clearest account of the termination of the Niger. Numerous
authorities state, that, in its middle course, it turns to the
southward, and flows till it joins the Bahr Kulha, the sea, or the
alluvial country. This it certainly does do at the points we have
mentioned, and which we are about to consider. It may be necessary
further to observe, on what Mr. Bowditch was informed, namely, that,
close to the northward of Houssa, were two large lakes; “one called
Balahar Sudan, and the other Girrigee Marragassee.” (_Bowditch_, p.
198.) The first, as Mr. Jackson distinctly states, is clearly a negro
corruption of the words Bahar Sudan, and the other, he supposes, is a
negro name for the same sea. Bowditch, there is the greatest reason to
believe, has completely mistaken the information concerning the position
of this lake, or lakes, which must be to the southward of _the country
of Houssa_, and not to the northward of the city of that name. He has
been led into the error by taking the city for the country of Houssa,
and from not adverting to the misapprehension which both negroes and
Arabs are so apt to entertain on these subjects. The greatest care is
necessary in order to make them state bearings and positions of places
conformably to our mode of expressing these things. They very
frequently, in their figures of speech, reverse them. Thus, the shores
of the Atlantic Ocean which bound Africa, are called by them the western
shores of that sea. “The _western_ border of the ambient sea,” says
Abulfeda, “namely, that which washes Africa and Spain, is the Ocean,”
&c. We call it the eastern. Here they seem to look to the land, and we
to the sea. By applying this rule to Bowditch’s account of the lake
north of Houssa, we will see more satisfactorily that he has just
reversed its position. Situate to the south of the country of Houssa, it
may be either the Lybia Palus of Ptolemy, or else the gulf of Guinea,
which, after all, there is reason to believe, will turn out to be the
true sea of Sudan.

Before proceeding further, it may be observed, that the Niger, about
Yaoora and Boussa, is called Kood, Kaoda, and Coudha, a term of similar
import as Quolla. It is not easy to determine, whether the Arabs apply
the term Coudha to the Niger, or to the eastern river, or to both
streams indiscriminately. It is evident, from the manuscript which gives
the account of Park’s death, that the term is applied to the Niger,
because he was on the Niger. But to whichever of the rivers it is
applied, or, if applied to both, it is clear they communicate with each
other. Shereef Brahima, an intelligent Arab, informed Mr. Bowditch, that
the water of the Coudha goes to lake Caudee, or Fittre; but he enables
us to understand distinctly what he means by that expression, when he
says that lake Caudee is “_the mother of Coudha_,” or, in other words,
that the Coudha flows westward from the lake, instead of eastward into
it. From the same authority, we learn, that between Gamba and the
_extremity_ of Coudha at Yaoora, the traveller passes four rivers,
namely, Kadarkoo, Doodirba, Shawanka, and Wada rivers, at the distances
as marked on the map. Of their course and magnitude we have no
information; but it is probable that the former is to the south or
south-east, and that one of them, namely, the Wada, is the same as the
Leeäsa river. The distance from Yahndi to each corresponds very
accurately. By this information we are enabled to fill up another blank
in the geography of Africa, and to fix, with considerable accuracy, the
features of the country, and the course which the various rivers take in
those parts of that continent.




[Illustration: _Page 128._

The Coast _FROM_ CRADOO LAKE to the HIGHLAND OF CAMEROONS _from the_
African Pilot

W. H. Lizars Sculpt.]

                                CHAP IV.

_Bights of Benin and Biafra — Rio de Formosa — Delta of Benin —
Innumerable Rivers — Rio Forcados — Gatto Creek — Cape Formosa — Rivers
East — New Calabar and Bonny River; their great magnitude — Old Calabar
and Cross Rivers — Rio Elrei — Salt Ground — Great Trade in Salt — Face
of the Country in the Delta — Trade to these Places — Inundation of the
Rivers — Time of ditto — Shews they are different from either the Congo
or the Egyptian Nile — Currents in the Sea near the Coast — Number and
Magnitude of the Rivers in the Delta — Breadth — Depth — Trade — Natives
into the Interior — a Race of People almost White — Leucæ Ethiopians of
Ptolemy — General Observations on the N.E. and North parts of Central
Africa — Accounts of Travellers — Kong — What it means — Great Magnitude
of the Niger, and his Tributary Streams — Length of course — Compared to
Magnitude of Bahr-el-Abiad at Shilluk — Cannot be the same Stream — No
Connection with that River._


Let us now turn our attention to the rivers which enter the Ocean in the
Bights of Benin and Biafra. Of the larger branches the Rio de Formosa,
though not the largest, may be considered the parent stream from which
all the others are deflections. At its mouth it is three and a half
British miles broad, with two bars of mud, on which there is 13 feet
water. Besides numerous creeks which issue from it, a very large, deep,
and navigable branch flows into the lake Cradoo, which communicates with
the Lagos river near its junction with the Sea. The space betwixt them,
according to the French maps, drawn for the French Marine service, under
the late Emperor, is filled with low islands; and several rivers from
the northward fall into the lake, or sound mentioned, betwixt the Rio de
Formosa, and the Rio Lagos. The account which Bosman gives of the Rio de
Formosa, is the most particular and satisfactory which I have met with.
“Upwards,” say she, “it is sometimes broader, and sometimes narrower. It
sprouts _into innumerable branches_, some of which may very well deserve
the name of rivers.” About five miles from its mouth, it throws off two
branches within two miles of each other. Agatton, the chief place of
trade, is situated sixty Dutch miles (220 British,) up the river, and on
a Peninsula formed by it. “_So far, and yet farther, ships may
conveniently come, sailing by hundreds of branches of the river, besides
creeks, some of which are very wide_. Its branches extend into all the
circumjacent countries. The country all about is divided into islands,
by the multiplicity of its branches.” The Portuguese, who had
settlements inland, and were well acquainted with those parts, affirm
that “it was easy, with a canoe, to get from the Rio de Formosa into the
circumjacent rivers, viz. the Rio Lagos, Rio Volta, Elrei, New Calabar,
Bonny, and other rivers. The Rio de Formosa meanders through a fine
fertile country, and brings down innumerable floating islands of
considerable extent on its waves. On the north side, the river is joined
by the Gatto creek, which may be the termination of a river descending
from the north, perhaps the Kakoa heard of by Robertson. The Rio dos
Forcados, apparently a mighty stream, no doubt branches off from the Rio
de Formosa, after the streams running south-east have separated. South
of the Rio dos Forcados, is a lake of considerable magnitude, which
communicates with the sea, west of Cape Formosa, and also with the New
Calabar river. The number of rivers which enter the sea from the Rio de
Formosa to Cape Formosa, is six.

Passing Cape Formosa eastward, besides creeks, we have six rivers,
which, at their mouth are all navigable. Beyond these, we come to the
great estuary of New Calabar, and Bonny, or Bannee rivers. These streams
form a junction near the sea, the one forming an island on the east side
of the estuary, and the other an island on the west side thereof. The
New Calabar river comes from the N.N.W. and the Bannee from the N.E.
apparently at no great distance from each other; but still between them
some streams from the north enter the sound formed by their junction.
This grand estuary is eleven miles broad, very deep, and navigable for
ships of heavy tonnage. On the west side is a bank of sand, thrown up by
the action of the river and the sea. In some places it has thirty feet
water on it. The New Calabar river, opposite to the town, and 40 miles
from the sea, is six fathoms deep. In it, however, are many flats with
only 16 feet water. The Bonny river is perhaps the most powerful branch:
it divides, and forms an island about twenty five miles long, and twelve
broad; the eastern branch, a very considerable stream, entering the sea
under the name of Andonny, or St. Anthony’s river. The town of Bonny is
situated on this island, which is almost level with the water, and a
great part of it is flooded during the inundation. Inland, however, the
inhabitants assert that the land becomes more dry, and the country free
from those pestilential vapours which are generated amidst the swamps
immediately adjoining the sea. The current out of the mouth of the
united streams of the Bonny and New Calabar rivers is strong and rapid;
and it is asserted that they discharge as much water as the great river
Congo.

Thirty-two miles eastward from Andonny river, we come to the estuary of
Cross river, and Old Calabar, or Bongo river. This estuary is twelve
miles broad; but it may be considered as an arm of the sea rather than
the mouth of a river, though the above rivers fall into it. This inlet
penetrates into the country nearly 100 miles. At a considerable distance
up this inlet, Old Calabar river is found to enter from the east. Its
width and magnitude are considerable; but, tracing it eastward and
upward on its course, it is, according to some authorities, found to
pass over a large cataract which stops the navigation, and which
indicates a course not of great length. Cross river is a branch of the
Niger: our best charts represent it as coming from the N.E. This
evidently is wrong, and should, I apprehend, be from the N.W. This
Robertson asserts, and the name seems to bear him out; for it is by this
stream that merchandize is transported from Old Calabar river to Bonny
river, and the parent stream, the Niger, in order to be carried into the
interior. Therefore, perhaps, it is named “Cross river.” In the French
maps already mentioned, both these rivers are laid down as coming, the
Old Calabar directly from the north, and the Cross river joining it from
the N.W. In the latter, they are certainly correct. How far they are so
regarding the former, future researches can only determine.

A small peninsula divides the mouth of the latter rivers from the outlet
of the Rio Elrei. The estuary, or arm of the sea into which it falls, is
ten miles broad. Both estuaries are very deep, and the navigation of
either is safe. According to the accounts transmitted to the African
Association by Nicholls, the traveller who fell a victim to the climate
in endeavouring to explore this river, the Elrei comes from the
eastward, and joins the sound, or arm of the sea, north of the high land
of Rumby. Advancing up the river to the eastward, the land rises
rapidly, and the Elrei becomes full of cataracts and rocks, obstructing
the navigation. This shews that the sources both of it and the Bongo, or
Old Calabar river, comes from the bosom of that mighty chain of hills
which we shall presently see terminate on the coast a little to the
southward. These rivers will thus be found to come from the south side
of the mount Thala of Ptolemy. For the reasons mentioned, namely,
cataracts and rapids, it is obvious that neither of these rivers can be
branches of the Niger.

The country round the Rio de Formosa is uncommonly beautiful. Hence the
name. It is also very populous; but, from being so low and swampy, it is
very unhealthy for Europeans. The same may be said of the whole extent
of coast intersected by the above mentioned rivers. The country to the
northward, between the Rio de Formosa and Ardrah, is without hills, but,
rising in a gentle swell, affords the finest prospect in the world.
Inland, the country becomes more healthy, and the climate good. The land
is extremely fertile. The trees are uncommonly large and beautiful.
Cotton of the finest quality is amazingly plentiful; and indigo and
other dye stuffs are to be had in abundance. The feathered tribes are
innumerable. Horses, cows, and sheep are seen in great numbers. Weaving,
and dressing of leather, are understood and practised. The Jaboos, an
industrious people, carry on a great trade in grain, between Benin and
Lagos. Benin is about ten miles from the river. Agatton is the port of
the city. Benin is still a considerable place, though much decayed. The
streets are long and broad; and it has regular markets every morning and
evening. The houses, though built of clay, are handsome. Benin, when the
Portuguese first discovered this part of Africa, was a powerful empire,
extending westward to Elmina, and so far into the interior, as to be
known to an empire distant twenty moons journey, in a N.E. direction,
whose sovereign, being a Christian, it is supposed could only be
Abyssinia. The extent of Benin is still considerable, their dominions
extending twenty days’ journey from south to north. It claims
sovereignty over New Calabar and Bonny.

The trade to these parts of the coast of Africa is very considerable,
and annually increasing. The number of slaves annually exported from
Bonny, and Old Calabar rivers, were formerly, and still continue to be,
very great. They are chiefly brought from the interior by a water
conveyance. The people are every where fond of trade, generally civil
and obliging to Europeans who deal honestly; and they are anxious to
cultivate commercial connections with them. All around the Delta, the
population on the sea coast are busily employed in making salt for the
interior market. In the kingdom of Qua, situated between the Andonny and
Old Calabar river, this is particularly the case. The land on the coast
is called the _salt ground_, and is, perhaps, the place where Ibn-al-
Vardi mentions the numerous salt-pits on the shore of the sea. This salt
is carried into the interior, along with other merchandize, in canoes or
vessels, built around Bonny river, so large as to contain 200 people,
and having a cannon placed on each end. They are covered with hides to
keep them dry. (_Robertson_, p. 308.) Boussa, on the Niger, is a great
emporium for this trade, and the place where the people from the sea-
coast meet the caravans from Barbary, to exchange their merchandize.
(_Robertson_, p. 301 and 209.) The natives on these coasts also talk
familiarly of their trade, intercourse, and communication with Houssa
and Timbuctoo. West of the New Calabar river also, is a country famous
for the manufacture of salt, and called the brass-pan country, from the
great demand for articles of this description from Europeans.

The rivers on the Bights of Benin and Biafra are in flood from May till
December, but the height of the inundation is during the months of July
and August. Then the Rio de Formosa covers all the land as far as Gatto,
forty miles from its mouth, and fifteen from its bed. The inhabitants
amongst the islands formed by its numerous branches, erect temporary
villages, in which they live during the dry season, but which are all
swept away during the rains. Such also is the situation of the country
round the mouths of the New Calabar and Bonny Rivers, and, in fact,
throughout all these coasts. Inland, the overflow of the river is very
great; but we have no accurate account of the height. Shabeeny says,
that it is so great that all the sheep, camels, goats, and horses, which
feed on the banks of the river when low, are removed to the uplands
during the flood. The land is constantly gaining on the sea, from the
quantity of alluvial matter brought down by the different streams.
Places near the mouth of Bonny River, which, within the recollection of
traders of the present day, were stagnant pools, are now become dry and
cultivated ground. In this manner, and during a succession of ages, has
all the land in the Delta of Benin been formed. Every one of the natives
on these coasts agree in stating, that, in the interior, near Benin, a
great river from the northward throws off three branches, which pursue a
southerly course to the sea, and one branch which runs westward to
Lagos.

The time of the inundation of these rivers shew in the clearest manner
that they can have no communication with the Congo. Their rise begins in
May, and is at the height in July and August. The Congo does not begin
to rise at the distance of 200 miles from its mouth, till the beginning
of September. The distance from the Bight of Biafra, or the point
eastward and inland, over which the Niger, if it flowed south to the
Congo, would have to pass to the point where Tuckey first perceived the
rise of the latter, is only about 560 miles. The current in flood from
six to seven miles per hour, as Park found it in the Niger, (without
reckoning any accelerated rapidity from rocks and cataracts) would reach
the spot mentioned by Tuckey, in the Congo, in four days, and in six
days, allowing one-third more for the turnings and windings of the
river. For similar reasons, the Niger cannot be the Nile, because that
river reaches its greatest height in Egypt, by the time the flood in the
Niger is at its height about Yaoora, which is 4000 miles distant from
Egypt, by the supposed course of the river, and one third more, making a
moderate allowance for turnings and windings. The height of the flood
also in the Bights of Benin and Biafra, being in August, is a most
convincing proof that the waters which occasion it, come from places far
to the northward and westward of nine or ten degrees of latitude, and in
the same meridians, because the rains in the same parallels of latitude
as the mouths of these rivers, are greatest in May and June. Their
violence is past before August, whereas in the parallels between 10° and
20° north latitude, their violence is greatest in July and August. This
being the case, shews that the height of the flood from those waters
which pass Timbuctoo, and which come from Dar Saley, cannot be before
August in the Bights of Benin and Biafra.

From the immense volumes of fresh water poured into the sea on these
coasts, the currents are rendered exceedingly strong, and the swell and
agitation of the waves very great and dangerous. The current in the sea
sets to the northward, from the Congo along the coast of Africa, till it
approaches the Bight of Biafra. Thence it is bent westward, through the
Bight of Benin, and along the coast of Guinea. From the mouth of the Rio
de Formosa it runs particularly strong to the westward. Bosman describes
the excessive roll and turnings of the sea in this part in the strongest
language: “The tide, from the eastward,” he says, “is so strong, that no
shallop can stem it by rowing.” Having gained the shore through these
terribly agitated waters, is, he says, to have “_passed from hell to
heaven_.” Similar tides, swells, and currents, are invariably found off
the mouths of large rivers, particularly all such as are flooded by the
tropical rains. The mouths of the Maranon, the Orinoco, and the Ganges,
have all similar phenomena near them.

[Illustration: _Page 139._

CALABAR AND Bonny Rivers. Surveyed by CAPTN. NEWTON

W. H. Lizars Sculpt.]

When we reflect, for a moment, on the number and magnitude of the rivers
which join the sea in the Delta of Benin, we are filled with wonder and
amazement. From the Rio Lagos to the mouth of the Cross river inclusive,
the number exceeds 20. The breadth of their surfaces connected together,
would exhibit an expanse of fresh water perhaps 50 miles broad. Three of
these only, viz. the Rio de Formosa, the chief outlet of the Bonny, and
the estuary of the Old Calabar and Cross rivers, would make 27 miles.
The depth of these rivers greatly exceeds that of other rivers of the
first magnitude at their mouths. Thus, the Rio de Formosa has 13 feet
water on the bars at its outlet, and deepens to several fathoms as it
leaves the coast. The mouth of the New Calabar and Bonny has 7, 8, 10,
12, and, considerably upwards in the Bonny river, 18 fathoms; while the
New Calabar, 40 miles from the sea, is six and seven fathoms deep. The
chief mouth of the Orinoco has only 17 feet water on the bar, and the
navigable part is no more than three miles broad. The Mississippi enters
the sea by six channels, the two principal of which have only 12 feet
water on the bar in each. Thus the outlets of the Niger greatly exceed
either of these mighty rivers in the depth of their mouths. The distance
from the source of the Missouri to the mouths of the Mississippi exceeds
4000 miles. The Delta formed by the Niger, exceeds in extent that formed
by the Ganges, the Mississippi, the Orinoco, or the Wolga. In difference
of longitude the Delta of Benin is nearly 260 miles. That of the Ganges,
much larger than any of the others, is 200 miles. The navigation also of
the outlets of every one of these mighty rivers is much more obstructed
than the navigation in the mouths of the Niger. They have less water,
and are more intricate and dangerous than either the Rio Lagos, the Rio
de Formosa, the Bonny, and Old Calabar rivers. Of the depth of the Niger
in the interior we are wholly ignorant; but, judging by the depth and
magnitude of its branches at their mouths, we may form some idea of the
depth of the united stream: It must be great. Inland, the Niger, before
it is joined by any of the eastern rivers, is represented as two and
three miles broad, and in its lower course five miles. (_Bowditch_, p.
201.) The united stream of the Orinoco at St. Thomas’ is four miles
broad, and 65 fathoms deep, when the stream is lowest. The Ganges,
inland, is three miles broad, and ten fathoms deep, when in flood. The
united stream of the Mississippi, at New Orleans, is nearly one mile
broad, and 20 fathoms deep. Higher up its breadth is rather more than a
mile in some places, and from 200 feet to 35 feet deep. If we calculate
from its breadth, the Niger will yield to none of these rivers in depth.
The extent of country from whence it collects its waters, is, in breadth
from east to west, greater than that part of South America which forms
the immense Maranon; but, except in the meridian of Benin, little more
than one-half the extent from north to south. The features, however,
throughout the greater part, are of the same stupendous and magnificent
description which are met with in those parts of South America. From the
sources of the Misselad to the junction of the great eastern river with
the Niger, the length of the Gir will, on general bearings, exceed 1600
miles. The Niger itself has a still longer course; and the stream that
descends from Dar Kulla will have a course of 1000 miles to the place
where it unites its waters with the former streams. Although the
clearest information which we can obtain, leads us to fix the junction
of these mighty rivers at the point mentioned, yet it is by no means
improbable that this junction may take place lower down, or in the
alluvial country nearer the sea.

It has been, and at various periods, stated, that vessels of
considerable burden, navigated with sails and oars, and some of them
manned by white people, came up the Niger from the eastward to
Timbuctoo. Mandingo merchants informed de la Brue at Galam, that, some
leagues from Timbuctoo, the Niger was navigated by “_masted vessels_.”
Dr. Laidley, who resided long at Pisania, was informed, that vessels of
100 tons burden frequented Houssa, by which might be meant the country
as well as the city of Houssa. A priest, who had visited Timbuctoo,
informed Mr. Park, that “the canoes on the Niger were large and not made
of a single tree, but of various planks united, and navigated _by white
people_.” Major Houghton was informed by a Shereef whom he met with at
Medina, and who had formerly known the Major when he was British Consul
at Morocco, and who had been at Timbuctoo, that “they had decked vessels
with masts, with which they carry on trade from Timbuctoo, eastward to
the centre of Africa.” The crews of these vessels have been stated
sometimes to exceed 150. These things were considered as fables. Late
accounts, however, explain these relations in a satisfactory manner, and
also confirm the accuracy of the earliest accounts which we have of
Africa. Robertson has informed us of the great magnitude of the canoes
or vessels built about Bonny river. We hear of no such vessels employed
on either the Rio Grande, the Gambia, or the Senegal. With these vessels
they trade up the river into the interior. He also states, that the
natives from Tebo to the north of Benin “are _whiter than Arabs_, but
are silky haired; and that the people on the coast give them the same
appellation as white men, namely, _Evoo_.” These people are great
traders, and go far into the interior; and there is no doubt but that it
has been some of these people, with the large vessels mentioned, which
have, at different times, made their appearance at Timbuctoo. It is far
from being improbable also, but that they are “the particular kind of
people” mentioned by Jackson, and the “white people” who dress in the
style of Barbary Moors, and wear turbans, but do not speak Arabic, and
who dwell on the borders of that lake into which the Niger discharges
itself,” which Barnes heard of. It is very remarkable, that, in these
parts of Africa, (for, if we examine his work accurately, we will find
that it is hereabouts,) Ptolemy mentions and places a nation of _white
Ethiopeans_, (Leucæ Ethiopeans.) The circumstances which we have
mentioned prove the navigation of the Niger to be free and open; and
Edrisi distinctly states that the Gir is so also, when he mentions that
the vessels with salt from Ulil go up the Nile through the provinces of
Ghana, Vancara, and Kaugha. All accounts concur in stating that the
canoes which come down the rivers from the interior to the coast, are
large and much finer vessels than those generally used on the south or
the west coasts of Africa.

Some articles of European manufacture found in the interior also
establish the fact of this channel of communication. Thus the
schoolmaster at Tripoli informed Mr. Ritchie, that the uniforms of the
King’s guards at Timbuctoo were red; and “that they were armed with
musquets brought from the great Sea.” This must be the Bight of Benin,
to which Europeans carry a great quantity of fire-arms. These articles
do not come from the northward, for L’Hage Shabeeny expressly states
that the traders from Morocco to Timbuctoo “_carry neither swords,
musquets, nor knives, except such as are wanted in the caravan_.”
(_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 21.) The reason for this is obvious, for, if
they carried these articles, they would arm and enable the Negroes to
defend themselves, which is not the policy of either Moors or Arabs.
Consequently, these articles must come through countries where neither
of these nations possess any influence. All these things prove, in the
clearest manner, the open, easy, and extensive communication by water,
from the coast adjoining Benin, with the interior; a communication only
found on this part of the coast.

In the northern, and north-eastern parts of central Africa, from
Mourzook, to Darfur, and from the mountains of Eyrè to Timbuctoo,
instead of burning deserts, and sterile wastes, and boundless swamps, we
now, from good authority, find that there are numerous, powerful,
fertile, cultivated, well wooded, watered, populous, and industrious
states. Every where mighty rivers, from the east, from the north, and
from the west, are found pursuing their course to the ocean, and verging
to one grand point. Benin, Bornou, Asben, Bagherme, Dar Saley, Darfur,
Kashna, Houssa, Timbuctoo, Sego, and Wassanah, and many others, are
populous kingdoms, abounding in metals, minerals, fruits, grain, cattle,
animals wild and tame. Kashna comprehends 1000 towns and villages. The
population of Timbuctoo is estimated on the lowest scale at 50,000.
Houssa is still larger. Wassanah nearly double, and Bornou still more
extensive. The sovereign of Houssa, according to Shabeeny, can raise
70,000 horsemen, and 100,000 infantry. I am aware much must be allowed
for Negro amplification, but still sufficient remains to shew us the
importance of these places. Beyond Kashna, the camel, “_that ship of the
desert_,” is no longer found; thus ceasing to be produced where his
labours could no longer be generally useful or necessary, and in
countries where he is not calculated to live. After passing Kashna to
the southward and south-westward, the face of the country changes
greatly. It becomes less open, and more intersected with great rivers,
inundated roads, prodigious forests, and stupendous mountains, all the
way to the gold coast. All these countries, all Central Africa, abounds
with the elements of commerce; and her noble rivers afford the easiest,
the safest, the cheapest, and most expeditious roads for the collecting
and the conveyance of these. In all things, it is superior to what any
portion of America, in the same parallels, or indeed in any parallel,
afforded when Europeans first visited that quarter of the globe.

In the course of the Gir, or Nile of Sudan, as delineated on the map
accompanying this work, it may be observed, that it is extremely
probable the course of the stream in the middle part is still too much
(perhaps a degree and a half) to the north. This would bring the lake
Fittre into the latitude assigned by Ptolemy to the Nuba Palus. The
bend, or angle formed by the river northward of Wara, is also, in all
probability, much less acute than is represented on the map; and Wara is
perhaps more to the west, and not so much to the north of Darfur. This
would give the river, in appearance, a more natural course in those
parts, and which the bearings given by the Arabian and native merchants
would admit of without unnecessarily wresting their meaning. The rivers
that descend from the north would thus have a greater space to traverse
before these joined the Gir. On the other hand, the mountains which give
these birth, may be more to the southward than I have placed them; and,
in this particular, corresponding with the accounts given by Ptolemy
more accurately than their position as supported by the testimony of
Arab merchants. From 21° to 22° north latitude, there is reason to
believe, is the true position of the highest chain of those natural
barriers which divide the desert from the fruitful land. Northward,
there is no doubt, lesser chains gradually decreasing in height, till
these reach the desert. Northward of Ashantee, we have no difficulty in
ascertaining the highest land. The magnitude of the rivers which flow
S.E. point that out very distinctly. Thus we learn from Bowditch, (p.
171.) that at, and near Boopee, the Adirri and Addifoosoo, the two chief
sources of the Rio Volta, are about 120 yards broad. Lower down, and in
the route from Coomassie to Sallagha, the rivers Kirradee, and Oboosoom,
running S.E. are each about 60 yards broad. These things are sure guides
in determining the most elevated parts of the country. Independent of
the positive testimony of Sidi Hamed, regarding the very high ridges of
mountains in the central parts of Africa, with other concurrent
circumstances, we have the positive testimony of various other
intelligent Arabian travellers and merchants, that stupendous mountains
cover these parts of Africa. Leo informs us that Guber is environed with
mountains; and from Cashna, southward to Ashantee, all authorities agree
in stating that prodigious high hills raise their lofty heads throughout
all the space mentioned. The country northward from Ashantee to Sego and
Jinnë is full of exceeding high mountains, which renders commercial
communications almost impracticable. On the other hand, merchants and
travellers who come from the country of Houssa, to the sea coast at
Lagos and Bonny, make no mention of any particular chain of mountains,
or inconvenience therefrom to travellers; but speak of heights, and
complain chiefly of interruption and difficulties arising from large
rivers, lakes, and morasses. This shews the parts of the country where
the mountains become less elevated, and the land more open, thus
affording an easy passage for the mighty rivers in their course to the
ocean.

The word Kong is Mandingo, and signifies a mountainous country, and not
one particular ridge. Did an impenetrable ridge, as is imagined, extend
from Kong in 10° north latitude to Komri in 7° degrees north latitude,
then the distance from its summit to Benin would not exceed 240
geographic miles. In such a distance, it is utterly impossible that so
many, or indeed any one of the great rivers which enter the sea through
the Delta of Benin, could be formed. From the westward none of them does
or can come; and from the east it is equally obvious that they cannot
flow. All this portion of Africa is mountainous; but it is evident these
mountains admit a passage for the united waters of the Niger and the Gir
from the northward, which, emerging from the mountainous districts, flow
through a level country, and, in the lapse of ages, have formed the
alluvial Delta of Benin.

In the Bights of Biafra and Benin, therefore, is the great outlet of the
Niger, bearing along, in his majestic stream, all the waters of Central
Africa, from 10° west longitude to 28° east longitude, and from the
Tropic of Cancer to the shores of Benin. It is certain it is navigable
from Balia, for Park informs us canoes can pass the rapids at Marraboo.
This celebrated traveller descended the stream in safety to Boussa,
where an accident terminated his life. The traders from the coast go up
the river above this place. The course of the Niger will greatly
resemble, on the map, that of the Orinoco of South America, and the
length from the extreme sources (and those nearest its mouth) will be,
on general bearings, 2250 geographic, or about 2600 British miles. The
cannon, therefore, which thundered at Aboukir, and made the Nile
tremble—those cannon which burst asunder, for ever, the chains of
Christian slavery at Algiers, and which bore the fame of Britain[8] into
the deepest recesses of Africa, may in safety awaken with their echoes,
to obedience and respect, the uncivilized, or half civilized, nations of
all Central Africa.

We have noticed, and from sure authority, the magnitude of the Niger at
Bammakoo—in flood, one mile broad. At the ferry in the route to Houssa,
it is described as two miles broad; at Yaoora, three miles. In other
places it is stated by the Moors as five miles broad. We have noticed
the magnitude of the Gir, the Shary, and the Tzad, in the early part of
their courses—we have noticed the probable magnitude of the Bahr Kulla
and the supposed Gulbe, all uniting in the Gir, which, where it passes
through part of Kashna, with a rapid current, is twenty-three to twenty-
four feet deep, and very wide; and having considered these things
minutely, it is obvious that the united flood (making large allowances
for African amplification,) must form a river equalled by few, very few,
on this globe. The Maranon alone can exceed it. Neither sands can
absorb, nor lakes contain, such streams. When Bowditch mentioned to the
Arabs whom he met with at Ashantee, the European theory, that the Niger
was lost in lakes or sands, they expressed the utmost astonishment.
“God,” they said, “made all the great rivers to flow into the sea, and
did Europeans think that he made the Quolla (Niger,) the greatest of
them all, to be lost in the sands of the desert.”

It has been argued that the diminished size of the Bahr-el-Abiad at
Shilluk, compared with that of the Niger at Bammakoo, and more eastward
in its course, was easily accounted for by evaporation. This argument
might have been allowed some weight, had it been shewn that the supposed
course of the Niger from Timbuctoo to Shilluk lay through countries as
dry and sandy as those countries are through which the Nile flows from
Shilluk to the shores of Egypt. The reverse, however, is, from every
information we can receive, the case. The country along the supposed
course of the Niger, from Timbuctoo to Shilluk, is all remarkably hilly,
woody, mountainous, in many places well cultivated, and abounding with
large rivers, which must increase, not diminish, any great river which
flowed through it. Again, it is argued that the Bahr-el-Abiad being
_full_ all the year, is a proof that it is the Niger. This account,
however, proves the very reverse, because the Niger is not _full_, or in
flood, (for so those who reason thus would take the expression used by
Bruce,) all the year, but only during a part thereof. The expression,
“full all the year,” however, does not mean that the Bahr-el-Abiad is in
perpetual flood, but that it does not diminish in size during the dry
season so much as the Bahr-el-Azreek, and other streams that flow from
the south-eastward. That this is the true meaning of the expression is
obvious, for Bruce also expressly states that “_all_ the rivers in these
parts fail when the sun goes South of the line.”

This continued fullness, or rather greater copiousness of the stream,
during the dry season, in comparison with the eastern branches of the
Nile, proves to a demonstration that the chief branches of the Bahr-el-
Abiad either spring greatly to the southward, (some of them most
probably do,) near the equator, or else considerably to the south-
westward of Shilluk, amidst stupendous mountains covered with
impenetrable forests, where the sun’s rays, during the dry season, have
no influence in lessening the damps and moisture which give vigour to
the springs, and where also the height of the mountains may be such, as
melting snows may at all times add resources to the stream. From Donga,
where the Bahr-el-Abiad is said to rise, to Shilluk, is above 300 miles.
In an equal space, and through similar countries and Alpine scenery, the
Niger becomes a much larger river than the Bahr-el-Abiad is represented
to be at Shilluk. At its junction with the Bahr-el-Azreek it is said to
be three times as large as that stream when it is low. At this junction,
which is in 16° north latitude, the Bahr-el-Azreek can be _crossed on
foot, and is only mid-leg deep_. The magnitude, therefore, of the Bahr-
el-Abiad, calculated by the scale given, it is evident, cannot be very
large. Besides, the Bahr-el-Adda intervenes between the Bahr-el-Abiad
and the conjectured course of the Niger southward and eastward; and
whichever of the former streams may be chosen as the continuation of the
latter, still the theory in question exhibits the Niger in its lower
course as running, not down from, but up against, the hills and high
lands; for such are, and must be, situate about the sources of either
the Bahr-el-Adda or the Bahr-el-Abiad. The latter also is represented,
not as a still river, but of a current so rapid that a considerable
distance is passed over before its waters are mixed with those of the
Bahr-el-Azreek.

Considering all these things attentively, it is not possible that the
Niger, and its collected waters, can flow to form the Bahr-el-Abiad, or
the Nile of Egypt. They may have a communication. That is possible, but
not probable. They are certainly distinct rivers. Can a river which is a
British mile broad, as the Niger is at Bammakoo, in longitude 4° west,
and latitude 13° north, flow through all Central Africa, passing in its
progress east the parallel of 16° north latitude, and then returning
south to 7° north latitude, through a country filled with stupendous
mountains covered with snow, extensive forests, and drenched with
tropical rains— Can such a river, receiving, as it does, and must do,
mighty streams on either hand, flow again northward to north latitude
14°, and to the eastward as far as east longitude 33°; a distance, upon
the general bearings of its course, equal to 2700 geographic (3127
British) miles; and then and there dwindle down to a stream such as the
Bahr-el-Abiad is at Shilluk; the breadth of which, according to Browne,
is only such that _the human features could not be distinguished, but
the human voice could be heard, by a person on the opposite bank?_ This
breadth cannot exceed a quarter of a mile. The identity, therefore, of
the Niger and the Bahr-el-Abiad, is, for this as well as for many other
reasons too tedious to mention, altogether impossible. Swelled by the
tropical rains, which make the dry-bedded torrents of the deserts of
Africa become mighty streams, the Niger, with his accumulating,
accumulated flood, would become a river of such force and magnitude, as
would sweep all the cultivated land of Nubia bare as the rocks which
there compose the bed of the Nile—bear Egypt and her cities headlong
into the Mediterranean Sea, and cover perpetually, with its waters, all
her land, fertile and sterile, from Rosetta “to the tower of Seyne.”




                                CHAP. V.

_Country south of the Elrei — High land of Cameroons — An extinct
Volcano — Chariot of the Gods — Old Cameroons — Jamoor and Malemba
rivers — Moöhnda or Danger river — Gaboon river — Nazareth, Liverpool,
Bristol, and Tawney rivers — Congo river — Rivers west of the Rio de
Formosa — Rio Lagos — Mory river — Country around it — Rio Volta —
Boosempra, Ancobra, and Assinee rivers — Mesurada river — Sierra Leone —
Way to explore Africa — Distances of places, how ascertained — How to
command Africa — Fernando Po, a sure stronghold — Sierra Leone, a
secondary place — A settlement inland of the greatest importance —
Extent of country it would command — French settlement in Africa — Wish
to extend their power in that quarter — Rivers, their great use in the
Torrid Zone — East coast of Africa, important for Commerce — Rivers
Zambezi and Zebee — Island of Socotora — Situation of Africa — Slavery —
The slave trade — Extent thereof — Slavery and superstition scourges of
Africa — How to benefit Africa — Colonization — Advantage of colonies —
The chief strength of Britain — Eagerly coveted by France — Our efforts
in Central Africa would civilize all Northern Africa — Must expect to
meet difficulties — Perseverance will ensure success._


It is now time to turn our attention to the rivers south of the Elrei.
But first the high land of Cameroons demands our attention. This part of
the coast extends from the mouth of the Elrei to Cameroons river, about
45 miles in a north north-west bearing. The ridge comes close to the
sea. The nearest peak is a volcano, and is higher than the Peak of
Teneriffe. A third of its height is above the limits of vegetation, and
its top every morning _covered with snow_. Considering the latitude so
near the equator, the height, before snow and ice could appear, must
exceed 16,000 feet. Still farther inland, three other peaks are
discernible, each rising in height; for, seen from the sea, the most
distant appears of the same height as the nearest. In the clear
atmosphere of these latitudes, such mountains may be seen at a distance
of 200 miles. The face of these hills does not front the Bight of
Biafra, but fronts south south-east; as the view from old Cameroons
river clearly establishes. It is therefore almost certain, that this is
the termination of a mighty chain of mountains, which branch off from
the mountains of the Moon. It would be contrary to all the knowledge we
have of other parts of the globe, to suppose the mountains inland were
less high than those on the sea-coast. Such a chain must completely bar
the passage of any river from the northwards. This chain is distinctly
indicated in the maps constructed from the accounts of Arabian
geographers. The chain, no doubt, follows the course of the Bahr Kulla;
and thus shows how the Elrei and the Old Calabar rivers may have their
course in elevated lands, and their springs amidst their hills. It also
points out the deflection of the Niger to the west, as it descends from
the north, and approaches the western extremity of these mountains. What
we have noticed is a most extraordinary feature in African geography,
not paralleled, I believe, in any other part of this globe.

There is the strongest reason to believe, that the high land which we
have been considering is the “Chariot of the Gods” of the ancients.
According to Hanno it was situated in a bay or gulf. The flame that
issued from it at night, he says, extended to the stars, and by day the
same tremendous appearance was maintained. Hence that navigator called
it the _Chariot of the Gods_. It is clear, that it was beyond, and
greatly beyond “Hesperus his Horn,” which Ptolemy places in 8° north
latitude, and 13° east longitude from Ferro. Whoever considers the
latter author with attention, will readily see, that, in the place we
are considering, he has placed his “Deorum Currus.” There is no part on
the coast of Africa which answers so accurately to the description given
by Hanno. The mountain is an extinct volcano, but which, in the days of
Hanno, might have been in full activity. Nothing is more probable. The
Bights of Benin and Biafra must have undergone great changes since that
early period. The Delta must be greatly increased, if not, in a great
measure, formed, during the space of 2390 years. The island of Fernando
Po also is evidently of volcanic origin. But it is foreign to my purpose
to enter at length into these subjects.

Immediately south of this ridge, in 3° 40′, is Old Cameroons river,
about two miles broad. It is navigable upwards, for vessels drawing 18
feet water. About 3° 20′ north latitude we have the great estuary of Old
Cameroons, or Jamoor, and Malemba rivers. The extreme breadth is 12
miles. It communicates with Old Cameroons by Bimbia and other creeks. At
a short distance from the sea, is an island between the Jamoor and
Malemba rivers, on which the town of Cameroons is situated. The natives
say, that all these three rivers come from one parent stream in the
interior; but of whose source they are ignorant, as it was far distant.
Southward, the coast rises into a table land, extremely beautiful, and
very healthy. Passing Cape Claro, in 1° 10′ north latitude, we have
Moöhnda, or Danger River, a deep and powerful stream, navigable for
vessels of any burden. Its entrance is narrow and dangerous; but once
entered, it is quite safe. The island of Corisco (Thunder) is in its
mouth. Its banks abound with the finest timber for ship-building and
other purposes. Forty miles south, passing along a low swampy coast,
(almost a morass,) in latitude 0° 30′ north, is the entrance of the Rio
de Gaboon, 30 miles broad, but inwards contracted to 12 miles. 45 miles
from the sea, the river divides into two branches; the one streaching
north-east in a deep stream, till, according to the natives, it comes
from the Moöhnda. The other runs south-east, and about 60 miles upwards
is formed by several streams from the mountains. The sources of the
Moöhnda are said to be far into the interior, northward of east.
Southward of the Gaboon, the land is low, and the navigation of the
coast dangerous, by reason of currents in the sea. Northward of Cape
Lopez, we have Nazareth River, which has a bar, with only 12 feet water
at its mouth. It is a large and deep river, and navigable in the
interior. Such are the accounts given by the natives. Southward, and
round Cape Lopez, is Liverpool, Bristol, Tawney, and Cape Lopez rivers,
said to be considerable streams, and, with the Nazareth River, to come
from one river in the interior called Avongo, which, at a considerable
distance from the coast, is said to fall over an immense precipice. The
course, however, and sources of these rivers, are unknown, except that
they come from the eastward. Towards the mountains of the Moon they, no
doubt, have their rise, where the land is greatly elevated. South-west
of that ridge, the maps constructed from the authorities of the Arabs,
represent several rivers. It is a fact, and one worth attending to, that
from Old Cameroons river inclusive, the natives on the coast are wholly
unacquainted with Moors and Arabs, which shews they have no
communication with the northern interior countries; a circumstance which
could not have happened, had either the Niger or the Gir flowed to the
southward.

From Cape Lopez to the mouth of the Congo, the land is hilly, and the
shore in many places bold. Few rivers of any magnitude enter the sea on
this part of the coast. The mountains seem to run parallel with the
coast. The mouth of the Congo is in nearly 6° south latitude. The voyage
of Tuckey has made us accurately acquainted with this stream in its
lower course. Its magnitude has been greatly exaggerated. At Fathomless
Point, the true mouth of the river, it is only three miles broad. The
depth, however, is about forty fathoms. Higher up, and approaching the
cataracts and rapids, it contracts to two miles, and even to one mile.
These cataracts are numerous. The rapids continue for a considerable
space, during which the river is frequently contracted to a very narrow
channel. The ridges, on either side, rise steep, bare, and barren.
Navigation is impracticable. The course is from N.E. Above the rapids
and rocks it expands to the breadth of three and four miles. This is
about 280 miles from its mouth. At this point Tuckey was forced to turn
back. The navigation upwards was said to be open. Ten days’ journey
above this, a large branch comes from the N.W. The great stream comes
from the N.E.; and, in all probability, rises on the S.E. side of the
Mountains of the Moon, in about 5° north latitude, and 31° or 33° east
longitude. According to the Portuguese, near Concabella is the junction
of several great rivers. A branch comes from the east, and one as large
as the Po comes from the south. The Congo begins to rise in September.
The flood is greatest in December. It begins to rise at the cataracts on
the first of September. This rise begins a month before the rains
commence in these parts. This is a convincing proof that its source is
north of the equator, and south of those hills which give birth to the
Nile, where the rains are greatest in August. From November to January
the rains are heaviest in the lower parts of the Congo. Comparatively
speaking, it may be said to be in perpetual flood. The reason is
obvious. Its chief sources lie in different hemispheres, with one branch
in the middle, between those extending eastward into the interior. The
consequence is, that the Congo receives supplies from the rains of both
Zones. The one beginning to swell it, before the flood from the other
ceases. These things are a complete proof that it is no part of the
Niger. Tuckey and his companions were surprised at the vast volume of
water in the Congo, both above and below the cataracts, compared to that
which rolled over them. They conceived the stream found subterraneous
passages, from the number of tremendous whirlpools in it. Proyart, in
his account of Loango, mentions some curious circumstances, which would
favour Tuckey’s supposition. All the rivers in Loango, he says, flow in
an equal stream in the dry and the rainy seasons. They suffer no
diminution. However deep the natives dig, neither tuffe nor stone is
found. A stratum of compact argile confines the waters to the interior
of the earth. In some places it is interrupted, where the water
undermines the surface, and often excavates large and deep abysses,
which open spontaneously during the rains. The inhabitants fly as far as
possible from these moving grounds. (_Proyart_, Pinkerton’s Coll. vol.
xvi. p. 550.) Loango is west of the cataracts of the Congo, and situate
beyond the chain of hills which run along its N.W. bank. Can the
phenomena mentioned by Proyart, be occasioned by the subterraneous
passages in the Congo, as supposed by Tuckey?

If the Congo were the Niger, then the latter must pass south, in the
latitude of Benin, at the utmost not more than 300 miles east of the
high land of Cameroons: now a mighty chain of mountains is from the
coast seen to stretch two-thirds of this distance in that direction; and
all the country in the interior, we are informed, is exceedingly
mountainous. The vale, if I may use the expression, through which a
river of such magnitude as the Niger is, can flow, must be very broad.
Large streams would also join it from the west, as well as from the
east. Bearing this in mind, it is plain that if the Niger passed to the
Congo, no space of sufficient extent could remain between those
mountains and the sea, to yield those immense rivers which enter the sea
from Rio Lagos to Cape Lopez. The utmost extent of the course of any of
them could not exceed 200 miles. If the Niger continued to flow to the
Congo, after throwing off branches which form all the rivers in the
Delta of Benin, and southward to Cape Lopez, then, considering the
elevation which, in that case, the bed of the Niger behoved to have,
their streams would have the rapidity of torrents; whereas, in all but
the Old Calabar and Elrei river, it is the reverse.

Westward of the Rio de Formosa, we have the Rio Lagos river, which a
branch from the Rio de Formosa joins at its mouth. The current is very
rapid during the flood; bearing down floating islands, and forcing
vessels from their anchorage, when in the roads. The chief stream comes
from the northward, and above its junction with the branch of the Niger
is said to be ten fathoms deep, and so broad, that when in the middle,
the banks on either hand, though covered with lofty trees, can scarcely
be discerned. This stream has different names, in different parts of its
course. Seven days’ journey N.E. of Ardrah, it passes under the name of
Azewoa. Six days’ journey N.E. of Yahndi, it passes S.E. under the name
of Mory. Four days’ journey northward of Yngwa, the Kontoorooa, one of
its branches, is found flowing S.E. half a mile broad, and near its
junction with the Kirhala, which is a larger stream. This latter river
is readily identified, as being that which travellers cross at twelve
days’ or eleven days’ journey distant from Kong, in their route to
Jinnë. The united stream of the Kontoorooa and Kirhala flows S.E., and
is undoubtedly the Lagos river, which flows through populous and
powerful countries and states.

The Mory, or Lagos river, has been mistaken by Robertson for the Niger;
and, accordingly, he confounds the kingdoms and states on each, as if
these were around or upon the same river. Soko, in Ashantee, he has thus
put down as Sego, which place is 400 miles from Soko. The Mory river
must be of great magnitude. Descending from such stupendous mountains,
it must soon increase and become a very large stream. Six or seven days’
journey north of Ardrah, travellers represent it as being six miles
broad. In length it must exceed 500 miles. Various accounts state that,
north of Dahomey, is a very large lake from which several rivers issue.
Robertson says it is 10 days’ journey N.E. of Agombe, the capital of
Dahomey. Bowditch says it is situated in Hio, 10 days’ journey north of
Dahomey; and Snelgrave and Barbot state that this lake lay between Gago
and Dauma (Dahomey) 370 miles N.N.E. of Ardrah, a distance much greater
than either of the two former authorities allow. There is little doubt,
however, but it is the same lake that each authority has in view.
Snelgrave and Barbot call it Guarde, and estimate its length at 100, and
its breadth at 50 leagues. In this, however, they may be deceived, from
estimating the days’ journey, the usual mode of calculation, at much
more than it really is. There is little doubt, however, but that it is
of considerable size, and its true position seems to be about 100 miles
to the northward of east from Dahomey.

The countries to the west and north-west of Dahomey are represented as
very populous, abounding in provisions, and the people great traders.
Dagwumba, in particular, is a powerful state, and its capital, Yahndi,
of considerable magnitude, and a great emporium for trade. Still more to
the north-west, and amongst the Kong hills, are other powerful states.
To the northward of the chief range, according to Bowditch, is the
kingdom of Moozee; but, from other authorities, particularly Park, we
learn that Moozee is the capital of the great kingdom of Gotto. It is a
very common practice among negroes to place the capital for the kingdom
and the kingdom for the capital. Moosee lies in about 10° 20′ north
latitude, and 0° 45′ west longitude.

The soil in the kingdom of Dahomey is composed of a deep, rich, reddish
clay, intermixed with sand, and scarcely containing a stone the size of
an egg throughout the whole country. This affords a clear proof of its
being low and level: it is very fertile. The surrounding countries
exhibit the same features.

Westward of the Rio Lagos is the Rio Volta, a large, deep, and rapid
stream, which is increased by the junction of the Laka at no great
distance from the sea. The sources of both rivers we readily recognise
in the Adirri and Addifoosoo, which take their rise in the eastern parts
of the mountains of Kong, which are here so elevated as to be covered
with snow, and amongst which springs the chief branch of the Niger. The
Kirhala, and the Ba Nimma, also here take their rise. The mouth of the
Rio Volta, between the breakers, is a mile broad, and has three fathoms
water; sixty miles upward it is four fathoms deep. The stream flows
through fertile and populous districts; the natives hold it in great
veneration. Teak trees abound on its banks. The climate is fine, and the
country healthy. A branch from the Rio Lagos communicates with the Rio
Volta, in many places only divided by a sand-bank from the sea. All the
natives on this part of the coast are industrious, and great traders.
Many Arabic words are found mixed with their languages; several Arabian
customs remain. About Fidah the country is fertile and delightful. The
land rises gently from the sea, covered with lofty trees growing in
regular order, as if planted by human hands.

Beyond Cape Three Points is the Boosempra, the Ancobra, and Assinee
rivers, the latter the largest, but all comparatively small streams.
Westward, as far as to the Mesurada, the rivers that enter the sea are
mere torrents, a proof of the shortness of their course, and also that
the river called “Zamma,” already mentioned, must be a branch of the
Niger. The coast here is all bold and high. Inland, the country is
exceedingly mountainous, rising in height and grandeur. Sierra Leone
(hitherto supposed to be the chariot of the gods of the ancients,) seems
to be the termination of the mighty chain which stretches north-east by
east, through those parts of Africa; and it is very curious, that this
chain appears to run exactly parallel to the grand chain of Mount Atlas.
Perhaps it stretches across the Continent to Egypt.

Whether the Congo is the Niger or not—whether the latter flows to the
Egyptian Nile, and whether or not it terminates in a lake, swamps, or
sands in the interior, still the Bights of Biafra and Benin are the
points from whence to set out to ascertain and determine this important
point. A considerable portion of the journey, we know from the best
authority, can be travelled by a water conveyance. The whole distance
cannot much exceed 300 miles, till the point would be determined. The
nations and people on the route are comparatively peaceable, civilized,
and friendly to Europeans. At old Calabar, different European languages
are understood. The English language is spoken, and taught, and read,
and written. They keep regular mercantile accounts in our language;
hence good guides could be procured. In any other route from the west,
from the north, or from the east, into the interior, the path is through
dreadful barren deserts, countries wild and rugged, and men fierce and
rude, and by religion the most inveterate enemies to the Christian name.
The distance also, by any one of these routes, to be travelled before
the points alluded to could be decidedly determined, is about 2500
miles. It is not difficult, therefore, to determine the route which
should be chosen.

Coomassie in the south, Mourzook in the north, and Cobbè in the east of
Africa, are points accurately ascertained. Timbuctoo, in the centre, is
tolerably well known. It is satisfactory that, taking the bearings, and
calculating the distances on these by the most accurate scale, as all
these are given by authorities wholly unknown to, and unconnected with
each other, the positions of places and rivers agree with a remarkable
degree of accuracy. In this manner the map which accompanies this work
was constructed.

Agadez, according to Leo and Joannes Bleav, is about 160 leagues distant
from Cano. This corresponds very nearly indeed with the position where
it is placed according to the accounts obtained by Ritchie and Bowditch.
From Cashna to Zegzeg, according to Leo, is 150 miles, which will fix
the position of the latter place about 100 miles north-east by north of
the Niger at the point where Sidi Hamed crossed the great ridge. The
mountainous nature of Zegzeg, mentioned by Leo, is thus supported by the
testimony of Sidi Hamed. From Cashna, westward to Gonjah, (Kong, or
districts near it,) according to Shereef Imhammed, is 97 days’ journey,
which, from the nature of the country passed through, and the route
taken, will agree with sufficient accuracy with the position of Kong, as
placed by the information given to Bowditch. From Gonjah, or Kong, to
the sea coast, through Tonouah, is 46 days’ journey according to Shereef
Imhammed. This will be found to agree very nearly with the accounts
obtained by Bowditch. Kashna is stated to be east of Timbuctoo 690
miles, and west of Bornou 650 miles. (_Rees’ Encyc._) Both these
distances will be found to agree well with the position of Kashna, as
obtained from Bowditch and others. Park’s guide, Amadou Fatouma, told
him that from Sansanding to Kashna was a journey of 60 days or two
months. Much of this journey was by water, and consequently more
expeditious than by land.

From Cubcabea in Darfur, by Wara in Dar Saley, to Bornou, according to
Browne, was a journey of 60 days. According to Ledyard, the distance
from Mourzook to Bornou is 660 geographical miles. According to
Burkhardt it is 50 days’ journey, (by others 52,) which, at an average
of 13 miles per day, is 650 miles. From Mourzook to Agadez, according to
Ledyard, is 479 geographical miles: from other authorities it is 47
days’ journey, and 17 days’ journey additional to Kashna, which is
nearly south of Mourzook. From Tripoli to Timbuctoo, according to
Ritchie, is a journey of 80 days. The two places are 1260 geographical
miles distant from each other. This would give an average of 15½ miles
for each day’s journey, which, being through an open country, exceeds
considerably what can be made good in one day in the woody and
mountainous districts.

South of the Niger we will find the reckonings equally exact. From
Coomassie to Yahndi is 24 days’ journey. This will place Yahndi in north
latitude 8° 38′, and 0° 55′ east longitude. From Yahndi to Yaoora is 42
days’ journey, and the same distance to the point where the Niger is
crossed in the route to the city of Houssa. From Inta to Timbuctoo is 41
days’ journey; from Coomassie to Kong is 24 days’ journey, and thence to
Jinnë is 42 days’ journey, according to the accounts which Bowditch
obtained from different authorities. From Elmina, on the Gold Coast, to
Oenessy, on the river Ingaee, (evidently the Niger at Jinnë or Lake
Dibbie,) by a route through Buntakoo, Inta, Oalla, &c. is, according to
Robertson, (p. 180,) 60 days’ journey. Calculating the day’s journey at
10 geographical miles made good south of the Niger, and 13 miles, (12 to
13 is the number allowed by _Browne_, p. 448,) upon an average, in the
cultivated countries north of the Niger, the reader will perceive how
nearly different authorities, wholly unconnected with each other, are
made to agree; a proof of the general accuracy, and also that the proper
scale for estimating these days journey has been followed.

To explore Central Africa to its deepest recesses—to acquire the command
and control over the whole of its trade, we require only two great
stations: first, an insular one near the grand estuary of the Niger;
second, as the river has several navigable estuaries, another station in
the interior is necessary, either where the stream divides or unites, as
may be found most eligible or most healthy. With these we command the
whole trade of Northern Africa, from the source of the Senegal to
Darfur, and from Bornou to Benin. A third station, at the Rio Lagos,
would give us the command of the trade into the deepest recesses of the
Kong mountains. If ships cannot navigate to all these more distant
parts, we know that boats, and vessels of a magnitude sufficient to
render the conveyance of goods cheap, expeditious, and easy, can and do.
Steam-boats could navigate to the most distant parts—to Balia, to
Bornou, and Dar Saley. Ten, twelve, fifteen, or twenty days, would serve
to reach Timbuctoo, and the most distant parts from our interior
settlement. Steam would impel them upwards; the current would bring them
down without any expense of fuel. Coals could be carried out cheap; wood
can be had in abundance. Who can calculate the advantages that would
result from such an intercourse?

The Island of Fernando Po is the insular station which nature points
out, I may say that she has planted, for that important end. This island
is about forty miles distant from the mouth of Bannee River—the same
distance from the estuary of Cross and Elrei rivers—scarcely farther
removed from Cameroons and Malemba rivers, and about 200 and 220 miles
from the Moöhnda and Rio de Gaboon, thus commanding the entrance of all
these rivers, if they proceed from the Niger, or whether they proceed
from the Niger or not. Even if the Niger flowed to the Congo, after
throwing off all the rivers mentioned—even though the Gir were a
separate stream, and besides throwing off the rivers south of the high
land of Cameroons, it continued its course to the Congo, then the value
of Fernando Po would by this be greatly enhanced; because, besides an
entrance into Northern Africa, we should command an entrance into
Southern Africa also, as the Congo is not navigable near its mouth by
reason of cataracts. The Island of Fernando Po has been successively
abandoned by the Dutch, Portuguese, and Spaniards, and the title to it
could thus readily be acquired. The land is very high, and therefore
healthy. It is 36 miles long, and 15 broad, and could be made very
productive. On each side it has fine and safe anchorage; the inhabitants
are warlike, but their subjugation would be an easy task. Prince’s
Island, 110 miles south-west, is a fine soil and climate, and might also
be taken possession of, to prevent any other European nation from
annoying us. St. Thomas’s, under the equator, is very unhealthy, and
both it and Annabon is too distant from the coast to render them of such
importance as the former two.

The reason why an insular situation is necessary is obvious: it would be
healthier than the low lands on the coast of the continent. It could be
kept and protected by a naval power, at much less expense than a
settlement on the coast of the mainland. It would prove a station which
would equally command every approach, while it would prove an
impregnable bulwark in the hands of the Mistress of the Ocean, from
whence our internal establishment could always be supplied, and to which
it could look for succour and effectual assistance in case of any
emergency.

Fernando Po is, of all places, the best, and, it may be added, the only
proper station on the African coast, for our cruizers to watch and cut
up the slave trade, which is, and while it continues, will always be,
greatest on the coast opposite. Our naval officers know, and are well
convinced of this. Sierra Leone is near 1600 miles from this island, and
from the prevailing winds, vessels from the Bights of Benin and Biafra,
where the greatest number of captures are made, are forced to beat all
the way to Sierra Leone, which renders the passage exceedingly tedious.
As the vessels now employed in the slave trade are small, and built to
sail fast, that they may elude our cruizers, and being thus exceedingly
crowded, the length of the passage to Sierra Leone proves fatal to many
of the slaves. Sierra Leone is also the most unhealthy spot on the whole
western coast of Africa, and, from its situation, must remain so. It is
a grave for Europeans; and whoever turns his eye to the map, will
readily perceive that it is the worst chosen station on all the coast of
Africa for an extensive political or commercial establishment. From the
nature of the country behind this settlement, it is obvious it can have
no communication with the interior but by land carriage, and this, from
the mountainous nature of the country, is almost impracticable. It has
nothing in it or about it that ever can give it an ascendancy in Africa,
and an establishment on the Niger and Fernando Po would soon shew its
insignificance.

But, while possession of Fernando Po would, in time of war, completely
command all the grand outlets of Central Africa, and place whatever
European settlements were therein planted, completely at the mercy of
Great Britain, still the possession of that island alone, would neither
give us the monopoly of the trade to those parts, nor prevent other
European nations from sharing in that trade with us in time of peace. A
commanding station, however, inland on any spot which could controul the
united stream, would give to this nation the complete monopoly and every
advantage. Without this, Fernando Po would only become valuable to Great
Britain when war occurred betwixt her and any European power which had
settlements in the interior. Without such a controuling settlement also,
in the interior, the trade from Great Britain to those Central parts of
Africa, laid open by these rivers, had much better, as more convenient
and less expensive, be carried on direct from any port in Great Britain,
to Timbuctoo, &c. (should the Niger prove navigable for ships) than to
have the goods landed, and afterwards reshipped at Fernando Po. This
island may be of great use as a depot, till the point for forming a
settlement in the interior is finally pitched upon, and rendered secure
against any attack. In choosing the position for this settlement, care
must be taken not only to take into consideration the security and
advantage for the present moment, but those great advantages and
important results which may be fairly anticipated for the future.

Granting that the navigation of the Niger was interrupted at Boussa, by
reason of rapids or rocks rising amidst the stream; still, we know that
the river can be navigated in safety from Boussa upwards, and from
Boussa downwards. Therefore, on this commanding spot, let the British
standard be firmly planted, and no power on Africa could tear it up. A
trifling land carriage would then give this nation nearly all the
advantages of an open navigation, and by such a natural barrier, place
the Niger completely under her controul. Firmly planted in Central
Africa, the British flag would become the rallying point for all that is
honourable, useful, beneficial, just, and good. Under the mighty shade
thereof, the nations would seek security, comfort, and repose. Allies
Great Britain would find in abundance. They would flock to her
settlement, if it had the power and the means to protect them. The
resources of Africa, and the energies of Africa, under a wise and
vigorous policy, may be made to subdue and controul Africa. Let Britain
only form such a settlement, and give it that countenance, support, and
protection, which the wisdom and energy of British Councils can give,
and which the power and resources of the British empire can so well
maintain, and Central Africa to future ages will remain a grateful and
obedient dependency of this empire. The latter will become the centre of
all the wealth, and the focus of all the industry of the former. Then
the Niger, like the Ganges, would acknowledge Great Britain as its
protector—our King as its Lord.

The extent of country and population whose improvements, labours, and
wants would be dependent upon, and stimulated to exertions by, a
settlement on the Niger, is prodigious, and all together unequalled. The
extent compromises a country of nearly 40° of longitude, from W. to E.,
and through the greater part of this extent of 20° latitude, from N. to
S., a space almost equal to Europe. Where the confluence of the Gir, or
the Bahr Kulla with the Niger takes place, is the spot to erect the
Capital of our great African establishments. A city built there, under
the protecting wings of Great Britain, and extended, enriched, and
embellished by the industry, skill, and spirit of her sons, would ere
long become the capital of Africa. Fifty millions of people, yea, even a
greater number, would be dependent on it.

Whoever turns his eyes to the map, must at one glance perceive that this
is a kingdom—a colony—a trade in which no foreign power whatever could
come into competition with us, or endanger its stability and prosperity.
Insurmountable barriers oppose on every side. On the north and on the
east deserts intervene, across which all attempts at mercantile
competition must be fruitless, and where no hostile armies in any force
can find their way. From the west, south-west, and south-east,
impenetrable mountains (for I may say these are so for any purposes of
trade or attempt at invasion) arise, insuperable barriers. By the
majestic stream of the Niger an entrance can only be obtained. The
Mistress of the Ocean may place a barrier there, which she, and she
only, can shut and open at her pleasure. The rival which can approach
nearest, must do so by means of the Senegal. But this stream ceases to
be navigable above Galam. Thence to the Niger is nearly 200 miles,
across such mountains, and through such forests, as may be considered
impassable for any army of strength, or for any mercantile speculation
which could alarm or shake the prosperity of the settlements eastward on
the Niger.

The French nation have long looked towards Africa with an anxious and a
longing eye, in order to repair the losses which revolution and war have
occasioned in their colonial establishments. France is making every
effort to explore and collect information concerning the interior parts
of the northern division of that Continent. She is already established
on the Senegal, and commands that river; and if the supineness and
carelessness of Great Britain allow that powerful, enterprising, and
ambitious rival to step before us and fix herself securely on the lower
Niger, then it is evident, that with such a settlement in addition to
her command of the Senegal, France will command all Northern Africa. The
consequences cannot fail to be fatal to the best interests of this
country, and by means surer than even by war or conquest, tend
ultimately to bring ruin on our best Tropical Colonial establishments.
She will then meet this country with a decided superiority in every
market, not only with all colonial productions at present known, but
also with others peculiar to Africa, and as yet, little known in Europe.

The rivers are the roads in the Torrid Zone. Nature seems to have
intended these as the great help in introducing agriculture and
commerce. Wherever the continents are most extensive, there we find the
most magnificent rivers flowing through them, opening up a communication
from side to side. What is still more remarkable, and becomes of great
utility, is, that these mighty currents flow against the prevailing
winds, thus rendering the navigation easy, which would otherwise be
extremely tedious and difficult. This is the case with the great Maranon
and Oronoco in South America. The prevailing trade winds blow right up
their streams. This is the case with the Niger, and in a more particular
manner during the time it is in flood. For ten months in the year, but
more particularly from May till November, the prevailing wind in the
Bights of Benin and Biafra is from south-west, thus blowing right up all
the outlets of the Niger. January and February are the months during
which the Harmattan wind blows, a dry wind coming from the north-east,
and from the great deserts south of the Mediterranean. In the Congo,
Tuckey found the breeze generally blowing up the stream. It is needless
to point out, at length, the advantages which may be derived from this
wise regulation in the natural world. The meanest capacity may
comprehend these.

But it is not the west coasts and interior of Northern Africa only that
afford eligible situations for settlements, and a wide field for
profitable commerce. The east coasts afford ample range for both. From
the Cape of Good Hope, but more particularly from Caffraria to Cosseir
on the Red Sea, there are rich and ample fields. These were the mines of
wealth for the ancient world, and from whence the Phenicians, Tyre and
Zidon drew their golden stores. By political events, cut off for ages
from the civilized portions of the earth, these countries have become
sunk in ignorance and barbarity, and their capabilities remain neglected
and unknown. But the materials remain. And could Tyre and Zidon—cities
on the Mediterranean in the earliest periods of history, while knowledge
was limited to what it is now—do what Great Britain cannot? Certainly
not. We have more than they ever had within our power. Immense rivers
flow on the east coast of Africa. The Zambezi, or, as it is called at
its mouth, Quilimanca, enters the sea in about 18° south latitude, and
by five different mouths, forming so many Deltas. Far into the interior,
and before it divides into branches, it is a league broad. It inundates
the country in April, a proof that its sources are towards the Southern
Tropic. The country up this river, and its tributary streams, is very
rich in metals and minerals, as it is also towards the south about
Sofala, so famous for its gold mines. Northwards are other important
rivers, particularly the Zebee. But the grand station in these parts is
the Island of Socotora, to the east of Cape Guardafui. In the hands of a
naval power, such as Great Britain, this shuts up the Red Sea most
completely, and gives us the command of Western Arabia, and all the
inlets into Abyssinia and Nubia. The coasts of Africa opposite, are the
lands so famed in ancient times for myrrh and incense. It brings us into
immediate contact with, and in fact enables us to command, the fertile
kingdom of Aden on the Arabian coast, so famous for its spices.
Possession of this island would enable us to shut and open the Red Sea
at our pleasure, in all the trade from the East Indies, or indeed from
any part. A small exertion might get from the Turks Massouah, and
Suakim, and Cosseir, ports on the west coast of the Red Sea. These
places are of no use to them, but would be most valuable to us.

Unfold the map of the world. We command the Ganges—fortified at Bombay,
the Indus is our own. Possessed of the islands in the mouth of the
Persian Gulf, we command the outlets of Persia, and the mouths of the
Euphrates, and consequently of countries the cradle of the human race.
We command at the Cape of Good Hope; Gibraltar and Malta belonging to
us, we controul the Mediterranean. Let us plant the British standard on
the Island of Socotora—upon the Island of Fernando Po—and inland upon
the banks of the Niger, and then we may say Asia and Africa—for all
their productions and all their wants—are under our controul. It is in
our power. Nothing can prevent us. A tenth part of the sum which our
merchants and manufacturers have lost in overstocking old markets, would
have been sufficient to fix us securely in Africa, and to have developed
completely all the mercantile stores which she possesses, and the
improvements of which she is susceptible.

To benefit Africa, and make Africa a benefit to Europe, we must know and
consider the evils she suffers, and the wrongs she inflicts on herself.
In every part of Africa her population, whether Moors, Arabs, Negroes,
or the mixed race descended from these, is divided into innumerable
petty states, who are engaged in constant quarrels and warfare with each
other. Wherever we find more powerful states in Africa, there the
ignorant sovereign rules over his trembling subjects by the terrors of
superstition and the sword. Life, liberty, and property, are
consequently every where insecure. Slavery exists universally, and the
slave trade is prevalent every where. The elements of human society are
dreadfully disjointed. Nevertheless, the nations in central Africa, I
mean its northern part, are not savages. They are barbarians, and some
less rude than others. Every where we find them collected into cities,
cultivating the land, and carrying on commerce, which, though rude when
compared to civilized nations, yet clearly distinguishes their condition
from that of the savage state. Here, the fiery zeal and hard yoke of the
Arab has done some good. Wherever their influence extended, cannibalism
and human sacrifices, so prevalent on the coasts of Guinea, and
countries bordering on it, were abolished. The days, however, of Arabian
grandeur and greatness are fled. Their power in Africa is decaying fast.
The governments on the southern boundaries of the Zahaara, and in the
north-east parts of Sudan, exhibit the strangest compound of arrogance
and weakness, pride and imbecility, despotism and ignorance, barbarity
and folly, that are to be met with on the face of the earth.

Yet the materials for a better order of things exist both amongst them
and the Negro population. The power that could curb the lawlessness of
the one, and enlighten the ignorance of the other, would soon make them
useful. Were it not that the power of the Arabs is so much decayed in
better countries, the population of Africa to the Gold Coast had at this
day acknowledged Mecca as their temple, and Mahomet as the prophet of
God. Decayed as their power is, still they are more than a match for the
timid and indolent Negro, whose lands are invaded and plundered by these
marauding bands. The Mahommedan religion teaches its votaries that it is
a deed meriting paradise to convert, by any means, an infidel to the
true faith. To accomplish this, the Negro is loaded with chains.
Enthusiasm and interest goad on the Arab and Moor. Large caravans seek
Sudan from every quarter, and barter the commonest merchandize for men.
Into Morocco, the Barbary States along the Mediterranean, Egypt, Nubia,
Abyssinia, across the Red Sea into Arabia and other countries, from
60,000 to 70,000 slaves are carried annually. Since the abolition of
Christian slavery in the Barbary States, this traffic in Negro slaves is
greatly increased. The miseries the slaves endure marching across the
deserts, sinks the middle passage of the European slave trade into
insignificance.

There is no efficient way to arrest the progress of this deep-rooted
evil, but to teach the Negroes useful knowledge, and the arts of
civilized life. Left to themselves, the Negroes will never effectually
accomplish this. It must be done by a mighty power, who will take them
under its protection— a power sufficiently bold, enlightened and just,
to burst asunder the chains of that grovelling superstition, which
enthrals and debases their minds, and that, with the voice of authority,
can unite the present jarring elements which exist in Africa, and direct
them to honourable and useful pursuits. A small portion of European
knowledge and spirit would be sufficient to rouse the Negro to assert
his independence, and drive back, with shame and disgrace, any force
which either the Moors or the Arabs could send against him. Till this is
done— till the native princes are taught that they may be rich without
selling men—and till Africa is shown, that it is in the labour and
industry of her population, and in the cultivation of her soil, that
true wealth consists—and till that population see a power which can
protect them from such degrading bondage, there can be no security for
liberty or property in Africa; and, consequently, no wish or hope for
improvement amongst her population. Slavery, and a slave trade, existed
in all their virulence many centuries before Europeans had any knowledge
of Western and of Southern Africa. Were the European abolition rendered
ever so effectual— were all the traffic with the other places previously
enumerated completely abolished, still this would scarcely dry up one
tear that flows to swell the tide of African misery. Millions are still
slaves—slaves to slaves in Africa. It is in Africa, therefore, that this
evil must be rooted out—by African hands and African exertions chiefly
that it can be destroyed. It is a waste of time and a waste of means, an
aggravation of the disorder, to keep lopping off the smaller branches of
a malignant, a vigorous and reproductive plant, while the root and stem
remain uninjured, carefully supplied with nourishment, and beyond our
reach. Half the sums we have expended in this manner, would have planted
us firmly in Interior Africa, and rooted up slavery for ever. Only teach
them and shew them that we will give them more for their produce than
for the hand that rears it, and the work is done. All other methods and
means will prove ineffectual.

It is the policy of the Moors and Arabs to keep Christians, in any
numbers, from penetrating into the interior of Africa. Fanaticism and
interest make them oppose all such attempts. This jealousy is heightened
by superstitious fears; for there runs a tradition amongst all the
Mahommedans in Africa, that the Christians are one day to wrest the
country from them. The Negro States on the south of Africa act with
similar policy, and for similar reasons. They do every thing they can to
hinder Europeans from having communication with the nations in the
interior. They want a monopoly of every trade carried on with the
interior; and all these people are convinced, that if ever Europeans can
find their way into the interior, their monopoly, and all their power
and influence, are gone. It is evident, therefore, that till all these
barriers which stand in the way of African improvement are broken down
and destroyed, no great progress will ever be made in civilizing Africa,
or of rendering that continent serviceable to her inhabitants, or to the
rest of the world. Protection and conquest, permanent and commanding,
can only accomplish the object. Not that conquest, which, springing from
unprincipled ambition, overruns to destroy, but that conquest which
subdues and controls to restrain evil, and establishes what is good.
This once civilized a part of Africa—this only can accomplish such a
work again.

While the first and determined effort must be made to put down every
foreign slave trade with, or in the interior of Africa, it may be a
question, how far it would be politic and safe to intermeddle with the
internal slavery there existing, except to ameliorate it. This, as in
Russia, exists to an enormous extent. The number of slaves in Africa is
about three-fourths of her population. But we must not grasp at too much
at first. We must get their chiefs to go along with us at the outset.
This, it is possible, we might not effect with that cordiality which is
necessary, should we require all their slaves to be made free at once.
In Africa there is no such a thing as a freeman hiring himself to
labour; it is all done by slaves; consequently, without them no labour
could be carried on. Also, we must create the labour in which freemen
could be employed. With the present internal establishments, therefore,
it might be prudent not to interfere further than to see strict justice
maintained to all in their relative situations, till time prepared their
minds for the change, and till a general system of industry, and influx
of wealth from labour, enabled the freemen and their chiefs to
emancipate their slaves, without reducing themselves to beggary and
want: In short, till the one could procure labour to earn his
subsistence, and the other free labourers to keep up his former rank and
independence. But while we did not interfere too rashly in these
internal regulations, so as to bring unnecessary difficulties on our
hands, and which might blast our future prospects, still it must never
be forgotten, that no time and no opportunity ought to be lost in making
freedom universal in Africa; and every exertion must be made, in every
way and at all times, by precept and by example, to prepare the minds of
the one part of the population in Africa to give, and the other to
receive it. We must instruct this to be done; and, above all, we must
counsel and direct all external traffic in slaves to cease. With that
there can and must be no compromise, if we wish to benefit Africa. But
let these instructions and commands be issued and carried into effect in
the spirit of moderation, conciliation, and peace—by that spirit which,
placing ourselves in the situation of our neighbour, would do as it
wishes to be done by; and with this, our object cannot fail, in time, of
complete success. We must be the sole arbiter and director in this part
of Africa; and therefore our intentions must be honest, our actions
just, and our sentence irrevocable.

In establishing such a colony in Africa, we must not, as in the case of
America and New Holland, go with a few unarmed settlers, as amidst a few
straggling savages. We must go with a force that will command respect
and obedience, and be able to resent and punish every aggression made,
or insult offered. A force less than the garrison of Gibraltar would
command all the interior of Northern Africa; and a few Congreve rockets
would serve to disperse and reduce the most numerous armies that the
most powerful sovereigns in these parts could arm against us. Europeans,
indeed, could not undergo in these climates the same fatigues as the
natives; but the superiority of the former in knowledge and skill would
compensate for the mere physical superiority of the latter. The opinion
universally entertained of European superiority, would, of itself,
judiciously applied, half conquer Africa. Besides, we could levy and
organize a force, to any extent judged prudent, amongst these natives,
to aid in the control and command of the country. We have done this in
India, and why cannot we do it in Africa? Nay, we might make India
subdue Northern Africa;—the Ganges the mighty engine which would give us
the command of the Niger. From the banks of the former we could obtain a
voluntary force, which would enable us to dictate to the latter. By
these means we should make India the means of preparing for us an empire
of equal importance to replace her strength, when that, in course of
political changes, is withdrawn from our allegiance. Once established on
the Niger, the work is done. The resources and energies of Africa would
complete the object. There are many of the people, both Moors, Arabs,
and Negroes, who, though they could not be made agriculturists,
followers of commerce and manufactures, would yet make good soldiers;
and, commanded by European officers, would, with a small proportion of
European troops, be equal to every purpose. The preservation of the
health of European troops in warm climates, is now better understood
than formerly, and in the interior of Africa there are numerous healthy
situations.

There is but one opinion amongst all those who are, or who have had an
opportunity of being acquainted with Africa, her population, and present
institutions, namely, that colonization, fixed and stable, can only
render her any permanent benefit. The mere abolition of the external
slave trade, they all agree, will do little or nothing for the welfare
of Africa. Governor Ludlam, than whom no person better understood the
African character, or interests of Africa, goes even a step farther. “To
abolish the slave trade,” says he, “is not to abolish the violent
passions which now find vent in that particular direction. Were it to
cease, the misery of Africa would arise from other causes; but it does
not follow that Africa would be less miserable: she might even be less
miserable, and yet be savage and uncivilized. The abolition of the
external slave trade does not actually set us forward one step in our
course to civilize or benefit Africa. Nay,” says he, “where they have
been in some measure improved, I rather think they will sink back into
their former state, which is still the state of the natives two or three
hundred miles inland (from Sierra Leone.) In the next place, the
administration of every African government must become extremely severe,
if not extremely bloody. When so effectual a punishment as slavery is
done away, which yet, as it sheds no blood, is readily executed on petty
criminals, and in doubtful cases, severe punishments, and more terrible
examples, must be introduced. Every ancient institution, the power of
every hereditary chief, must now be sustained by blood instead of
slavery. While the punishment of many small crimes has, by means of the
external slave trade, been raised into slavery, it is not less true,
that the punishment of some great ones has been sunk into it. The
abolition, therefore, will be of little benefit to Africa, unless plans
for its improvement and civilization be vigorously acted upon. That
civilization will follow conquest, I readily allow;” and, adds he,
“there will be no question that the French will diligently endeavour to
extend their influence in Africa by all possible means, and as
diligently endeavour to drive us out of it.” (_Letter to Zach. Macauly,
Esq. Sierra Leone, April_ 14, 1807.)

This was the opinion of one intimately acquainted with the west coast.
Every passing day has served to confirm his opinions, formed from actual
observation. Let us attend to the observations and opinions of another
intelligent observer, made in Eastern Africa, namely Burkhardt. Page
344, he says, “Were all the outlets to Sudan closed to the slave trade,
and the caravans which carry on the traffic with Barbary, Egypt, and
Arabia, prevented from procuring farther supplies, still slavery would
universally prevail in Sudan itself; for as long as these countries are
possessed by Mussulmans, whose religion induces them to make war upon
the idolatrous Negroes, whose domestic wants require a constant supply
of servants and shepherds, and who, considering slaves as a medium of
exchange in lieu of money, are as eager to obtain them as other nations
would be to explore the African mines, slavery must continue to exist in
the heart of Africa; nor can it cease, until the Negroes shall become
possessed of the means of repelling the attacks, and resisting the
oppression of their Mussulmen neighbours. It is not from foreign nations
that the Blacks can obtain deliverance; this great work must be effected
by themselves, and can be the result only of successful resistance. The
European governments who have settlements on the coasts of Africa, may
contribute to it by commerce, and by the introduction among the Negroes
of arts and industry, which must ultimately lead them to a superiority
over the Mussulmans in war. Europe, therefore, will have done but little
for the Blacks, if the abolition of the Atlantic slave trade, _which is
trifling_ when compared with the slavery of the interior, is not
followed up by some wise and grand plan, tending to the civilization of
the continent.”

Colonization, permanent and powerful, is this “wise and grand plan.”
Established in the heart of Africa, Great Britain would be the arbiter
of Africa. Her precept, and example, and assistance, would serve to
teach and enable every Negro potentate to repel all foreign aggression,
and the beneficial tendency of employing their present slave population
in cultivating their own kingdoms. This would procure them wealth.
Wealth would induce them to seek security, and enable them to obtain the
means of protecting themselves from external injury; or, where they
could not of themselves accomplish this object, bring them to place
themselves under the wings of the power which could do so. On this grand
and wise principle, colonization and cultivation were the first
settlements of the Portuguese established in Africa. The beneficial
results soon became most extensive and apparent, even after the
attention of that power was unfortunately withdrawn to another quarter
of the world. The number, and extent, and prosperity, of their
settlements in Africa are well known. Unfortunately, however, for
Portugal, and still more unfortunately for Africa, the spirit, strength,
and influence of Portugal received a check in Europe, and the discovery
of, and desire for cultivating America attracted her attention, withdrew
her affections and care from these settlements in Africa; and not only
so, but by a most erroneous policy, and barbarous system, induced her to
withdraw the strength of Africa to cultivate the fields of America. In
this manner her extensive colonies in the former were lost, or became
only points for carrying on the slave trade; and all the good she had
done, and might have done to Africa and to herself, was lost and
disregarded. What she might have done, and what every European power has
so long neglected, it is now in our power, under more favourable
circumstances, to set about and accomplish.

There is, and can be but one opinion about the policy of extending our
connections political and commercial with Africa. In the manner pointed
out, these can only be permanently and beneficially extended. It must
cost some expense, but the result will repay it. It is to her colonial
system that Great Britain is indebted for her greatness and her glory.
It is these possessions which enabled her to resist and beat down
beneath her feet, the world united against her. It is her colonial trade
that gives her sailors, acquainted with every coast, and inured to every
climate. The whole trade of Northern Africa would augment more than
others the number of these most useful subjects. Nor is it merely the
number employed in that trade which such an intercourse would give her.
The command of African produce would give her the trade to other
quarters of the world, and by so much more, add to the numbers of her
seamen. These would man her fleets with determined hands on every
emergency. On these things depend the preponderance of Britain in the
councils and affairs of Europe. If neglected, that preponderance is
gone, and our existence, as a nation, is endangered. Our formidable
rival France, understands this well. She has learned it by experience.
Had the counsels of Talleyrand been followed by her Government, the
fatal disasters which befel France had never happened, nor the glory and
power of Britain been so raised and extended. To procure and rear up
colonies, was at all times the earnest recommendation to his countrymen,
of this crafty but wise politician. He placed Britain before their eyes
as a most striking example of what such possessions did do, and could
enable her to perform.

In his valuable pamphlet, written during the French Consulate, for the
purpose mentioned, he says of Britain. “Her navy and her commerce are at
present all her trust. France may add Italy and Germany to her dominions
with less detriment to Britain than will follow the acquisition of a
navy, and the extension of her trade. Whatever gives colonies to France,
supplies her with ships, sailors, manufactures, and husbandmen.
Victories by land can only give her mutinous subjects; who, instead of
augmenting the national force by their riches or numbers, contribute
only to disperse and enfeeble that force; but the growth of colonies
supplies her with zealous citizens, and the increase of real wealth, and
increase of effective numbers, is the certain consequence.”

“What would Germany, Italy, Spain, and France, combining their strength,
do against England? They might assemble in millions on the shores of the
Channel, but _there_ would be the limits of their enmity. Without ships
to carry them over, without experienced mariners to navigate these
ships, Britain would only deride the pompous preparation. The moment we
leave the shore, her fleets are ready to pounce upon us, to disperse and
destroy our ineffectual armaments. There lies her security; in her
insular situation and her navy consist her impregnable defence. Her navy
is, in every respect, the offspring of her trade. To rob her of that,
therefore, _is to beat down her last wall, and to fill up her last
moat_. To gain it to ourselves, is to enable us to take advantage of her
deserted and defenceless borders, and to complete the humiliation of our
only remaining competitor.” These are great and serious truths, which
every British statesman, and indeed every Briton should engrave on their
memories. France will always consider us as her competitor; and she
will, accordingly, pursue the plans which can only render her successful
against our independence and prosperity. This, Britain ought carefully
to remember.

The change contemplated in Africa could not be wrought in a day. But
were we once firmly established, in a commanding attitude, on the Niger,
and an end put to the two great scourges of Africa, superstition and an
external slave trade, the progress of improvement would be rapid, and
the advantages great. Commanding the Niger, none could interfere with
us. The Arab and the Moor would no longer be tempted, by gain from
traffic, to brave the dangers of the great Zahaara; and, if from
ambition or love of plunder they did so, then meeting a foe which could
effectually oppose them, they would not venture to repeat their
incursions and attacks. Thus cut off from the means of obtaining slaves
from the interior of Africa to labour for them, as they are now debarred
from enslaving Christians, they would be compelled to labour—compelled
to follow the example of civilized nations—compelled, in a word, to
become civilized also. Nor would the consequences stop here. Those
fierce hordes, rendered savage by the hardships they endure, and who
frequent the great Zahaara to plunder the traveller and the merchant,
and who are tempted with the hopes of wealth to lead such unsettled
lives, finding this trade no longer carried on by these routes, would be
compelled to emerge from their burning wastes, seek more habitable
spots, and thus come more within the power of civilized man. The
accomplishment and carrying into effect the object and measures I have
endeavoured to point out, would not only civilize Southern and Central
Africa, but all the northern and eastern parts thereof; and is, perhaps,
the only way by which it can be done, except by the conquest of all
those countries by some formidable European power, which, even if one
capable of doing that could be found, the jealousies of the other powers
would oppose and prevent. But the same reason does not apply to
controlling the Southern and Central parts of Africa, because that does
not immediately threaten the independence, repose, or interests of any
European power.

But it will, and may very justly be asked, what right have we, or any
other European nation, to go and fix ourselves in Africa, conquer and
controul the native powers, levy taxes, and make them our subjects? The
answer is plain; we have no such right, nor is any such right here
claimed or advocated. In every thing that has been stated, or that may
yet be stated, in the prosecution of this subject, I have viewed matters
prospectively, and considered our connection with Africa and our empire
there, as extensively and permanently formed. But there is not the
smallest idea of wishing to recommend that we should, or hope expressed
that we would, enter Africa with the sword drawn to accomplish these
objects. Quite the contrary. Fernando Po we may take possession of with
the permission of the Portuguese, (should that be deemed necessary to
ask,) without invading or violating, in the slightest degree, any right
of the natives, or those of any native power in Africa. For the
settlement inland, let us purchase the right and title to the space of
country we may judge necessary for that purpose, from any of the native
Princes or powers to whom it may belong. This was done at Sierra Leone,
and may be done in any other part of Africa very readily, and at a
trifling expence.

This done, there fixed and fortified, we have an unquestionable right to
extend our connections in Africa by trade, and by treaties. We can form
alliances, take nations under our protection who may solicit the same,
(many certainly would,) and thus situated, we should have the clearest
right to resist, repel, and conquer every power which might dare to
attack ourselves, or any of our allies. In this manner, as in India, but
at much less trouble and expence, our influence, power, and empire,
would be felt, would be consolidated, extended, and securely fixed in
Africa; and, ere long, it would comprehend all the countries which have
been pointed out, either as friends, or immediately under our sway. It
is in this manner I would recommend, and wish to see, and hope to see,
our power and commerce extended in Africa; and, in this manner, it can
and would extend, not only without infringing upon any legitimate
rights, but extending inestimable blessings and benefits to all.

We have attempted to do much for Africa, but hitherto without effect. We
have expended millions in endeavouring to arrest the career of the slave
trade, and upon Sierra Leone; but, in regard to the former, it may be
stated altogether without effect. Let it not be supposed that I mean any
reflections upon any one on account of the measures which have been
pursued, but the expence has hitherto been such as to be a serious item
in our national expenditure, and all without any good resulting to
either to ourselves or Africa, at least such as offers any prospect of
permanent advantage. It was only the other day that, for one year,
L.150,000 was voted to pay Portugal for illegal captures of her slave
ships, and L.18,000 more as the expences for commissions to watch over
and investigate these matters. Large as these sums are, still they are
comparatively trifling to what has at different times previously been
paid to Spain and Portugal, and in rewards to our naval officers for
seizing those very vessels which this nation is thus obliged to repay. A
portion, however, of the sums mentioned, and not a very large portion,
would be sufficient to commence an establishment such as that
recommended, and which, from the trade it would draw to it and protect,
would not only be soon able to support itself, but to repay whatever
advances government may, in the first instance, have made. On this
principle also ought colonies only to be formed in Africa, to draw
wealth to Britain, not to take it from her. We have done much for
Africa. We are the best entitled of any European nation to secure to
ourselves whatever advantages she may possess. To extend and to increase
these advantages, a liberal policy in all things is absolutely
necessary, and it may be equally advantageous to Africa and to Great
Britain that foreign ships should be admitted into such a colony or
colonies with the produce of their respective countries which Africa may
require, and be permitted in return to take away cargoes of African
produce to their own countries, but to these countries alone. This, so
far from injuring our commerce in that quarter, would tend rather to
increase it, or, where it might militate against our interests, a
trifling duty imposed upon foreigners, might, without materially
injuring them, make up the difference.

In an undertaking of this kind, we are not to be led away by too
sanguine hopes of immediate success; because, if we are so, we shall be
completely and unnecessarily discouraged at any untoward circumstance
which may, in the course of events, come in our way. Neither are we to
imagine that the population of Africa, or indeed any other population
within the Torrid Zone, can be brought to exert themselves in the same
manner as the hardier natives of temperate climates. But were the
exertions of the former only brought to equal one half the labours of
the latter, the gain would be immense to Africa and to the world. It
would give a new turn, and a different tone, to the feelings and
pursuits of the population of that unhappy country. But nothing can be
done—nothing ever will be done, to alter their present indolent and
inactive mode of life, till justice and general security are spread
throughout these extensive regions. It would be vain to expect industry
or exertion on their parts, in order to procure the comforts and the
luxuries of life, when no one can call any thing he may possess his own,
or where the superior wealth which he does possess serves only to mark
him out as the prey of the unfeeling robber or sovereign despot.
Formidable as these two scourges are in Africa, still they are only so
to the feeble and imbecile population, whom superstition and ignorance
have, from time immemorial, taught to bend under the yoke. Before the
power, energy, and intelligence—before the firmness, prudence, and
justice of Great Britain, these would vanish. Those fearful butcheries,
under the name of “_customs_,” at the death of any person of note, so
prevalent in Southern Africa, would disappear. Industry and commerce
would rear their heads. Christianity would enter, with Liberty in her
train; and the unprincipled despot, and the sanguinary freebooter, would
shrink back into the deserts, and be heard of no more.

The exertion on the part of Great Britain to accomplish all this would
be small. The power of the Arab is declining; it is easy to contend with
a power in that condition. The climate opposes some obstacles, the
population of Africa none. The smallest gun-brig in our navy would lay
the nations dwelling on both banks of the Niger, from Bammakoo to its
mouth, from Bornou to Benin, prostrate before us, with awe, obedience,
and respect. Coming as their friend—overthrowing what is evil— rearing
up, encouraging and protecting what is just, we should teach the nations
in these extensive regions to assume their rank amongst the sons of men.
To accomplish this, we have, by means of the Niger, a safe and an easy
road. Let no other nation pre-occupy it.




                               * * * * *
                           TRADE AND COMMERCE
                                   OF
                        NORTHERN CENTRAL AFRICA.
                               * * * * *


                           TRADE AND COMMERCE
                                   OF
                        NORTHERN CENTRAL AFRICA.

                               * * * * *

                                CHAP. I.

_Colonies necessary to Great Britain — France anxious to colonize Africa
— New markets can alone relieve our trade — Old overstocked — Africa,
the best field — Superior productions — Country near the Niger —
Powerful, populous, cultivated and commercial states — Large cities —
Numerous valuable productions — Africa long neglected — Formerly
enriched other countries — Articles of export and import — Particular
enumeration and value of those most in demand — Salt — Ostrich feathers
— Spices — Precious stones — Gums — Drugs — Dye stuffs — Gold dust —
Ivory — Gunpowder, Fire arms, &c. — Value of articles — Great profits on
trade — Immense advantages of a water conveyance — Hardships attending
the trade at present — Value of articles at the Gold coast and the
interior — Extent and value of the trade at present — Would supply our
West India Colonies with provisions — Obtain plenty of fine cotton —
Would open up a trade to the Cape of Good Hope and India — Abolition of
the slave trade would relieve and cultivate Africa — If not checked our
West India colonies must be ruined — Infringe the rights of no civilized
nation in colonizing Africa — Three modes of establishing the trade — A
chartered company the best — Regulations under which to be formed —
Government must countenance and support such an undertaking — Plans to
be adopted and pursued — General reflections on the climate of Africa,
and the importance of the contemplated undertaking._


The high rank and preponderance of Great Britain in the scale of
nations, can only be maintained by extensive commerce. This alone can
give us naval superiority, and that can be secured to us only by
colonial establishments. In the present depressed state of our
manufactures and commerce, no permanent relief can be hoped for, if new
markets for our trade be not discovered and established. The old, of
which we had the monopoly, have, from the industry, the skill, and
exertions of the population of other countries, become less beneficial
to us than formerly; and for the reasons stated, as well as from the
poverty of other countries, the demand from us is greatly reduced.
Besides this, we must look forward to new colonies to replace such as in
the course of time we must lose. Amongst this number are our North
American possessions, and the East Indies, all of which will, sooner or
later, throw off our yoke. Our West India colonies are also on the
decline. The system that made them is destroyed; and it is quite
certain, that a revolution in their internal establishments, violent or
gradual, is not far distant, either of which will work such a change as
will render these possessions of little value as commercial colonies.
They are also daily getting more and more into contact with dangerous
and ambitious neighbours, which must render the tenure of these
possessions more insecure, and perhaps force us into future contests,
the expences attending which, the parent state may, from their altered
economy, grudge to bear. All these considerations render it imperious
upon us to turn our thoughts to commence establishments in some other
parts of the world, that by gradual improvement these may render the
decay and ultimate loss of some of our present colonial establishments
as light and little felt as possible. In establishing such colonies,
care should be taken to keep them free from the inconveniences, dangers,
and changes to which several of our present colonial establishments are
so much exposed. There is, perhaps, no part of the globe where new
commercial establishments could be set down more easily, or where these
could be more effectually protected than in Africa. It is at present a
noble, and at present an undisputed, but not long to remain an
undisputed field.

The French nation is most anxious and most earnest to extend their
settlements and influence in Africa. Deprived by the Revolution and by
wars, of, I may say, all their valuable colonial possessions, France
looks to Africa with a longing eye. To cultivate colonial produce in
Africa by means of her population was the idea of Talleyrand, and the
plan of her late Imperial Despot; and nothing but the constant wars in
which his restless and unprincipled ambition involved him, and his
ultimate downfall, prevented him from putting this plan into execution,
with an energy and means which would have altered the whole face of
European colonial policy in tropical regions. The same advice which
suggested this plan has yet the ear of the French government, and every
proceeding on the part of France shews clearly, that she has the object
in view as soon as circumstances will permit. America has also turned
her attention to Africa; and an expedition for a settlement, and another
for discovery, was lately sent out to the west coast of Africa for
similar purposes and similar views. The spot that we ought to choose for
our exertions, may—nay, must soon be pitched upon by one or other of
these powers.

The object which this country ought at present to attend to, is, as has
been shortly noticed, to look out for and obtain new markets for the
productions of her industry. Laying open the trade to India and to
China, taking off all the restrictions with which our commerce is at
present unavoidably fettered, will merely afford a temporary relief to
the mercantile interest of the country. Other nations may adhere to
restrictive systems, and, at all events, we will be met on equal terms
on that point. In and with the countries particularly mentioned, and
many others not enumerated, we have and will continue more and more to
have the unencumbered efforts of the mental skill and physical exertions
of their whole population to contend with. To no civilized country can
we at present send manufactures in which we do not find native
manufactures springing up to oppose, and to be encouraged, in preference
to ours. This is what we had reason to expect, and of which we have no
just reason to complain. In France, Germany, the kingdom of the
Netherlands, Russia, and Prussia, this is remarkably the case. The
renovated governments of several nations of Europe, the moment they are
got clear of political storms, will turn their attention to similar
objects. In India our manufactures are met by cheapness and superiority.
The British manufacturer and merchant may there gain the superiority;
but, in effecting their object, both may be forced into sacrifices which
no future compensation will be able to repay; while any partiality shewn
in that trade may very readily raise a tempest, which will tear up to
its foundations the fabric of our power in India. In China we may say
they exchange no manufactures with us. South America is convulsed with
civil war, and, end as that contest may, still the greater part of the
real property of the country, namely, the slaves, by whom alone the land
was cultivated and produce raised, is, by their emancipation, destroyed;
and it is evident that a long time must elapse before the loss is
replaced or injury repaired under another system. The United States are
stripped of all their neutral carrying trade, and all that valuable
trade to our West India colonies so long their great gain and support;
and thus situated, these States cannot, if they were inclined, take from
us any thing like the quantity of manufactures which they formerly did.
Besides, they are endeavouring to rear up manufactures amongst
themselves, while the independence of South America will lay open to all
the world a trade of which Great Britain, from particular circumstances,
has long enjoyed almost the complete monopoly. It is a fact that they
prefer the linens of Silesia and other manufactures of Germany to many
articles of our manufacture.

New markets, therefore, can only afford this country a great and a
permanent relief;—new markets in countries where no competition from
manufactures produced by native skill and industry can for ages lessen
the value of, the demand for, or come in competition with ours;—new
markets which can supply us, in return for the productions of our skill,
with the precious metals, and with the raw materials for many branches
of our trade, and other articles which we at present must take from
rival commercial states. Africa is that country, and the natives in the
interior of the northern central parts thereof the people we have to
look to as consumers of our manufactures, and from whom we can fear no
competition at all. The introduction of gold dust alone would tend to
lessen the value of money raised by the resumption of cash payments, and
consequently tend greatly to lighten the load of our national debt.

On the United States of America, we may say, we chiefly depend for the
superior cottons for our finer manufactures. War betwixt those States
and this country is by no means an improbable event. Their interests
would no doubt, notwithstanding, lead them to get their cotton to a
British market; but, during war, it is evident that it could only find
its way at an enhanced rate. This additional price might be such as
would raise the value of our manufactures to a price beyond what
Continental nations could afford, or are inclined to give, and therefore
lead them more and more to encourage manufactures of their own growth,
and to manufacture for themselves. It must therefore be of the first
importance to our cotton manufacturers to be independent of America for
a supply of fine cottons. Africa, as we shall presently see more at
large, can furnish that supply. The tea trade to China is a continued
drain upon this country for specie. From good authority, it seems that
this valuable plant may be cultivated to advantage on the rich plains
which extend between the Rio Volta and the Niger. Also the old Arabian
traveller, Batouta, who had visited China, states, that in the interior
parts of Africa, along the Niger, which he visited, the tea plant grew
abundantly. Here is another and a mighty inducement to secure as ours
the produce of these regions. In comparison with China, these parts are
at the door; and the difference in freight and insurance alone, would
give the tea there produced a decided superiority in the European
market, and in the markets of every part of the western world. It could
also be obtained from Africa in exchange for our manufactures, and not
as from China, in exchange for specie only.

It is to the Niger and his tributary streams that our attention ought to
be turned. The magnitude and importance of these, have elsewhere been
sufficiently dwelt on. The wide extent of Africa through which these
rivers run, is susceptible of great improvement, and is every way
adapted for trade. Here is not a barren wilderness inhabited by a few
savage individuals, who possess not one idea of useful knowledge or
civilized life. We should not, in Africa, wander as the first European
settlers did on the banks of the Maranon and the La Plata, for hundreds
of miles, without seeing a habitation where a half civilized human being
would be content to shelter his head. No! numerous, powerful, and
populous cities, rise around us on every side. The inhabitants of these
are indeed unlettered barbarians, compared to Europeans, but the
materials for a better state of society are most abundant, and want only
a power to direct, to excite, and to controul them.

Bornou is a very extensive and powerful monarchy. The capital thereof is
so large, that travellers, in describing its magnitude, state, that
Cairo, which contains half a million of people, “_is a trifle to it_.”
Kashna, which is subject to Bornou, is said to contain 1000 towns and
villages. The country is represented as being very pleasant, beautifully
diversified with hill and dale, very fertile, well cultivated, abounding
in docks and herds, and very populous. In this kingdom, they dye goat
skins red and yellow in a very superior manner. These form a very
considerable branch of trade with the Barbary States, particularly with
Morocco, from whence they are carried into most of the countries in
Europe. The kingdom of Asben, of which Agadez is the capital, is a
beautiful and a very rich country, populous and well cultivated. From
Assouda to Agadez, and also southward to Tegomah, it is particularly so.
Silver is said to be so plentiful in this country, that the natives
construct their defensive armour and the corslets of their horses with
that metal. Houssa is also a very populous country, and throughout all
the territories included under this name, the population are represented
as being a very superior race of people to any other in the interior of
Africa. The environs of Timbuctoo, and for many days journey north-east
of it, is all a cultivated and populous country. On the Niger, above it
for several hundred miles, we know from undoubted authority, that the
population is very considerable, and that both agriculture and commerce
are successfully and extensively carried on. About the beginning of last
century, the sovereigns of Morocco carried on a great and lucrative
trade with Timbuctoo, by means of regular caravans, properly guarded,
and assisted by regular establishments in the Great Desert. This trade,
once the chief source of the wealth of Morocco, has been for many years
nearly lost, owing to political revolutions in that country. It is now,
however, about being re-organised by the Emperor of Morocco, under the
direction of an Englishman, and upon a better and a securer footing than
before.

Descending the Niger, we find at Wassanah every mark of cultivation and
commerce. Betwixt this place and Timbuctoo, there are, no doubt, many
fine districts, particularly where Kuku is situated, so “famous for
magnitude” in the early ages of Arabian power. From Wassanah to the sea,
and westward to Ashantee, we hear of considerable attention to
agriculture and unremitting attention to commerce. All ranks are traders
in Africa. No one thinks mercantile matters and pursuits beneath his
notice, or that he is degraded by following trade. On the contrary, the
merchants amongst them are accounted the chief ones of the earth; and it
is remarkable, that in many places traders pass free and unmolested
between nations at war with each other. In every part of the Delta of
Benin commerce is eagerly followed. Westward from the Rio Volta the
population is numerous, most of them very industrious, and all actively
engaged in business of some description or other. The country from the
Rio Volta to the Rio de Formosa, is represented as being uncommonly
beautiful; and the agriculture in many places such as would not disgrace
many parts of Europe. Inland, the country known under the name of
Wangara, or those parts of Africa supposed to go under this name, is in
all probability a country considerably advanced in civilization. “It is
the country of gold and aromatics,” says Bakui. Gold dust is amazingly
plentiful all along the Niger, from the sources downwards. The quality
is particularly fine about Bourrè above Tangarari. It is found also in
Houssa, and about the sources of the Bahr Kulla. Silver, copper, and
iron, abound in various parts of Africa, particularly in those countries
situated upon the Niger, in the early part of his course, and towards
the sources of the Senegal and the Gambia. The latter is of a very fine
quality. Many other rich stores would undoubtedly be added to our
knowledge were these countries explored, as doubtless they would be, if
subjected to Great Britain.

The cities in these places are numerous and large. Sego, we know from
good authority, contains 30,000 inhabitants; yet it is but a trifling
place to Walet, Timbuctoo, Houssa, Wassanah, and Kashna, on the north-
east side of the Niger. Coomassie, Yahndi, Abomey, Benin, Ardrah, Lagos,
and many other places, are all great towns. Moors and Negroes no doubt
amplify in their descriptions of places, but still, allowing largely for
that, sufficient remains to shew the importance of all these places. The
country throughout is covered with smaller towns, villages, hamlets; and
to most of these places navigable branches of the Niger extend. There
cannot be a doubt, but, that these places would prove prodigious outlets
for all the manufactures of this country. Even at the commencement the
demand would be considerable, and every succeeding voyage would increase
it.

Every kind of colonial produce can be cultivated in Africa. The rich
soil from the Volta eastward, in all the Delta of Benin, and along the
Niger northward, are particularly adapted for coffee, sugar, &c. Cotton
of a quality remarkably fine may be had in abundance. Rice is found
every where, and in great quantities. Indian corn of the very finest
quality is in all places most abundant, and which of itself would form a
great source of wealth and a most valuable and important branch of
commerce. Various kinds of dyes and dyewoods are very plentiful. The
qualities are very superior. Some of them are said to resist both acids
and light. To this country the importation of such articles would be
invaluable. The fine navigable rivers render the conveyance and shipment
of all these heavy articles of produce easy and cheap, an advantage
which no territory distant from a water conveyance can possess. Such
means of conveyance are advantageous every where, but within the Tropics
these are incalculably so. The Jaboos, a superior race of people,
situated between Lagos and Benin, use the dye stuffs of the country with
great ingenuity; and the manufactures carried on by the population about
the junction of the Gir with the Niger are numerous and well executed.
Immense herds of deer traverse the fertile plains situated north of
Iffla or Popo. Teak trees and other very fine kinds of timber for ship-
building are every where to be had in any quantity. Various descriptions
of timber also fit for furniture, and some fine kinds peculiar to
Africa, can be readily obtained. Palm oil, which finds ready market in
this country, is to be had in abundance. But it is impossible to
enumerate, within the bounds of a publication like this, every article
of commerce which may even now be found in Africa. What must it become
when science is introduced, and property and life made secure?

The legitimate commerce of this portion of Africa has long been
neglected. In early ages it was certainly of much more importance than
it is now. There is good reason to believe that the Roman empire
obtained the greater part of the gold which enriched it from the centre
of Africa. After the Arabs extended their arms into those parts of
Africa, commerce was very active, and the quantity of gold brought from
Sudan was very great. Morocco was the great emporium of this traffic,
and from thence this precious metal was circulated into most of the
nations of Europe. The Sovereigns of the former country were so sensible
of the immense advantages which this trade conferred, that they carried
large armies across the desert, subdued, and for a long time held in
subjection the finest parts of Sudan. Timbuctoo was the chief seat of
their power. With that city and Fez there was a regular and open
communication. Segelmessa, and all the towns south of Mount Atlas, were
enriched by the traffic carried on with the land of the Negroes. In the
days of Leo Africanus, who visited all these parts, this trade was
carried on with much industry. Segelmessa, in particular, was greatly
enriched by it. So also was the province of Dara, in its immediate
neighbourhood. “Their castles in this province,” says Leo, “are
inhabited by goldsmiths and other artificers, and so are all the regions
lying in the way from Timbuctoo to Fez.”

Jinnë was famous in the days of Leo for cotton, and grain, and gold; all
of which they exchanged with the caravans from the northward. The
inhabitants of Timbuctoo were particularly wealthy. There were many
shops of artificers and merchants, especially such as wove cotton and
linen cloth. The king had many plates and sceptres of gold of great
weight and value. Their coin had no stamp. Perhaps it was what is now
called Wangara gold bars. There are Negroes in our West India islands,
from the interior of Africa, who distinctly state that there are in
their countries shops and places of business not inferior to many in
some of the best towns in these islands. Gago was also an important
commercial station: “It is wonderful,” said Leo, “to see what plenty of
merchandize is daily brought hither, and how costly and sumptuous all
things be.” The arms of Morocco also reached this distant place, and it
is said that Muley Hamed, son of the famous Muley Moluck, sovereign of
Morocco, some time about the year 1590, brought from Gago 75 quintals,
and from Timbuctoo 60 quintals of gold dust, making together 135
quintals or 16,065 lbs. avoirdupois weight of gold, the whole worth
about L.962,100 Sterling. (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_, p. 520.) The yearly
tribute of Timbuctoo was 60 quintals. Succeeding sovereigns continued to
draw immense supplies from the same quarter of this precious metal. In
the days of Leo, the central parts of Africa received all their foreign
supplies from the northern side of the great desert. The length of the
journey, and the difficulties and dangers attendant thereon, rendered
the price of every article of foreign manufacture very high. Thus horses
bought in Europe at 10 ducats each, sold at Gago for 40 and 50 ducats.
The coarsest European cloths brought four, and the finest 15 ducats per
ell. One ell of Venice or Turkey scarlet cloth, sold as high as 30
ducats per ell. A sword brought four crowns; spears, bridles, &c. were
proportionally dear. Salt, however, exceeded every other commodity in
value. The duty in Gago was L.5 for a camel load of 600 lbs. The prime
cost at Tegazza was only four shillings per load. At Timbuctoo also this
article bore a very high value. Though some of the articles mentioned
now reach these interior parts from the Gulph of Guinea, still their
value in the interior is, from various circumstances, not greatly
reduced.

The articles chiefly imported into the different places connected with
the trade of interior Africa are as follows, viz. into the eastern parts
from the Red Sea, into Abyssinia, Nubia, and westward to Kordefan and
Darfur, they import, cambrics, baft (used as currency,) India goods,
such as Bengal silks, China silks, nankeens, cotton cloth, cotton
stuffs, refined sugar, in small loaves of about four pounds each, linen,
paper, sheep-skins, tar, looking-glasses, silver trinkets for female
ornaments, soap, files, scissars, thimbles, needles, razors, sword
blades, coral, spices, such as cloves, mace, nutmegs, cinnamon, ginger,
black-pepper, India and Mokha beads, and a great variety of other
articles. From the north and from the sea-coasts on the west, there is
sold and carried into interior Africa, viz. manufactured silks, damasks,
brocade, velvet, raw silk, combs of box and ivory, gold, thread, paper,
cochineal, (from France, Italy, &c.) red woollen caps, baize, check
linens, light coarse woollen cloths, blue linens, long cloths, superfine
and plain brilliant cloths, and mixtures, and cassimeres, Turkey
carpets, glazed cottons, printed cottons, calicoes, cotton netting,
veils, printed and calico handkerchiefs, muslin dresses and scarfs,
cotton stockings, dimities, creas, rowans, Britannias and Irish linens,
plattillas, tissues, muslins, (mulls) gum-benzoin, gum, tartar, cassia,
vitriol, brimstone, alum, copper, brass, iron nails, copper nails, brass
nails, dagger blades, knives, fire-arms, powder, and shot, all kinds of
hardware for common use, trinkets, beads, glass-ware, salt, iron,
tobacco, lead, cocoa, coffee, sandals, cushions, Silesias, all India
cotton and linen goods, brandy, rum, and various other articles
previously enumerated.

From eastern Sudan the exports are, viz. slaves, gold dust, gum-arabic,
gum-liban, (a kind of incense much esteemed,) leather, whips, rhinoceros
horns, very valuable, ostrich feathers, very fine, ebony, ivory, musk,
&c. To Morocco and other Barbary states are exported, viz. slaves, gold
dust, gold bars, gold trinkets, _B’kore_, a kind of frankincense,
greatly esteemed by Mahommedans, guza serawie, (grains of paradise,)
ivory, amber, ostrich feathers, gum-Arabic or gum-Sudan, gum-Copal,
assafoetida, dyed skins, tiger skins, leopard skins, senna, manna,
indigo, equal to that of Guatimala, hemp, &c. From the south and from
the west coasts are exported, viz. elephants’ teeth, gold dust, wax,
honey, palm oil, rice, Indian corn, cotton, indigo, amber, barwood,
camwood, ebony, sandalwood, hides, a great variety of medicinal herbs
and drugs, dye-woods and dye-stuffs of very superior qualities, and a
great variety of timber fit for ship-building and other articles.

In the interior, a great trade is carried on from place to place in
exchanging various commodities of native productions and produce. Shea
butter, produced from the shea tree; Garoo nuts, a fruit eagerly sought
after by all the nations south of the Niger; and some native trinkets
and manufactures, form considerable branches of commerce in Africa. The
latter, however, would soon yield to the superiority of European skill.
Provisions also form a considerable branch of trade, in carrying these
from one state to another, as may be found requisite. There no doubt
exists other branches with which we are unacquainted; and many more
would be produced were industry and security extended and put in
activity over these extensive districts of Africa.

Several of these articles of commerce are so important, as to demand our
particular attention and observation. From these we may obtain data to
enable us to judge of the value and importance of other articles already
enumerated. To begin with salt: This is an article of the greatest
importance in commerce, and one which the population of these parts
cannot possibly do without. The profits thereon, says Jackson, “_are
extravagant_.” According to El Hagi Shabeeny, “_it is more profitable
than linen_.” (_Jackson’s Shabeeny_.) In almost every part of Africa, it
bears the same high price. In Dar Kulla, Browne informs us, that twelve
pounds of salt will buy a male, and fifteen pounds a female slave. At
Timbuctoo, it has been known so high in price that six pounds thereof
was equal to the value of a prime slave. In Melli, a camel’s load brings
from 200 to 300 mitgalli, or minkalli, each worth about a ducat. These
loads are generally small; for, being composed of rock salt, they do not
carry much, lest a heavy load should chafe the backs and sides of the
camels. These loads are sometimes more, sometimes less, and from 200
lbs. as high as 600 lbs. About 300 lbs. may be reckoned a medium load.
This would make the value in Melli from 4s. to 5s. Sterling per lb. Leo
Africanus says, he has seen 80 ducats given for a load at Timbuctoo.
Each load costs at Tegazze, in the Desert, 4s. Sterling. From the heart
of the Great Desert, the Moors and Arabs carry on an immense trade in
this article, to all the neighbouring parts of Sudan. Since the days of
Edrisi also, to this day, it has been an extensive article of commerce
from the sea-coasts on the Bights of Biafra and Benin, to the interior
parts of the continent. It is carried to the most distant parts by means
of the rivers. But having so many petty states to pass through, where
the trader cannot protect himself, so many duties, presents, expenses
and exactions, are laid upon it, and so many barterings and sales take
place, that it becomes extremely dear by the time it reaches the
interior countries, without yielding a great return to each hand engaged
in conveying it. To the slaves brought from Houssa, and other countries
in its neighbourhood, to the sea-coast, a piece of salt is the greatest
rarity which can be presented to them. This shews the scarcity of it in
the interior, and the absurdity of placing the Isle of Ulil and the
salt-pits of the early Arabian geographers in those very parts of Africa
where salt is unknown. Rock-salt is what is chiefly carried from the
great desert. Such can be purchased in Britain, for exportation, at the
rate of 12s. to 15s. per ton. It is needless to point out the ease with
which European merchants and navigators could carry it into the interior
of Africa by a water conveyance, and the advantages to be derived from
such a trade.


                          _Ostrich Feathers._


This is also an important and lucrative branch of African commerce.
Those brought from Timbuctoo, Houssa, &c. are much superior to any that
are found in Eastern Sudan, and from thence carried to the Egyptian
market. Yet the latter sell at Cairo for 280 piastres (L.70 Sterling)
per lb. They are generally sorted in parcels of 10 lbs. containing a
proportion of each kind from the best to the worst. The price at Cairo
is ten times greater than at Shendy in Nubia. (_Burk._ p. 282.) Hence we
can form some idea of the advantages which the merchant would derive by
getting into the interior of Africa, and procuring and transporting
these with the facilities which a water communication affords. Sorted
for the Cairo market, the parcels contain 1 lb. of the finest and the
whitest sort, 1 lb. of the second quality, and 8 lbs. of the coarser
kinds, in equal proportions, making the parcel 10 lbs. which sells for
2800 piastres, or L.700 Sterling. The price at Shendy may be taken as a
just criterion to judge of the value at Timbuctoo and Houssa, say 28
piastres, or L.7 Sterling per lb. In Britain, the finer kinds cost very
high. The advantages of this branch of commerce is very evident.


                     _Spices, Precious Stones, &c._


According to the accounts of various travellers, pimento is abundant in
Dar Kulla. The tree which bears it is called _kumba_. A _rotal_, or
pound of salt, will purchase four or five _mid_, each _mid_ about a
peck, or nearly 35 lbs. for 5s. which is about the value of a pound of
salt in that country, (_Browne_, p. 309.) Edrisi and Ibn-al-Vardi,
expressly describe Vancara as “the country of gold and aromatics.” We
have seen in what part of Africa this country lies. Ptolemy, in his
“_Mundi Descriptio_, cap. 15, states the remarkable fact, that in these
parts of Africa, “Hyacinthus et chrysoprasus ibi reperiunter. Cinnamomum
ibi colligitur.” _Hyacinths and chrysoprasus are there found. There
cinnamon is collected_. Jackson informs us, that one of the chief
articles of export from Sudan to Morocco is “_B’Kore Sudan_,”
(fumigation of Sudan,) a kind of frankincense much esteemed. Burkhardt
mentions gum-Liban as an article of value in the exports from the
eastern parts, and which is also a kind of incense, and used as a
medicine. As early as the days of Hanno, Africa seems to have been
remarkable for spices. That navigator expressly mentions, that in his
voyage between “Hesperus his Horn,” and the “Chariot of the Gods,” he
sailed along a coast from which the gales were perfumed with incense.
This was no doubt the _Mellegette_, or Pepper coast, where the
Portuguese found such great quantities of pimento, and which, to this
day, abounds there. When the trees are in blossom, the fragrance which
perfumes the air is delightful, and reaches to a distance. Many other
valuable articles would, without a doubt, be brought to light by the
energy and activity which European intelligence would create and call
forth in Africa. Once shew the population that the fruits of their
industry is secure, and a market open for the same to exchange, in order
to supply their wants, and the work is done.


                           _Gums, Drugs, &c._


Senna is most abundant in the interior parts of Africa, particularly in
the territories of Kashna. It is brought into Europe by way of Tripoli
and Alexandria. That brought from Tripoli is the best, owing perhaps to
the journey being shorter, and the article receiving more care in the
packing, and less damage in the carriage across the desert. The King of
Fezzan exacted from the tribes of Tibesti an yearly tribute of 20 camel
loads of this article. Manna is also abundant in the central parts of
Africa, near the confines of the desert. About Agadez the inhabitants
collect it in small vessels, and, mingled with water, they esteem it a
very precious drink. It is of a very cooling nature, and therefore
extremely useful in such a climate. Gum Arabic is particularly abundant
in Africa. The name it there goes by is Gum Sudan. Burkhardt informs us,
that what of this article is brought from the countries to the westward
of Kordofan is of the very finest quality. That produced in the central
parts cannot be less so. The value thereof we shall immediately and
particularly consider. In proportion to its value, must be the value of
all other commodities of a similar description in interior Africa. The
prices, therefore, of the following articles in Britain, are worth
attending to. The whole quoted are African productions.

  Gum Copal, 2s. 3d. to 6s. per lb.; duty, 1s. 8d. per lb.

  Assafœtida, £5 to £10 per cwt.; duty, 10d. per lb.

  Musk, 12s. to 15s. per oz.; duty, 5s. per oz.

  Senna (Tripoli,) 3s. to 3s. 3d. per lb.; duty, 1s. 3d. per lb.

  Gum Ammoniac, drop, £22 to £25 per cwt.; duty, 1s. 3d. do.

  Do.   do.   lump, £10 to 10 guineas, do.; do.   do.

  Gum Galbanum, drop, £28 to 28   do.   do.; do. 1s. 4d. do.

  Grains, Guinea, £9 to £10 per cwt.   do.   2s.

  Indigo, (Guatimala,) 8s. 6d. to 9s. per lb.; duty, 5d. per lb.

The latter article, Jackson informs us, which is produced abundantly in
Africa, is of a quality equal to that brought from Guatimala, which is
the finest that is to be got. Various other dye stuffs, and also dye
woods, are abundant in Africa. The quality of some of these are so
superior as to resist both acids and light. Such would be most
invaluable to a manufacturing country like this. The Senna of Agadez is
worth, at Tripoli, from L.4, 4s. to L.4, 10s. per 100 lbs. That of
Tibesti is only worth from L.2, 14s. to L.3 per the same quantity.
(_Transact. Afric. Assoc._ p. 169.)


                              _Gold Dust._


This article is very abundant in all the mountainous districts of
Africa. The following places are more remarkable for it than others,
viz. Mandingo, the countries around the sources of the Niger, Senegal,
&c. and the country to the south of Vancara, or amidst that range called
Mount Thala by Ptolemy. Also about the sources of the Bahr-el-Abiad, and
south-west of the Bahr-el-Azreek, about Dumute and countries to the
south-west. Gold is said to be more plentiful in those parts than in
Peru. There can be no doubt but if a civilized and strong power were
established on the Niger in Central Africa, that this article would
circulate to it from regions the most remote, and hitherto unknown, and
be collected by people who are at present careless, as not knowing what
to make of it. The value of this article is different at different
places in Africa, and is not always easily and correctly ascertained.
Being easier transported than other merchandize, it in general
approaches nearer its European value than articles and produce of
greater bulk and more expensive carriage. At Fezzan and Cashna, the
ounce of 640 grains, or 9 Mitkals, is worth, in Cashna, L.4, 10s. but in
Fezzan only L.4. At this rate, an English ounce of 480 grains, is worth,
in Cashna, L.3, 17s. 6d., and in Fezzan only L.3. (_Transac. Afric.
Assoc._ p. 169.) El Hagi Shabeeny states, that the value of gold at
Timbuctoo and Fezz was as 90 at the former to 150 at the latter, a
difference of nearly 70 _per cent._, which would almost induce us to
believe that there is some mistake.


                              _Ivory, &c._


Ivory is a most important and lucrative branch of African commerce. It
is to be had in considerable quantities in the interior. The medium
value in Britain at first hand is L.21 per cwt. exclusive of a duty of
L.3. It is bought at Houssa at about 1½d. per lb. and sells in Morocco
at the rate of 60 ducats for 200 lbs. In Ashantee the price is about
20s. per cwt. All these articles mentioned, and many more of the most
interesting and valuable kinds, medicinal herbs, drugs, dye-stuffs, dye-
woods, colonial produce of every kind, timber of the most valuable kinds
for ship-building, and other purposes, would soon be found in abundance
in Africa. The water communication which the Niger and his tributary
streams afford lays the whole immediately and readily open.

Gunpowder, shot, flints, and fire-arms, are every where in great demand,
and bring an enormous profit. The exportation of these articles,
however, from Great Britain is prohibited. The reason given is, that
these things would tend to encourage wars amongst the natives, and
extend the slave trade. This is an erroneous policy on our part, and has
an effect diametrically opposite to what we suppose. Foreign nations
carry these things into Africa to exchange for slaves, and for slaves
alone. The consequences are, that the natives and powers on the sea-
coasts arm themselves with these formidable weapons, and carefully and
strictly prohibit the introduction of any into the interior countries.
In this manner the former are rendered superior to the latter, who
become an easy prey to their profligate neighbours whenever or wherever
they find that it suits their interest and convenience. In this manner
the slave trade is extended and aggravated, and we, at the same time,
lose all the benefit which the sale and exchange of these commodities
afford, without rendering Africa the service we intend. If the nations
inland could procure European fire-arms, there is not the smallest doubt
but they would be able to repel all the hostile attacks of their lawless
neighbours, made for the sole purpose of procuring slaves, whether these
inroads are made by the Negro Powers from the sea-coasts, or the Moors
and the Arabs from the Great Desert. The policy of both are the same on
this point, and each do all they can to keep the population of the
interior from obtaining such supplies, that this population may, at all
times, remain at their mercy. All accounts, European or African, agree
in their statements on this head.

If Great Britain carried her arms into Africa to colonize and to rule
over it, then her policy, and her just and wise policy, would be to
keep, as far as she was able, fire-arms from the hands of every nation
in the interior, but such as she can depend upon as being friendly and
faithful to her. While this is not the case, however, our obvious policy
is to exchange and sell such productions of our skill and industry as
the population of Africa may have the greatest desire to obtain. In this
manner we shall wrest a valuable branch of commerce from the hands of
foreign nations, who use it for the worst of purposes, obtain the
friendship and protection of the greater powers, and thus get our
manufactures and our policy—our name and our greatness extended over
Africa. It is a mistake that the possession of fire-arms render wars
more bloody, and nations more eager to engage in them. The reverse is
the case, as, if it were here necessary to establish more fully, a
reference to history both ancient and modern would readily prove. The
extension of a trade in these articles to Africa, and such may be
extended to an inconceivable degree, would be of the utmost advantage to
Great Britain, and, in a particular manner, it would tend to relieve the
stagnation of the trade in Birmingham, so greatly depressed from the
cessation of hostilities in Europe, the duration of which occasioned
continued and extensive demands for these articles from that city.

The cotton and linen manufactures of this country are particularly
coveted and sought after in Africa. Showy prints are particularly sought
after by the negro women; and there cannot be a doubt, but when they
perceive that the finer dresses are within their power, that these will
also be eagerly coveted. The finer cloths would also soon find a market
in the interior, and even the coarser would be in demand in the cold
mountainous countries. The three following instances of the value of
European articles in the interior, upon the authority of Mr. Jackson and
others, may serve to give us an idea of the value of other articles,
which, in all such as are most in request, we may rest assured, is upon
an equal scale. An 100 lbs. of refined sugar brings at Timbuctoo 100
Mexican dollars, worth 4s. 6d. each, or L.22, 10s. Sterling. A piece of
Irish linen, 25 yards, of ordinary quality, brings 75 dollars, or L.16,
17s. 6d. A piece Flemish platillas brings 20 mezeens of gold, or 50
dollars, L.11, 5s. In order, however, to understand the subject better,
and see it in a clearer light, we shall state the value of these
articles, as these are rated in the trade at present carried on from
Morocco and other places across the Great Desert, and the value which
these would bear if carried direct from Great Britain by a water
conveyance, and African productions brought back by the same means.

                               * * * * *


                        _IMPORTS AT TIMBUCTOO._

  100 lbs. refined sugar cost in Britain  £3 10 0

  Duty in Morocco 10 per cent.             0  9 0

  Freight to Mogadore                      0  3 6

  Carriage and duties across the Desert    2  0 0

                        Costs at Timbuctoo                       £6  0 6

  Sells there for 100 Mexican dollars, at 4s. 6d. each           22 10 0

  Profit by this conveyance                                     £16  9 6

  If carried by water, charges would be 30s. less                 1 10 0
                                                                --------
  Profit if carried from Britain direct, or 300 p. cent.        £17 19 6

                               LINEN.

  A piece Irish linen worth at Timbuctoo                        £16 17 6

  Prime cost in, and charges from, Britain,                       3 10 6
                                                                --------
  Profit, or near 400 per cent.                                 £13  7 0

                             PLATILLAS.

  A piece is worth at Timbuctoo                                 £11  5 0

  Cost in, and charges from, Britain, about                       2  0 0
                                                                --------
  Profit, or nearly 450 per cent                                 £9  5 0

                               * * * * *


                       _EXPORTS FROM TIMBUCTOO._

                  GUM SUDAN, OR GUM ARABIC.

  200 camel loads, at 250 lbs. neat, cost 4 Mexican
  dollars each load                                          800 dollars

  Camel hire to Akka in Barbary, at 18 dollars each         3600

  _Statta_, or convoy duty to chiefs                         300

  Camel hire from Akka to Santa Cruz, at 3 dollars           600

  Suppose freight and charges to Britain                     600
                                                           -------------
                                  Total                     5900 dollars
                                                           -------------
        Value brought across the Desert                    £1327 10 0

  Gum Sudan, or Gum Arabic, costs in Britain, (the
  finest quality,) L.10 per cwt. including a duty of 12s.

  200 camel loads is 22⅓ tons, at L.200, is                £4466 13 4

                              Deduct

  Duty                               £268  0 0

  First cost, &c. landed in Britain  1327 10 0

                                     ---------              1595 10 0
                                                           -------------
  Profit, or about 210 per cent                            £2871  3 4

                 If Gum Senegal, it would stand thus:

  221 tons, at L.100 per ton, (neat)                       £2233  6 8

  Deduct first cost                                         1327 10 0
                                                           -------------
  Profit, or nearly 70 per cent.                            £905 16 8

In the preceding statement, no account is taken of the profit of the
merchant at Santa Cruz or Mogadore, but the whole is stated as if the
article were brought to Great Britain by the route of the Desert. If
shipped to Great Britain by the Niger, it would stand thus, viz.

  Neat proceeds 200 camel loads, or 22⅓ tons, at the
  price of Gum Arabic                                         £4198 13 4

                           Deduct

  First cost at Timbuctoo, 800 dollars  £180  0  0

  Freight 22⅓ tons, at L.10              223  6  8

  Insurance, at 5 per cent.               20  0  0

  Allow for commissions                   20  0  0

                                        ----------              443  6 8
                                                              ----------
  Leaving the enormous profit of                              £3755  6 8

  If Gum Senegal, neat proceeds                               £2233  6 8

  Deduct cost and charges                                       443  6 8
                                                              ----------
  Leaving profit 400 per cent.                                £1790  0 0
                                                              ----------
  Clear profit, at a medium between both                      £2772 13 4


                    _TRADE BY BARTER AT TIMBUCTOO._

  800 pieces Flemish platillas cost in Britain                £1200  0 0

  400 pieces Irish linen, ordinary quality                     1200  0 0

  Say freight and charges to Timbuctoo by Niger                 600  0 0
                                                              ----------
  Cost landed at Timbuctoo                                    £3000  0 0

  In the trade across the Desert, these articles, in quantity and
  quality as above, have been exchanged for, viz.

  500 skins Wangara gold dust, each containing

    4 ounces, is 2000 ounces, at 75s.                         £7500  0 0

  100 Wangara gold bars, each 20 ounces, at 75s.               7500  0 0

   50 Camel loads Gum Sudan, medium value                       700  0 0
                                                              ----------
                                                            £15,700  0 0

                             Deduct

  Cost articles exchanged              £3000 0 0

  Freight and charges gold to Britain   1500 0 0

                                       ---------               4500  0 0
                                                              ----------
  Profit, or 370 per cent.                                  £11,200  0 0

But if the above articles were sold for gold or specie, and then native
produce purchased, the profits on a voyage would be much greater,
because there would be a profit both on the export and the import in an
equal ratio. The only difficulty to calculate this, is to ascertain what
is the value of gold at Timbuctoo. This is uncertain; but suppose it is
the same as at Fezzan, namely, L.3 per English ounce, we cannot err far.
Then 400 pieces Irish linen, and 800 pieces platillas, would bring at
Timbuctoo L.12,050, or 53,550 dollars. This sum would purchase 13,387
camel loads, or 1494 tons Gum Sudan, which would produce in Britain,

  Less duties                                         £280,972  0 0

  Deduct freight and charges                            29,686  0 0
                                                      -------------
  Profit Gum Arabic, 200 per cent.                    £251,286  0 0

  If Gum Senegal, would bring                         £149,400  0 0

  Deduct freight and charges                            29,686  0 0
                                                      -------------
  Profit Gum Senegal, or 100 per cent.                £119,714  0 0

  Exclusive of 400 per cent. profit on the outward
  bound cargo.

                             IVORY

  Costs at Houssa 1½ per lb. or per cwt.                    £0 14 0

  Freight and charges to Britain                             0 13 0
                                                           --------
  Cost by water conveyance                                  £1  7 0

  Sells in Britain for                                      21  0 0
                                                           --------
  Profit by this mode                                      £19 13 0

I state these things merely as a criterion to judge of the advantages
which may be derived from such a trade and such communications being
laid open. I am perfectly well aware that the quantity of the articles
mentioned could not be procured at any one place, or, under the present
circumstances, at any one time in Africa. But various articles, all
bearing a proportional value, could be procured. No doubt, to do so,
would take some time, as there is no such a thing as depots of
merchandize to any extent in Africa. Consequently great deductions would
fall to be made on account of the expences which the greater delay
attending such a voyage would occasion. But, as security was established
in Africa, the articles to be exchanged would be brought to favourable
spots ready for the market, and thus much delay and expence, which,
under the present circumstances, must be incurred, would afterwards be
avoided. It is almost unnecessary to observe, that as the interior is
gained, the nations become more civilized, the country more populous,
the value of all European goods greater, and that of all native
productions less, and the quantity more abundant. Therefore, it is
evident, that the trade to those parts must be most beneficial, and that
the water conveyance will render the most bulky the most profitable, as
being by this means more readily brought to a market. By the use of
steam-boats, every article of commerce may safely, and expeditiously,
and cheaply, be carried into the remotest parts of Africa. Already the
French have got these kinds of vessels on the Senegal. A short time
will, I hope, see such vessels placed on a nobler stream. Nor is it
possible to conceive a sight more surprising and grand than that which
will be disclosed when the first steam-boat bears an European throughout
all central Africa. The consequences will prove beyond all calculation
beneficial.

It would be a waste of time, and a waste of words, to point out further
the advantages which such a trade would confer on this country, and on
any and all who engage in it. No doubt the value of European articles
would decrease as these became more abundant in the interior of Africa.
But it must also be borne in mind, that the diffusion of knowledge, and
industry, and the establishment of security for life, liberty, and
property, would create such a degree of wealth and of wants, as would
increase the demand to an astonishing degree, and thus keep up the
value. The price also of the productions of interior Africa would no
doubt rise in those countries, and fall in Europe, but the immense
supplies which could so readily be procured and speedily produced, if
once her numerous population had felt the sweets of industry, and
property would tend to counterbalance any exorbitant rise in value from
the increased demand. But, taking every casualty and every difficulty
into account, still the field that remains is so extensive and so
fruitful, that a rich and abundant harvest must be the certain result.

As the principal part of the trade into Sudan is at present conducted,
it is subjected to the most serious inconveniences. Besides a duty of 10
per cent. in Morocco, and the excessive expences of land carriage,
amounting, according to the nature of the goods, to three times or five
times the original value, the merchandize in its passage into the
interior passes through five different hands, each of whom receives from
20 to 30 per cent. of profit and duty, &c. Yet the merchants engaged in
it make rich. The African produce brought back is subjected to the same
burdens, and, in Gum-Sudan, we have an instance of the enormous expence
of land carriage, being more than five times the amount of its original
cost. A water conveyance will remove entirely this excessive expence.

From considering the previous statements, derived from real and
authentic mercantile transactions between Morocco and Timbuctoo, &c. it
is evident that gold and gold dust are not the most profitable, though
these may, in some instances, be the most marketable articles of
Exchange. Being easier transported, gold commands at Timbuctoo a price
much nearer to its European value than any other article, but
particularly bulky articles of African produce. Though the freight of
gold would be lower than any other article, still, its value being
greater, larger sums for commissions and other expences are necessarily
paid upon it. From a trade in the articles we have mentioned into the
interior of Africa, it is evident that a duty to government could very
well be afforded. Suppose the imports into Africa amounted to one
million, and the exports from it to as much, as there is sure data to
shew would be the case, then the duty to government at five per cent.
would produce L.100,000. If the land and properties in Africa paid at
the same rate, wherever we colonized or protected, (at present they pay
ten times the sum, not for protection but for oppression,) it would be
very easy, in this manner, to raise a sufficient revenue to defray every
expence attending any settlement to colonize and to civilize Africa.

The whole population of Africa, high and low, are traders, and in some
way or other engaged in trade. Already they are acquainted with its
advantages, and some of its rules. They only want security and a greater
degree of knowledge to make them thoroughly acquainted with the
principles of honourable commerce. The Moorish and Arabian merchants,
who everywhere, in perfect safety, frequent the markets of interior
Africa, may be made the ready instruments of diffusing commerce from the
great towns on the rivers to which European merchants, with their goods,
can have easy access into the more remote and inaccesible parts of the
continent. They are very honourable in their dealings, and there cannot
be a doubt, but that they would most cheerfully engage in conveying
European goods, from places on the rivers to towns at a distance from
their banks, rather than run the risk they now run, in transporting
goods through the fearful deserts and dangers that intervene between
Morocco, Fezzan, Tripoli, Egypt, and Sudan. All these merchants are well
acquainted with the country, inured to the climate, and conversant with
the different languages, even if Arabic were not generally understood in
Africa. They may thus be made most useful and active commercial agents.

To give a farther illustration of the advantages to be derived from a
trade to Africa, I shall here adduce, from the authority of Mr.
Bowditch, the profits on that carried on between Cape Coast and
Coomassie, (capital of Ashantee,) and other places more into the
interior. The expence attending it must be considerable, when we reflect
that it is carried on by means of land carriage, through the immense
forests, and over the hills of Southern Africa.

  _India silk_ costs, at Cape Coast, L.4 per piece
  of 11 yards, brings 5s. per span[9] at Coomassie,
  and 20s. per fathom at Yahndi—profit                  175 per cent.

  _Sarstracunda_ (highly glazed British cotton, of
  bright red stripes, with a bar of white) at Cape
  Coast 30s. per piece, at Coomassie 2s. 6d. per span   400	

  _Glasgow Dane_, 30s. Cape Coast, at Coomassie 5s.
  per handkerchief                                       75	

  _Rum_, Cape Coast 10s. per gallon, Coomassie 7½d.
  per dram                                              400	

  Flints, Cape Coast 5s. per 100, Coomassie 3d. each    600	

  _Tobacco_, (Portuguese,) Cape Coast L.6 per roll,
  (42 fathoms) at Coomassie L.10                         75	

  Ditto,       at Inta                                  150	

  Gunpowder, Cape Coast L.4 per ¼ barrel 25 lbs.,
  at Coomassie 7½d. per charge of ¾ ounce               400	

  Iron, Cape Coast L.1 per bar, Coomassie 35s.           75	

  Ditto,           Sallagha and Yahndi 60s.             200	

  _Lead_,          the same

  _Spanish dollars_, 5s. Cape Coast, at both places
  10s. (two ackies)                                     100	

  Ditto,   ditto,   Sansanding, 25s. to 50s.            600	

_Sal Amoniac_ is abundant in Dagwumba, and at Ashantee, 2s. will buy a
lump as big as a hen’s egg. Small Turkey and Mesurata carpets bring at
Coomassie 2 ounces gold, worth 75s. per ounce, or even L.4. The
Ashantees frequently give the governor of the Dutch forts 2 ounces of
gold for one roll of Portuguese tobacco.

The nature and extent of the trade at the outset, under the settlement
and the regulations proposed, would be, _first_, the value of all the
trade at present carried on across the Desert. _Second_, the whole trade
at present carried on between Cape Lopez and Cape Palmas. _Third_, the
inland trade of Africa between place and place in commodities and wants
purely African, and particularly salt from the coast to the interior.
These three branches are at once placed in the power and under the
controul of those who can navigate and command the Niger and his
tributary streams.

The value of the present trade into the interior of Africa cannot be
calculated with perfect accuracy. The trade from Morocco is about
1,000,000 dollars in exports annually. From all the other Barbary
States, from Mourzook, Egypt, Nubia, Darfur, &c. it is about three times
as much, in all one million Sterling from the North (chiefly) and from
the East. In the trade from Morocco the returns are said to be in some
instances ten to one, and, in general, that a capital of 5000 dollars
will be raised in two years to 20,000 dollars. The trade from Mourzook
must be in a similar proportion, and that from Egypt, according to
Burkhardt, yields from 150 to 500 per cent. each journey, according to
the nature of the articles carried to market. Slaves, however, are
chiefly the returns, at least those on which the profit is greatest; but
in the trade contemplated this would form no part, and consequently the
profits would not be in the same proportion. But, on the other hand, the
profits would be greatly increased, from the quickness of the returns,
and the reduced expences at which the trade would be conducted. The
British exports to Africa, (Cape of Good Hope included,) were, on an
average of three years, ending 1810, to the amount of L.830,000
annually, and the imports, exclusive of gold dust, L.430,000. The
quantity of gold brought from the gold coast annually, is estimated to
amount to L.400,000. Since that period both the exports and the imports
are greatly increased. At least L.300,000 in imports, and as much in
exports, centre in those places where the projected establishments would
be placed. At present also the British trade to these places is greatly
reduced, because other nations, continuing the slave trade, which we
have abandoned, supply those places with a great quantity of goods which
would otherwise have come through our hands. The extent of this annually
it is difficult to estimate; but it is, perhaps, equal to our share of
the imports, and, exclusive of slaves, fully one-third of the exports of
African produce.

To give a stronger and more correct idea of what might be the extent of
the trade in question, it is only necessary to point out, and to mention
the following fact. During the continuation of the slave trade, Great
Britain exported manufactures to Africa to the extent of L.1,000,000
annually, entirely for the purpose of barter in that trade. It is not
too much to say that all the other European nations sent an equal amount
for the same purpose. One-half of all this certainly went to those
places situate between Cape Coast and the Rio de Gaboon, but principally
confined to that part of the coast from the Rio Lagos to the Rio Elrei.
From Bonny River alone, it is calculated 20,000 slaves were annually
exported by European nations. These would cost, at the lowest, L.10
each. Thus, at least, L.1,000,000 of European goods were annually
imported into those parts of Africa where the Niger enters the Sea, the
greater part of which were intended for the consumpt of the nations
inland. The contemplated settlements would secure to Great Britain, and
that immediately, the whole of the trade mentioned, and the advantages
to be derived from African produce taken in exchange.

This is the present trade with those parts of Africa. It would soon
increase greatly, and include the supply of all our West India colonies
with the finest descriptions of dry provisions, such as Indian corn,
rice, &c. and also with live-stock of every description, which are
indispensably necessary for the supply and health of our naval force and
garrisons in that quarter of the world. For all these we are at present
chiefly dependent upon a foreign and a rival power. Indian corn is the
finest of all food for Negroes. They prefer it to superfine flour. It is
found to be better for their health. In the West Indies we have 800,000
slaves. These must require large supplies. From the United States we
formerly imported into these colonies annually 647,853 bushels of corn;
431,504 bushels meal and flour; and 9,393 bushels rice; altogether,
valued at L.440,000. The live-stock imported also cost a large sum, and,
altogether, the imports from America to the West Indies exceeded half a
million Sterling. Canada cannot supply these articles, because it does
not produce them. Africa could supply these, and at a cheaper rate; and
in return, take back rum, as the United States formerly did.

Secondly, there would be an immense importation into this country of
cotton of the finest qualities, coffee, indigo, superior dye-stuffs, and
excellent timber, either for the purposes of ship-building or ornamental
furniture. Africa yields all these in abundance. The value and
advantages of all these it is impossible to calculate. To the United
States, and to the Brazils, we give annually six millions for cotton,
which Africa produces of a much finer quality. By obtaining it from
Africa we should thus be independent of either of these powers in case
of war, and not only so, but we should, by this means, if not deeply
injure their present establishments, at least completely check the
further extension of the cultivation of cotton in these countries, which
is one of the greatest sources of their wealth and their power. This, in
a political point of view, is of itself a matter of great consequence,
and a way of weakening a rival power of which no nation has any just
right to complain. The introduction of cotton from Africa to any extent,
would lower the value of the article from every other quarter, thereby
affording our manufacturers the raw material at a cheaper rate, which
must tend to the extension of their business, and, by cheapening, create
increased demands for their goods. The same may be said with regard to
coffee, sugar, and dye-stuffs. The advantages of a supply of ship-
timber, independent of any rival power, are too obvious to require
pointing out.

Thirdly, under this head would be a trade to the Cape of Good Hope. The
northern settlement would take flour and wine from the southern, and,
through the Cape, a supply of East India goods, articles which are in
great request in Africa. The southern settlement would take back from
the northern, sugar, coffee, and various other articles, such as timber
for ship-building and other purposes, thereby mutually benefiting each
other, while the wealth of each must ultimately flow to the mother
country in increased demands upon her for various articles, which their
labour, capital, and soil, cannot produce. Fourthly, we should acquire
nearly all the trade to the Mediterranean with the Barbary powers, by
carrying to their doors, at a much cheaper rate, all the articles which
they are accustomed to procure from the interior of Africa. This
increased intercourse with Britain would tend greatly to soften the
asperity and fanaticism of their character, two things which so deeply
injure the moral and the natural features of this fine portion of
Africa. The severest laws of Mahomet would bend to interest, and honest
commerce has, in every age, proved a powerful instrument to civilize
mankind.

From the previous enumeration, it would appear that the direct foreign
trade of this portion of Africa which would fall into our hands
immediately, is fully equal to three millions in imports and exports.
From the extent and populousness of the country itself, from the
fertility of the soil, the abundance of the precious metals, the
cheapness of provisions, and, above all, from the manners and pursuits
of a great multitude of the population being favourable to, and engaged
in, commercial concerns, there is no reason to doubt but that, under
prudent management and adequate protection, the trade, in a short time,
would be augmented to five times, nay, to ten times the sum. There
cannot be a doubt but that, in exploring, cultivating, and civilizing
the tropical regions of Africa, immense, and as yet hidden stores for
the benefit and advancement of manufactures, and commerce, and
agriculture, would develope themselves[10]. They know nothing of the
Torrid Zone who can think otherwise. Security will give the Africans
industry. Both will teach them wants, and when they find that these can
be gratified with safety, there can be no doubt respecting the result.

Attention to every article of agriculture, and the demands occasioned
for these in the regular course of trade, would be found the most easy,
powerful, and effective engine which could be used to turn the attention
of the population of Africa to understand their true interests, and
consequently prove the most peaceable and expeditious mode of extending
knowledge and civilization amongst them. Without roads and regular means
of conveyance of goods and produce, such as we possess, the ignorant
despot of the interior will never think of making his slaves, or his
people, cultivate or transport produce of great bulk, and of laborious
and expensive carriage, in order to procure in exchange articles which
he requires, either for ornament or for use; produce too, which is
liable to be injured by the way, while, with a trifling labour, and at a
still more trifling expence, the slave can be compelled to walk to the
most distant market in order to be there sold and exchanged for
mercantile commodities, to gratify the passions of a barbarous master.
Nor have we any reason to expect any change while cut off from all ready
communication with any enlightened nation, and not only so, but, on the
contrary, everywhere surrounded by fanatic powers, whose interest and
whose policy it is to teach, and encourage these sovereigns to follow an
opposite course. It can tend to little advantage to cut off a foreign
slave-trade, (granting that could be made effectual,) unless we teach
the Africans how to employ their slaves in a more useful and profitable
manner. Unless we do this, the abolition of the foreign slave-trade will
only tend to secure a greater number of wretched victims for those
bloody “_Customs_,” and wholesale butcheries under the name of
sacrifices, which are so frequent in many parts of Africa.

This detestable traffic must be gradually, that it may be wholly and
entirely abolished, not only between Africa and foreign countries, but
in Africa between state and state. To accomplish this end effectually,
it is necessary also to destroy that grovelling superstition which
disgraces human nature in Africa, and which binds the minds of prince
and people in the worst and most ruinous of all bondage. In fact, it is
this which leads to personal slavery, and every evil which afflicts
Africa. Till the chains of superstition are broken asunder, neither the
fetters of slavery, nor the yoke of the slave-trade ever will. The
introduction of Christianity will dispel the terrors of the one, and its
benign influence root out and remove the horrors of the other. Nothing
else can accomplish the object. It is in our power to do this. The
blessings and the benefits which, by the exertions of men from other
countries, were first conferred upon us, we are bound to diffuse amongst
other nations who remain deprived of them. It is on this sure basis, the
introduction of true religion, and the education of young and old in its
principles and its duties, that we must build the fabric of our dominion
and our fame in Africa. Every other means will prove a foundation of
“sand,” which each flood of human passions will sweep away. But, erected
on the rock of Christianity, the foundation of our power in Africa will
be impregnable, and our dominions spread invulnerable against every
assailing foe. Christianity is the great enlightener and softener of
human nature. Power directed by its principles can never fail of
stability.

Let us proceed: we have nothing to fear. The whole civilized world is on
our side. Our immediate interference is necessary to rescue Africa from
severer afflictions and deeper woes than any she has previously endured.
The accounts from every quarter are most deplorable, calamitous, and
distressing. The slave-trade is stalking abroad with more appalling
steps than ever. Since the abolition of Christian slavery by the Barbary
States, their fury and their cupidity is directed, as might have been
foreseen, to the unhappy population of the interior. The latest accounts
from these places are most distressing. Havoc and ruin, pillage and
desolation, are marching in awful array over all northern Sudan, and
whole tribes are driven away into slavery by the ruthless Moor and
unprincipled Arab. Powerful assistance and protection can only terminate
this dreadful state of anarchy, distraction, and misery, into which
Africa is so deeply plunged. These alone can check those frightful
evils, and bring peace, security, and happiness, to Africa. Let us plant
our standard, the standard of liberty, peace, and order, in her bosom,
wherever our power can be most commanding, and by good deeds, acts of
kindness, and protection, let us draw them to be our willing subjects,
and then we shall see what power in Africa or elsewhere will dare to
make slaves of them—to steal—to buy—or to sell their children any more.

Not only our duty, but our interests, require of us prompt and decisive
measures on this subject, and on this occasion. It is the continued
extension of the slave-trade which is proving the deepest injury to our
West India colonies, and unless it is checked, the further continuance
of it will cover all these colonies with ruin. The vast quantities of
sugar, coffee, and cotton, which the United States, the Spanish and the
Portuguese possessions are now raising, and the cheap rates at which
these are produced from the continued importation of slaves, has driven
our West India merchants out of every market on the Continent. It is in
vain to speak about stopping a trade where individual and national
interest are so much concerned, while all Africa is ready also to
welcome any who embark in it, and while we pay such enormous sums
annually to purchase that very produce, (cotton in particular,) which is
raised by the labour of the slaves thus introduced. The united navies of
Europe, and all the laws which the nations in it can pass, will fail in
effecting the desirable object. British capital and industry thus
strongly, though indirectly, carries on the slave-trade; for it is the
interests of the governments, deriving so much benefit from its
continuation, to wink at the conduct of their subjects who engage in it.
There seems, therefore, no way to stop this trade effectually, and by so
doing secure the prosperity of our West India possessions, but by
colonizing interior Africa, and teaching and commanding the population
there to abandon this disgraceful and abominable traffic.

Every object here pointed out can be carried into effect without
trenching, in the smallest degree, upon the immediate rights and
interests of any civilized nation upon earth. The advantages which
Africa would derive from such measures cannot escape the notice of the
most thoughtless. There cannot be a doubt of the rapid growth and
extension of such a connexion and such a commerce. Whatever benefits
Africa derived from it, would be returned upon us with double interest.
Those who are acquainted with the character of Negroes, know how eagerly
they seek after our cotton manufactures, particularly showey prints, &c.
both for the purposes of ordinary use, and ornament upon festive
occasions. They are all, particularly the females, fond of shew, and the
outlet which would thus be created for the manufactures of Sheffield and
Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, and Paisley, would be prodigious. The
profits of such a trade also are not to be calculated by the scale of
that trade carried on from Sierra Leone and the countries on the Gold
Coast. The former place is inhabited chiefly by captured Negroes, the
refuse of Africa, savage, poor, idle, and indolent, and from it there is
no conveyance by water into the mountainous interior, while the latter
are occupied by a population, harassed, oppressed, and plundered, by
some petty or higher despot. At the same time, they have no extensive
communication with the wealthier countries in the interior. The trade
proposed and contemplated will, and it is obvious must, have a wider
range, greater facilities, and a securer foundation.

It is a point of the utmost importance, and a subject which requires the
deepest consideration, to determine the best mode of establishing a
commercial intercourse with Africa, that shall prove advantageous and
permanent. The following views of the subject present themselves to our
consideration. The first is a direct trade with the natives of the
different countries in the interior, conducted in a similar manner as
other branches of commerce are carried on betwixt this country and other
independent nations. Taking the formation of the trade in this point of
view, we should merely have commercial without any political
establishments. Thus situated, we must depend upon the native powers in
whatever country our mercantile establishments are formed for justice
and protection; and to the power and interference of our own country for
redress, if, in course of our transactions, justice is denied or
protection withdrawn. Amidst a barbarous people, such occurrences may be
expected; while, before punishment is inflicted, the wrong is committed
which will undermine the security of all commercial intercourse. Under
such circumstances also, we ought not to interfere, and have no right to
interfere, in any shape, with any of the present institutions
established in the interior, whether these be civil or religious. Thus
situated, the trade must continue on the same footing, and consequently
on the same insecure and limited scale which it has hitherto done during
the lapse of so many centuries, and continue to be subject to all the
vexatious delays and extortions with which the capricious tyranny of the
rude and ignorant despots of Africa may choose to load it. A trade so
insecure and liable to so many unfavourable contingencies, cannot
possibly be profitable to any one, and consequently could not be
durable. Under such a system, there could be no rational hope of any
speedy improvement amongst the population of Africa, which improvement
can only give extension and permanency to the trade. No doubt, a
legitimate commerce, carried on with Africa would, in time, tend to open
the eyes of both the princes and the people to their true interests; but
the progress thereof, under the most favourable circumstances, must
necessarily be very slow; while so many obstructions lie in the way, so
many difficulties under this mode of proceeding would remain to be
overcome, and so many untoward circumstances may take place, as might
very readily deter European merchants from prosecuting a trade under so
many difficulties, and at last induce them to discontinue it altogether.
Besides, foreign nations would participate in this trade. Conflicting
European interests would be transplanted into the heart of Africa, and
add to all those jealousies, the rivalry, and those distractions which
already so grievously afflict and torment her.

The second view of the subject, which occurs for our consideration in
the establishment of this trade is, by colonization and conquest; for in
Africa the latter would necessarily, and speedily, and extensively,
follow the former. Under these circumstances, the trade contemplated
might safely be left free to the capital and industry of any British
merchant or subject who might choose to engage in it. All that would be
necessary in this case, in order to secure the most beneficial results
to this country and to Africa, would be to prevent foreign nations from
participating in this trade upon equal terms. At the outset, individuals
might lose in this trade. The markets might, and in all probability
would, be overstocked with supplies, both such as are proper and such as
are improper; such as are calculated for the present wants of the
natives, and such as are not calculated for that purpose. The loss,
however, thus occasioned, would not be a national loss. Foreigners would
derive no benefit therefrom. What one British subject lost another would
gain, and in time every thing would be reduced to order. The supply
would be suited to the demand, and the competition would be confined to
those articles which are best adapted to the market. The capital and
industry of all would have a fair, open, and honourable field for
exertion. Under such circumstances, it might be most advisable to lay
open, establish, and carry on the trade contemplated. This mode would
certainly be most consonant to the present feelings of the population of
the British Empire: but I am not sure, and indeed have strong doubts, if
it would prove soonest and most extensively beneficial, either to this
country or to Africa. The situation and interests of the latter must
never be lost sight of, because it is only by bettering or improving her
condition that we can greatly benefit ourselves.

The next mode of establishing this trade is under a chartered company.
This may be done after the manner of the East India Company. In
duration, however, it may and ought to be greatly limited, so as to
render it expedient for those to whom it is granted to carry on the
trade with energy, in order to reap every possible advantage from it,
and that it may not be left to languish, as might be the case, if the
period was greatly extended. On the other hand, the duration of it ought
not to be narrowed too much, otherwise that circumstance would tend to
discourage the merchant, and prevent him from laying out money at the
first outset, to any considerable extent, or from embarking in the trade
with that energy and vigour which could only render it productive and
successful, or reimburse him for his labour expended and capital
advanced. Perhaps 15 years might be a very fair period for the duration
of such a charter. With diligence and activity, the time mentioned would
render it an object well worth the attention of mercantile men, and
nothing more than the encouragement which the nation ought to give for
the labour in forming, or I may say creating, a commerce which is
altogether new to this country, from which, through the individuals
engaged in it, the nation derives immediate benefit, and lays, in the
only way in which it can be securely laid, the foundation of a trade,
from which the whole nation may fairly anticipate, and are certain to
derive, at a future period, still greater advantages.

A charter, for the purpose contemplated, may either be extended or
reduced, in regard to the numbers and capital engaged in it, as may be
found most eligible or necessary. As the nature of the commerce in view,
both as regards exports and imports, will naturally confine itself to
the three chief commercial ports of this kingdom, namely, London,
Liverpool, and Glasgow, and that in nearly equal proportions, so the
charter may be granted to an extent proportionate to the magnitude of
each of these places, and in a manner such as those merchants who are
inclined to embark in it may regulate and determine. Their interest
would lead them to choose the port which would prove the most conducive
thereto, from whence they could send supplies, and to which they would
direct the returns to be made. A power might be vested in the Board of
Trade to examine into the general management of the chartered company,
and to regulate these upon the strict principles of national justice and
national advantage.

A charter for the purposes mentioned, and under such circumstances, can
scarcely be called a monopoly. It is indeed an exclusive privilege in
trade, but then this exclusive privilege is for a trade yet to be
formed—a trade which neither this country, nor any other civilized
nation, are, or have previously, been in possession of—a trade, which it
is a very doubtful case if this country ever could possess, (certainly
not so soon, if at all,) to the extent to which she would command it, if
gone into under the regulations and privileges recommended. No
legislative interference with, or burthens imposed upon, any other
settlement in Africa, is required or expected. It is not solicited or
contemplated, that the produce of any other country or colony should be
prohibited from entering, or be taxed upon its entering, any of the
ports of Great Britain, (the great and most objectionable features in
other charters,) in order to enhance the value of, or insure a
preference in, the consumption of any articles which may be brought from
Africa under the privilege here recommended. No prohibitive or
protecting laws in any branch of commerce are thought of. On the
contrary, it is proper, and it is expected, that all branches thereof
should be left free and open to the competition of capital, skill, and
industry.

The judicious application of charters is one thing, and the injudicious
grant of them another. To a trade carried on with any civilized country,
every exclusive privilege is injurious. The reason is obvious. There
law, justice, and order prevail. Every individual is equally protected,
and no evil consequences can result from competing interests. To an
uncultivated and uninhabited country, similar regulations are equally,
if not more injurious, because the prosperity and advancement of the
same, in every branch of improvement, depends upon the ability, caprice,
liberality, capital, credit, and judgment—the good or bad fortune of
those who obtain such an exclusive privilege. With a populous, but a
barbarous country, incapable of organizing any thing that is stable or
advantageous for itself or its neighbours, a very different line of
conduct is rendered necessary. Without a chartered company, Great
Britain never could have achieved what she has done in India, nor reared
such a noble fabric of commerce and civil government as she has there
done. Yet when Britain entered that part of the world, India was peopled
by civilized nations. Compared to what the inhabitants of India were,
the people of Africa are rude barbarians. Compared to what the
population of India are now become, the inhabitants of central Africa
are mere savages. It may be for the greater advantage of Great Britain
and of India, that the trade to the latter should now be thrown open,
but it never could have been for the interest of either that this should
have taken place at an earlier period. The situation of Africa, however,
is totally different. There every thing is to do. Regular commerce is to
be created. Society is almost altogether to be formed. Security and
civilization, law, order, and religion, are each and all yet to be
introduced into and planted in Africa. Unity of action and design,
therefore, becomes absolutely necessary to accomplish all these
desirable objects. Conflicting interests, amidst such a disjointed
population, must, and will, indefinitely retard it. A charter is clearly
and indispensably necessary, in order to conduct mercantile affairs to a
prosperous issue—in order to regulate the supply, to explore the
country, and find out the proper markets—to negotiate, as an
irresistible and stable power, with the native princes—to purchase
lands, to protect trade, to punish aggression—to rear up, gradually an
empire in Africa, such as has been done in India, against which no
native power shall be able to raise its head. Then, but not till then,
the trade may be thrown open, but the territorial power of the charter
may, as in India, remain.

Without such regulations for a time, there is too good reason to dread
that our connection with Africa will never be more than the transient
visitations of insulated merchants acting without concert—often contrary
to one another—glutting the markets, pouring in ill-timed and improper
supplies—raising the price of native produce above its value, and
depressing each other’s commodities; in short, strengthening the hands
of the native tyrants, and enabling them more easily to dictate hard
terms to commerce, to shut up the interior altogether, and to enable
barbarous hands, or savage life, still to hold the balance in that ill-
fated country. The whole of our establishments on the coasts of Tropical
Africa, afford, at this moment, a sad confirmation, and striking
illustration of these important truths. If this erroneous policy in
their intercourse with Africa is still to be continued by European
powers, then, to the latest period of time, the central and southern
parts of that vast continent are doomed to remain in the same deplorable
state of ignorance, degradation, and misery, which has been their lot
during the lapse of 3000 years.

No doubt the capital, skill, and industry of British merchants, can do
much, and overcome difficulties which perhaps the merchants of no other
nation can. If government established powerful settlements in Africa,
and rendered Great Britain respected, feared, and obeyed, then there
could be no danger with regard to the ultimate success of the trade,
though laid open to all. But, in this case, a very considerable expence
must be incurred by the nation, without any adequate or immediate
return; whereas, in the other case, that return, and the expense
incurred for protection, would go hand in hand. The question for the
consideration and decision of government in this case, is, which method
will prove the most secure and permanent, and soonest become the most
beneficial to individuals and to the national interests, and at the
least possible outlay or expense? The plan that can accomplish these
things, is that which should be chosen, and acted upon without
hesitation or reserve. For the reasons already mentioned, as well as for
various others too tedious to enumerate, a chartered company for a
limited time seems the most advisable way to enter upon and establish
the contemplated trade. On such an important point, however, I would
wish it to be understood, that the opinion here given is adduced with
great deference.

The trade to Central Africa ought to belong exclusively to the subjects
and the people of Great Britain. Every article which the people on the
Niger can require for convenience, ornament, or use— all implements of
agriculture—all articles for domestic purposes—for dress, for
navigation, commerce, manufactures, science—in short, every thing that a
population advancing from the rudest state of society, through all the
intervening stages to the most enlightened, can want, are almost
exclusively the productions of the British soil, or of British industry.
Our finer manufactures would be chiefly sought after for the light
dresses adapted for the climate; but the coarser and the warmer would in
some instances also be sought after, by those people who live amidst the
African Andes. Where the fine and costly manufactures of other nations
were in request, then, coming through our hands, we should make it more
their interest to be on friendly terms with us. If the trade to Interior
Africa, carried on by barbarians, with our goods sold to them in the
first instance at a fair price, and then carried thither by them,
subject to all the danger, delay, expense, exactions, and robberies,
which unprincipled despots, and lawless freebooters heap upon them—if
this trade yield them such extensive profits as it really does, what
must the British merchant gain who can carry these goods from the first
hand, at the first cost, and land these at Timbuctoo almost as cheap as
they can at present be landed at Mogadore, Algiers, Tunis, or Tripoli?
How much could he under-sell both the Moor and the Arab, either in the
imports to the interior, or the exports from it, while his goods would
at all times arrive at their destined market in a state superior to what
it is possible theirs at present can now do? Besides, the conveyance by
water would enable us to carry many articles to those markets which,
from the nature of the articles, cannot possibly now be got transported
into the interior by land carriage.

A trade such as that contemplated, may employ a capital of any extent;
but at the outset, under a company, there is no necessity for its being
great. On the contrary, it is evident, that from the situation in which
Africa is, the trade, to do good to any party, must feel its way—must
make itself. The articles which would be chiefly exported in its early
stages, would be of the coarser and cheaper kinds, and the returns of a
description that will command a ready market. Small vessels, both for
expedition in the voyages, and also for navigating the rivers, would be
the best in the commencement of the undertaking. Indeed, till the latter
are completely explored, small vessels are indispensable. Some time must
elapse before all these points can be fully known. Till then, it is
evident the trade cannot be forced, while, at the outset, it may very
readily be overdone.

In an undertaking of this kind the countenance and support of government
is absolutely necessary, in order to induce merchants of capital,
credit, and character, to embark in it. To be done correctly and
advantageously, every thing must emanate from one source in Africa,
whether it regards civil government or commerce. Unity in design, and
obedience to the dictates of one authority, can alone render the present
plan completely successful. The reasons urged against the exclusive
privilege of trade to a civilized state do not apply in this instance.
The trade, open to all, would create conflicting interests, which would
retard and endanger, if not altogether prevent the accomplishment of the
grand, the ultimate object in view. Besides, it is one thing to embark
in a trade to a country where civilization, law, and justice prevail,
and another to engage in one to a country where all those things are yet
to be formed. The latter requires an exclusive privilege to induce and
protect the adventurers, while the trade, in the same or similar
articles with other parts of the world, remaining upon its present
footing, or without any preference to either, will always prevent the
apparent monopoly from injuring the general interests of the parent
state by exorbitant prices, while the competition they have to meet with
from other markets, would compel the merchants engaged in the trade with
Africa, to be diligent, prudent, and industrious. Unless such a
privilege were granted, there is too much reason to dread, that every
object at present contemplated will fail, and that the nation, as well
as individuals, will thereby sustain a great and irreparable loss.
Conflicting interests also would lower us in the eyes of the natives,
and prevent us from acquiring and maintaining that superiority in Africa
indispensably necessary for our protection, and for her civilization and
improvement. In Africa, as in India, opinion gives power. Without power
in Africa we could not effect any thing.

The persons to be employed under government in these parts should be men
who are willing to serve their country for their country’s good. They
ought to be amply remunerated for their services, and their public duty
ought not to be forgotten or sacrificed for private emolument. Their
business and their duty is to see justice impartially administered to
all, and to raise the honour and fame of their country on a sure and a
permanent basis. The settlement must, for as short a time as possible,
be rendered burthensome to Great Britain. Africa is to receive the
benefit, and ought to and must defray the expence. All expences
attending civil and military establishments must be borne by Africa. A
trifling tax imposed upon the property of the country under our
controul, would be adequate for this purpose, as, at the outset, these
need not be large. As these increased, Africa, from the benefits
received, would be more able to defray the additional expence. A tenth—a
twentieth part of what the population of Africa now pay to those from
whom she receives no benefit whatever, would now, and, at any future
period, be more than sufficient for this purpose. The blessings of good
government, true religion, peace, and security, would by this tribute be
cheaply purchased.

All expences, merely commercial, or in any way relating thereto, such as
travelling expences for agents, salaries for servants in the employ of
the company, or for the furtherance of any object connected with their
immediate and exclusive interest, ought to be borne by the mercantile
body engaged in the undertaking. A public fund should be set apart to
defray the expences of exploring the country, in order to form
connections and establishments in more distant parts thereof. But as
this tends to the benefit of this nation—of Great Britain and Africa, an
allowance (till the revenue of the latter can defray the expence) should
be made out of the public purse to the mercantile body for this purpose,
government having the power to require satisfactory information how the
money has been expended. The interest of the merchant would induce him
to pay liberally, and, at the same time, to proceed economically. In all
undertakings of this kind, mercantile men can prevent or rectify abuses
easier than any government can do, and, therefore, it becomes more
proper to bestow upon them such an authority, and such an exclusive
privilege, as is here pointed out.

The expence of embassies to the courts of the native powers, which ought
to be frequent, should be borne by Britain at the outset, and afterwards
by the colonial government. The former ought to lend her name and
authority to individuals resident in large cities as consuls or persons
exploring the country, thereby conferring upon all these persons a
degree of importance highly necessary in Africa, and which would not
fail to claim respect from the sovereigns and the people. In all the
chief towns men of this description should, as soon as possible, be
placed, in order to gain the most correct knowledge of the country, its
productions and wants, and to buy, sell, receive, or send off these
productions and supplies, to the general depot where these articles are
directed to be collected in their voyage to, or from Europe, and other
places. This mode of proceeding would sooner teach the natives the value
and utility of their productions and their labour.

The concern being for the general benefit of the nation, should, from
the outset, receive the cordial and unremitting attention and support of
the nation. In all matters, either civil or political, every
establishment must be under the controul of the British government. In
political matters and civil government, none must lift a hand or a foot
in Africa without permission from it. In every thing relating to
commercial affairs, the direction and management must remain entirely in
the hands of the company and its servants, while, at the same time, the
servants of government must be instructed to render the merchants every
protection and assistance requisite to prosecute and extend the trade.
This company, by their charter, ought to have the power to extend their
capital as they may see necessary. This capital may consist of
transferable shares. These shares may be smaller or larger, as may be
judged most convenient. The smaller, however, the better, as it will
give a greater number of persons an opportunity to engage in the
undertaking, and thus create a greater interest in the mother country
for the welfare and prosperity of these African Colonies. Government, in
the first instance, must be at the expence of every outlay for permanent
military establishments, such as proper fortifications and adequate
garrisons; but both the principal and the interest of the outlay ought,
as soon as possible, to be paid from the proceeds of internal taxation,
laid on such things as may be found most eligible. All regulations,
laws, and measures for the government of these colonies, must be formed
by the British Government and Legislature, or subject to their approval
and revisal, always, however, restricted, (could that be supposed
necessary,) in so far as these shall not militate against the interests
of the company or main object of the undertaking.

Provision should be made in every place for the teachers of religion,
and the instructors of youth. A fixed revenue should be raised and
appropriated for this purpose; and it is the people of Africa, and
others who may derive benefit from it, who should defray the expence.
The superstition which degrades and debases Africa must be vanquished by
the spirit and the precepts of the Gospel; and the other, namely, human
sacrifices, wherever we may find these, be prevented by the arm of
power, if necessary. No expence ought to be spared to accomplish these
objects. In this the authority of the company and of the government
should go hand in hand. The blessings of the British constitution should
be gradually extended to the colonists, as their intelligence, power,
and resources increase. At the outset this could not be done with
safety. Justice, however, must be most carefully administered; and in
every thing, Europeans must set a good example, that the liberty
bestowed upon the African population may not be construed by them as a
path to licentiousness. All kinds of African produce and commodities
should be admitted into Great Britain and her other colonies, upon the
same terms as those articles are admitted from other places, with the
exception of sugar, the great staple of our West India Islands, where so
much British capital is vested, and whose cultivation is so expensive. A
considerable time, however, must elapse before any establishment could
be formed in Africa to cultivate sugar to an extent which could affect
the market. There are other points for regulation, which a due
consideration of this important subject, in all its bearings, and the
wisdom and liberality of the British government, will, either now, or in
due time, supply. Having thought much and long on the subject, I only
hint at this with due deference to the opinion of the government and of
the public.

Minor criminals, who are sentenced to be transported from Great Britain,
may be sent to Africa to aid in colonizing it. The punishment also of
many offences against our laws, such as theft, house-breaking, forgery,
&c. when these are not attended with the most aggravating circumstances,
and which are at present capital, may be commuted into banishment to an
African colony. Many, very many of those unhappy individuals who forfeit
their character and lives to the violated laws of their country, and
many who are expatriated from it, are not destitute of talents, and, if
spared, might become useful members of society. In Africa, from
necessity, they must become sober and industrious, or they would soon
end their days. But if they behaved well, they might become greatly
serviceable to their country, to themselves, and to mankind. In Europe,
the remembrance of errors stamps an inferiority upon them in the eyes of
every one, and which too often overcomes every resolution of amendment,
and, considering themselves proscribed outcasts, they are hurried
headlong into the commission of greater crimes. Removed, however, into
the midst of a population such as are in Africa, they would assume an
importance in their own eyes, which would act as a stimulus to keep them
in the paths of virtue. They would see human nature degraded below them,
and men more ignorant and rude than themselves. They would feel their
superiority. They would strive to maintain it. By doing good to others,
which they would then have in their power, the better disposed would
endeavour to make amends for the injuries which they had previously
inflicted upon society. The worst amongst them could still teach
multitudes in Africa much useful knowledge. Removed from the scenes of
their folly and their crimes, and the inducements which led to these,
there would be few, indeed, who would not strive to retrieve their
characters and their fortunes.

For a first offence, expatriation from friends, country, and civilized
society, is, and must be, the severest punishment: removed to Africa
must prove particularly severe. Let the condition of their restoration
to society be their merits, activity, and character in Africa. It is our
duty to reclaim, more than to punish—to restore, rather than to cut off
a member from society. In this we follow, and, ought to follow, the
footsteps of him who came to seek and to save—to preserve, not to
destroy those who had erred. Perhaps 1000 convicts annually might be
sent from Great Britain to Africa—1000, every one of whom might, under
judicious authority, in some degree be made instrumental, in places of
the greatest danger, to teach useful knowledge to the ignorant African.
Under the controlling authority established there, the convict, from the
hopes of forgiveness and restoration to a better rank in the scale of
society, would be led to amend his own life, and reclaim the most
degraded and benighted of his fellow creatures. All, perhaps, would not
act such a part. But many would. If, however, this plan succeeded in
reclaiming five out of ten, and in making these outcasts from British
society the instruments of instructing Africa in any of the arts and
labours of civilized life, how great is the good that will thereby be
effected!

In this voyage (if I may use the expression) for the improvement of
Africa, there are two fatal rocks which we must carefully avoid, if we
wish to escape shipwreck. The first is, that, although the precious
metals (gold in particular) abound in Africa, still we must take care to
direct the exertions of her people to those labours of greater
importance, the profits of which can, at all times, command the precious
metals, and which productions ought, in this case, as well as in every
other, to be only a secondary object. The next is, we ought not to go to
Africa with the rooted idea, that it was Europeans who occasioned
slavery, and created a slave trade in, and with, Africa. If we adopt
this erroneous opinion, in order to act upon it, we shall never take the
right path or proper means to root out the one, or to destroy the other.
It is Africa herself, as has already been remarked, that is the great
root of the evil, though her guilt does not constitute European
innocence, wherever the latter has participated in, or yet continues the
traffic.

The climate of Africa is not worse than in other tropical regions of the
earth, particularly the coast of America from the Rio Bravo to Rio de
Janeiro. On the contrary, about the mouths of the Orinoco, and all along
the coast to the mouth of the Maranon, it is more unhealthy than any
part of the coast of Africa in the neighbourhood of Benin and Biafra.
With proper attention in forming settlements, healthy spots may be
found. It is quite evident, that, in the interior of Africa, such places
must be numerous, and that, freed from the noxious vapours so prevalent
about the mouths of rivers on the coasts, the greatest danger to the
health of Europeans would be the sudden transitions from heat to cold,
which must occur among the prodigious mountains of Africa. The heat, on
these coasts, is by no means oppressive or so great as in other places.
The sky is much obscured with clouds, which mitigate the heat greatly.
With care, these regions of Africa offer no greater objections to
forming settlements in them than many other places so eagerly coveted by
Europeans, and so widely colonized.


I have thus, though feebly I confess, in comparison to the magnitude of
the subject brought forward, completed the object which I had in view,
namely, to call the attention of the British government, and the power
and energies of our people, to an honour of the first rank, and, at the
same time, endeavoured to rouse the resources and enterprize of our
merchants to engage in a trade of the first magnitude. By means of the
Niger and his tributary streams, it is quite evident, that the whole
trade of Central Africa may be rendered exclusively and permanently our
own. The object, at all times of the highest importance, is, at the
present moment, become more particularly so. The feelings and the
efforts of this great nation would most cheerfully embark in the
enterprize. To support and carry into execution the measures necessary
to accomplish this undertaking is worthy of the ministry of Great
Britain, and worthy of the first country of the world. It will confer
immortal honour on our native land—lasting glory on the name and reign
of George the Fourth—bring immense and permanent advantages to Britain,
and bestow incalculable blessings and benefits on Africa. Agriculture,
and manufactures, and commerce, and learning, and religion, will spread
rapidly and widely over a country abounding in the richest productions,
whether on the surface of the earth or below it, but, at present, a
country overspread with the most abject servitude, and sunk in the
deepest ignorance, superstition, and barbarity. Every obstacle will
vanish before judicious and patient exertions. The glory of our
Creator—the good of mankind—the prosperity of our own country—the
interest of the present, and the welfare of future generations—glory,
honour, interest, call us, and, united, point out the sure path to gain
the important end. Let but the noble Union Ensign wave over and be
planted by the stream of the mighty Niger, and the deepest wounds of
Africa are healed. Round it, and to it, the nations from Balia to
Darfur, from Asben to Benin, would gather for safety and protection—the
slave would burst his fetters, and the slave trade be heard of no more.
The road to effect this is open— It is safe—It will soon be occupied by
others; and, if we hesitate, the glory and the advantages will be
wrested from our hands.

                                 FINIS.


           * * * * *
 _Printed by Balfour & Clarke,
       Edinburgh_, 1821.




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: There is some reason to believe that the Latitude as here
given, may have been transposed in transcribing, and thus the Latitude
placed for the Longitude. But, having no access to any copy but one, I
have not the means of ascertaining this point. If this transposition has
taken place, then the Sagapola Mountains would be a continuation of the
Usargala Mountains, and a chain extending on the south side of the
desert, till it joined Mount Mandrus. On the other hand, as the river
Subos, which enters the sea in 29° North Lat. is said by Ptolemy to flow
from those mountains, it would fix them as being part of the grand chain
of Mount Atlas.]

[Footnote 2: I strongly suspect that the longitude here has also been
transposed for the latitude.]

[Footnote 3: Verum recentiores Melli regnum claudunt à meridie
Melligetico littore, quo ab regno Melli regnam nomen accepisse
contendunt. Ceterum Melligetam terminant ab oriente promontorio
Palmarium à meridie autem oceano. (Geog. Joannis Blaev. pars tertia, p.
121. Amsterdam, 1662.)]

[Footnote 4: The country of the negroes is called by the Arabs Belad el
Abeed, (Country of Slaves,) and Belad el Genewa, the same as Djenawa.
(Geog. Joannis Blaev. pars tertia, p. 101. Amsterdam, 1662.)]

[Footnote 5: P. 21. Regnum hoc multis Guineæ insignitum vocabulo,
diversumque a vasta illa Guineæ regione quæ meridium versus ultra Gago
Guberque est regna, mercatoribus Afris, Leone teste, Genehoa; Arabibus,
Marmolio auctore, Genewa; incolis autem Genni seu Genee appellatur.
(Geog. Joannis Blaev, pars tertia, p. 104. Amsterdam, 1662.)]

[Footnote 6: In the Encyc. Brit. 5th edition, Gago is said to be
situated south of Timbuctoo and Houssa, and near a range of hills that
run from east to west, from whence issue many rivers that flow north to
the Niger. South of Gago is Dahomy.]

[Footnote 7: “Ab Orientes montes, qui in Deserta quædam procurrint; a
Septentrionibus autema lios quodam montes permeandos ad Guineæ
Mellegeticumque littus ituris,” p. 122.]

[Footnote 8: It is a curious fact, that at Coomassie, the capital of
Ashantee, Bowditch met with a very intelligent Arab, who had witnessed
the battle of Aboukir. He particularly mentioned the blowing up of the
L’Orient, and at the very hour (10 P.M.) that it took place. He was at
Cairo at that time when the French army, he says, came, ill-treated
every one, “took all, and paid for nothing;” and he was there when the
British army, with the Turkish force, drove them away. The British
treated every person well, and paid for every thing. Such were his
accounts, which, as we know well, are perfectly accurate.]

[Footnote 9: A span is 9 inches; 8 spans to a fathom. In Inta only 6 to
the fathom.]

[Footnote 10: With the parts to which the trade is at present
contemplated, the Romans and Egyptians, in the days of Ptolemy, seem to
have been well acquainted. Of Africa he says, “Est autem illa pars mundi
quæ Aphrica dicitur minor spacie quam Asiæ vel Europa: sed pro sua
quantitate ditior est et mirabilior in quantitate. Nam in auro et gemmis
ditissima, est similitur in frugibus, fructibus et olinis. Mirabilissima
etiam producit bestiarum et hominem species et figuras,” &c.]




Transcriber's note:


  The changes in the ERRATA regarding the text have been made.

  pg 1, Changed: "_by Ptolemy, Ednisi_" to: "_Edrisi_"

  pg 1, Changed: "_Sheabiddin, Macknisi, Batouta_" to: "_Mackrisi_"

  pg 13, Added ” after "sunt Gir et Niger."

  pg 14, Changed: "Arabian chroniclers, viz. Bukri and Mishundi"
  to: "Mishuudi"

  pg 32, Changed: "the kingom of Melli was situated" to: "kingdom"

  pg 36, Changed: "Abulfeda also confirms is account" to: "this"

  pg 40, footnote 5, Changed: "Amsterdam, 1669." to: "1662"

  pg 42, Changed: "once powerful kingom of Eyeo" to: "kingdom"

  pg 89, Changed: "9° 30′ east longitnde" to: "longitude"

  pg 102, Changed: "river coutinue westward to Kassena" to: "continue"

  pg 103, Changed: "where the ferrry men reside" to: "ferry"

  pg 109, Changed: "will be beween Cano and Kashna" to: "between"

  pg 123, Changed: "when the “_the water ran_" to:
  "when “_the water ran_"

  pg 167, Changed: "and 0′ 45′ west longitude" to: "0° 45′"

  pg 168, Changed: "mouth of of the Rio Volta" to: "mouth of the"

  pg 172, Changed: "Yahndi in north latitude 8° 38°" to: "8° 38′"

  pg 174, Changed: "calculate the advaatages that would" to:
  "advantages"

  pg 177, Changed: "us the monoply of the trade" to: "monopoly"

  pg 179, Changed: "empire can so well mantain" to: "maintain"

  pg 234, Changed: "from the tribes of Tihesti" to: "Tibesti"

  pg 246, Changed: "value of all Euro-ropean goods greater" to:
  "European"

  pg 272, Changed: "connection with Af-frica will never" to: "Africa"

  pg 277, Changed: "prevent the apparent monoply" to: "monopoly"

  Additionally, some changes in punctuation have been done silently.
