APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Sango
Lexifier: Other | Region: Central and East Africa
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/59
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Sango

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 59.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Interrogative constructions

9. Focus constructions

10. Complex sentences

11. Adverbs

12. Lexicon

1. Introduction

Sango is one of the official
languages of the Central African Republic (CAR), the other being French. The
name derives from one of the dialects of its major lexifier, Ngbandi. Various
means are used to distinguish it from this dialect (sango riverain
‘river Sango’). Some educated Central Africans refer to it as sango standard
in French although there is no standardized form. It has also been called a
sabir (jargon), sango commercial (‘commercial Sango’), and vehicular Sango (sango
véhiculaire). In popular speech until independence it was referred to as Sango
ti turugu ‘soldier’s Sango’. It is spoken by most people in the Central
African Republic, with a population of about 3,000,000, and by many inhabitants
of the adjoining Cameroon and Chad republics. In the diaspora it is spoken in
Brazzaville and in France. It is the dominant language of Bangui, the capital
of the Central African Republic, with a population of half a million, where it
is the first language of an increasing number of young people.

2. Sociohistorical background

Sango is in origin a pidgin, created
in the last two decades of the 19th century, when representatives of the Congo
Free State (Etat Indépendant du Congo)
and the French government took possession of the two sides of the Ubangi River.
The first expedition of Europeans to arrive at the headwaters of the Ubangi
River, 1,500 km from Kinshasa, was in 1887, led by Alphonse Van Gele,
representing King Leopold II of Belgium. He spent a year among the riverine
Ngbandi people, who were quickly named Sangos, Yakomas, Dendis, and Abiras,
buying ivory and establishing the claims of the Congo Free State in the region.
The French established themselves in what came to be known as Bangui in 1889
and immediately made forays northward into the hinterland and eastward on the
river, establishing what came to be known as the Haut-Oubangui (Upper Ubangi) and then Oubangui-Chari (Ubangi-Shari).

Since
the culture of the Yakomas and their Ngbandi co-ethnics was based on fishing,
iron work, and trading and they possessed canoes twenty metres in length, they
figured importantly in the occupation of the territory by the colonists in
providing canoes and canoers. The African employees and militiamen brought by
the Europeans–men who came from East and West Africa, plus speakers of
Bantu languages from the equatorial regions of the Congo River–would have
jargonized Ngbandi at a time when Kituba (see Mufwene, this volume) and
Bangala-Lingala (see Meeuwis, this volume) were also coming into existence. The
new language that emerged was in this process reduced in grammar and lexicon by
comparison with the source language and for that reason is called a pidgin. The
earliest attestation of a jargon is 1893. Others claim that a lingua franca
based on Ngbandi existed before Europeans arrived and that it underwent changes
after their arrival without becoming a pidgin.

The
indigenous languages that could have figured in the origin of Sango belong to
the Ubangian family of Niger-Congo, primarily Gbanziri and Ngbandi, both
riverine, and possibly Nzakara; any significant influence from Banda dialects
must have come as it spread northward. Foreign Africans serving the whites
spoke several Bantu languages and numerous languages from the Guinea Coast and
the West Coast, as well as the Western Sudan.

3. Sociolinguistic situation

Sango spread first among the people living along and close to the banks
of the upper Ubangi River, when it accompanied the military and administrative
occupation of the French territory and the rapacious exploitation by the
colonial government and the capitalist commercial societies. Since speakers of
Ngbandi in the French militia and the foreign Africans in the employ of traders
were numerous, and since they had direct contact with the inhabitants, they
must be considered the agents of spread. Catholic missions, the first two
established in 1894, played a lesser role. However, Baptist Mid-Missions,
established in the 1920s, adopted a Sango-only linguistic policy, quickly
introducing a written form of the language and translations of scripture that
were used by other Protestants. The Catholic standard, not fully established
until after the Second World War, was different.

Education
has always been in French, provided by Catholics and the government but not
Protestants in most of the country. Despite its use in religious education by
the latter, Sango has never achieved the status of a written language except
for the adoption of an orthography that recognizes three levels of tone. It has
yet to be used by any institution. Sango is hardly ever seen in posters and
advertisements. It began to appear in radio broadcasts at the end of the 1950s
and since independence it has been used for news reports and broadcasts of an
educational and religious nature. Since the 1970s, music in the “Kinshasa
style” with Sango lyrics has been popular.

Responding
to international initiatives in popular education, the government adopted
projects to introduce Sango in the first years of schooling and the Institut
de Linguistique Appliquée was created to further this aim, but Sango has
never been in the curriculum of any government-approved school.    French continues to be the language
of education, the means of social and economic advancement, the spoken language
in formal settings, and, most of all, the written language, as in newspapers,
both those published by the government and those published privately. French is
also the dominant language in radio and television broadcasts. It has since
independence in 1960 had an increasing influence on Sango in syntax and
phonology as well as lexicon (see Taber 1979).

Immediately
after independence Sango was considered constitutionally the vehicular language
of the country. In 1964 it was declared the national language (langue
nationale). In January 1965 a decree established the Commission Nationale pour l’Etude du Sango (‘National Committee for
the Study of Sango’). In 1974 there was established the Institut Pédagogique National (IPN,
the ‘National Pedagogical Institute’). Its purpose was to initiate research on
Sango and its use in schools. It was replaced in October 1983 by the Institut National d’Education et de
Formation (INEF). In January 1984 a decree established an official
orthography. In the final years of the presidency of André Kolingba (of Ngbandi
ethnicity) Sango was made co-official with French (April 1991).

The
prognosis for Sango, given continual political and civil strife and the lack of
funds, is not encouraging. It remains the Central African Republic’s spoken
language, French its written language.

4. Phonology

There are seven oral vowels, only
five have counterparts with nasalization (see Table 1), but nasalized vowels
are infrequent. Vowels appear long in contractions, as in tee < tene
‘say, speak.’ The central vowel [ə] occurs as a variant in the speech of
young people, possibly derived from French or from some Banda dialect. French
rounded vowels also appear in French words. The letter <n’> after a vowel
is used to indicate nasalization in the orthography (e.g. nyen’ [ɲɛ̃] ‘what’). The close-mid vowels are not, and never have
been, represented in the orthography, and there are no lexemes that differ only
by them (in minimal pairs).

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i  ĩ

u  ũ

close-mid

e

o

open-mid

ɛ  ɛ̃

ɔ  ɔ̃

open

a  ã

The consonants (Table 2) are almost identical to the ones in the source
language, except that /mv/ seems
to be disappearing, and /l/ and
/r/ are distinct, whereas in
Ngbandi they are phonologically conditioned variants of a single phoneme. The
variation between /h/ and /ʔ/,
which occur only word initially, may also be a vestige of Ngbandi. Some
variation is also due to the influence of substrate languages: for example, the
macrolectal /nz/ occurs as [nz] and [ndʒ]. The greatest amount of variation occurs in the
contracted speech of young people, a topic that cannot be covered in a few
words.

Table 2. Consonants

bilabial

labio-dental

labio-velar

alveolar

palatal

velar

laryngeal

plosive

voiceless

p

kp

t

k

ʔ

voiced

b

gb

d

g

prenasalized

mb

mv

mŋgb <ngb>

nd, nz

ŋg <ng>

nasal

m

n

ɲ
<ny>

(ŋ
<ng>)

trill

r

fricative

voiceless

f

s

h

voiced

v

z

approximant

w

l

j <y>

Sango has three levels of pitch, as
does Ngbandi; the few instances of falling and rising contours can be
represented as sequences of two vowels, as they are here, or with <â> and
<ǎ>. There is great variation in what occurs phonetically, and no
study of this feature of Sango’s phonology has yet been undertaken. One gets
the impression, anyway, that contours are being replaced by level pitch, as in kumase
from commencer, which frequently ends with mid-tone. Pitch features
in only a few words to differentiate lexemes and has very little role in
grammar (except for a rare vestige of Ngbandi) and only as an alternate to a
periphrastic construction. In this introduction, the definite article with high
tone is distinguished from the logophoric pronoun by marking the latter as nï.
Tone was indicated in religious publications only for a few words, a practice
continued in the latest version of the Bible. The introduction of tone marking
in the 1970s was primarily to help readers to correctly pronounce neologisms
like the word for ‘environmentalist’. The Central African government
nonetheless adopted in 1984 the recommendation of the Institute of Applied
Linguistics (IAL): as in <â> for high tone, <ä> for mid-tone, and <a>
for low. The IAL, with the collaboration of members of SIL International,
beginning in the 1990s, published several booklets with tone diacritics to be
used in literacy programs.

Questions are not ordinarily marked by a
special feature of pitch, but when a question is repeated or when expressing
emotion, a rising-falling contour with greater emphasis occurs on the final
syllable represented by <?!>.

5. Noun phrase

Nouns can be morphologically simple, compounded (like koli-kondo
[man-fowl] ‘rooster’), and morphologically derived (e.g. verb + -ngo). Only nouns and the demonstrative
can be pluralized with the prefix a-,
e.g. a-wali ‘women’, a-so ‘these’.1

Natural gender
is conveyed with ‘man’ and ‘woman’ in phrases with or without ti, except
for animals: melenge (ti) koli [child (of) man] means ‘male child, son,
young man.’

The numerals are the following. The decades
are made with bale ‘unit of ten’, hundreds with ngbangbu, and
thousands with saki.

(1)
oko      one                      omana               six

use      two                      mbasambala     seven

ota       three                    miombe             eight

osyo     four                     ngombaya         nine

uku     five                      bale
oko            ten

These can occur (a) independently as an utterance (as in ‘I want five’),
(b) in ordinal function with the definite article, e.g. use ni [two DEF] ‘the second one’, and (c) as an
ordinal preceding a noun, as in use wali ni [two woman DEF] ‘the second wife’, or (d) as a
cardinal numeral following a noun, as in lango use [night two] ‘two nights (or
days)’.

The
connective ti ‘of, to’ relates modifiers to the head noun in noun and
verb phrases. As with the genitive in other languages, ti is used in
noun phrases to signal possession
and qualification or attribution. It is the most frequently used word in the
language. Examples of noun phrases with a ti
modifier are the following.

(2)
koli ti
mbi            [man of 1SG]               ‘my
husband’

fen’
ti zo              [scent
of person]          ‘smell
of human being’

nyama
ti nyen’    [meat
of what]             ‘what
kind of meat?’

nzara
ti zo           [hunger
of person]      ‘desire
for human flesh’

The
semantically general oblique preposition na introduces noun phrases in
clauses to mark dative, locative, benefactive, and other roles. Frequent are
relational phrases with body parts in a spatial sense (a usage common in many
African languages): na ya (ti) [OBL belly [of]] ‘in, inside’.  These phrases with the definite article ni
can be translated adverbially.

(3)
Lo        gwo     ndo   ape.2

3sg      go   place neg

‘She
didn’t go anywhere.’ (gwo < gwe)

(4)
Lo     leke        a-kungba          (ti)     lo      na     a            ti     da        ni        kwe.3

3sg    prepare pl-belongings  (of)    3sg   obl   interior  of    house  def      all

‘She
gathered up all her belongings in the house.’ (a < ya)

(5)       Na         peko         ni           lo           ken’.

obl        back        def        3sg        refuse

‘He
later refused.’

Personal
pronouns are of two types: pronouns of direct discourse, and
logophoric pronouns (i.e. pronouns of indirect discourse, that is, reported
speech). In addition, the definite article ni and sometimes lo are
used in reference to inanimate objects with the meaning ‘it’. The indefinite
marker mbeni can be used pronominally.

(6)
Mbeni    zo          a-ga              awe.

indf       person  pm-come       already

‘Someone
has come.’

(7)
A-mbeni       a-ga            awe.

pl-indf         pm-come    already

‘Some
(people) have come.’

Pronouns
of direct discourse include three pronouns in the singular number but
only two distinct forms in the plural (see Table 3).

Table 3. Personal
pronouns (of direct discourse)

subject/object

1SG

mbi

2SG

mo

3SG

lo

1PL

e/i

2PL

ala

3PL

ala

indf

mbeni

Some of these occur in variant forms resulting from contraction or
assimilation: e.g. mi < mbi, me < mo, aa < ala.
The ambiguity created by homophony for second and third persons plural in ala
is increased by its use for both second and third persons singular
(‘you’ and ‘he’ or ‘she’) in a respectful or deferential manner, similar to
that of French. The first Protestant missionaries appear to have introduced ani
for the first person plural. It is still used for ‘we’ by some Central Africans
and marks them as Protestants.

Plural
pronouns are used in a resumptive manner when singular pronouns are
coordinated:

(8)
Laso    mbi   na     lo,     i           ke      gwe     biani.

today  1sg   and   3sg   1pl      cop   go        truly

‘Today
he and I will go for sure.’

The
forms for logophoric pronouns
are nï (with mid-tone) for singular and anï for plural. (In the
latter a- is the plural prefix.) Although the grammatical distinction
between direct and indirect pronouns is categorical, their use is variable.
These are matters yet to be studied. There is also a usage one might call
semi-direct that is signalled by the use of the particle o and occurs
most frequently in reported speech with mbi and lo.

(9)
Mama    na     a-tene,   a-ninga               nï                baa   lo         ape.

mother  def   pm-say,  pm-be.long.time  1sg.log     see    3sg      neg

‘The
mother said that she (the mother) hadn’t seen her (the daughter) in a long
time.’

(10)
Lo    o,     lo      zo      na     nï               yi          ti     nï                so        nï               te.

3sg  clt, 3sg   roast obl   1sg.log     thing   of   1sg.log      rel     1sg.log     eat

‘(He
said) that she (his wife) should roast for him this stuff of his to eat.’

Adjectives
are the only words that can co-occur with nouns, some preceding them, others
following them (some perhaps only in frozen phrases), but they can also occur
alone with the definite article as nominals. Examples of those that precede nouns and noun phrases are kete
‘little, small’, nzoni ‘good’ and vuru ‘white’; those that follow
nouns and noun phrases are mingi ‘much, many’ and kwe ‘all’. In
some phrases with postposed adjectives, which might now be considered compound
nouns, the meaning is different: mama-kete [mother-small] ‘aunt
(mother’s younger sister)’, as well as some other kinship terms, and the phrase
zo voko [person black] ‘an African’. In a pluralized noun phrase the
adjective carries the plural prefix.

(11)
A-kete         a-melenge       ti       a-kondo

pl-small     pl-child          of      pl-chicken

‘small
chicks’

Comparison of adjectives and adjectival verbs is expressed with the
predication a-hon’ ‘(it) surpass’ (see 12), and a superlative is
expressed with a-lingbi ape [PM-be.possible NEG] ‘it has no equal’ (see
13).

(12)

Melenge

child

ti

of

mo

2sg

a-ke

pm-cop

pendere

nice

a-hon'

pm-pass

melenge

child

ti

of

mbi.

1sg

Your child is prettier than my child.

(13)
A-melenge  so        ka        a-ke           na      yoro      a-lingbi               ape.

pl-child     dem     there    pm-cop      obl    charm   pm-be.possible   neg

‘Those
kids over there have an awful lot of charms.’

6. Verb phrase

Verbs in commands are usually preceded by a pronoun: ala ga ma! [2PL
come PCL] ‘Come on now!’ All verbs and the copula can occur with the predicate
marker (PM) a-, which obligatorily follows a noun subject, where it is
comparable to a dummy predicate marker, and never follows a pronoun subject. In
the speech of young people in Bangui the prefix is frequently deleted in verb
chains: lo ga lo hunda ‘she/he came and asked’ can be rendered lo ga
a-hunda or lo ga hunda. Verbs, except the copula yeke (in speech usually ke), can
also be nominalized with -ngo. Some verbs –such as hinga ‘know’,
ken’ ‘refuse’, and yi ‘want’, and including French verbs such as peut
(pe in Sango) ‘be able to’ and commencer (with many
variants) ‘begin’– can occur with a dependent verb that is linked with ti,
much like infinitival to in
English.4 (But there is no reason to
consider these as auxiliary verbs at the present time.) Sango’s “filler verb”
is sara ‘do’. With a nominal complement it replaces verbs that were lost
in pidginization, e.g. sara inon’ [make urine] ‘urinate’.

The
copula yeke is an innovation in
Sango; the source language has none. Common variants of yeke are eke, ke, e, i.  It is used with predicated adjectives,
locative phrases, and noun phrases.

(14)
Mo    eke?!

2sg    cop

‘Are
you (there)?’ (a common greeting)

(15)
Da       ti       ala         na       a-ke              na       ya             ti       gbako.

house  of      3pl        def      pm-cop         obl     interior    of      forest

‘Their
house was in the forest.’

(16)
Koli   ti       mbi   na        a-ke            nzoni  zo           ape      so.

man  of      1sg   def      pm-cop       good   person   neg     thus

‘My
husband is not a good person, as you can see.’

Predications
are qualified for time (hence, tense) by temporal adverbs, as in (17). There is
no contrastive system for tense-mood-aspect marking, but the copula with a verb
lacking the PM functions as an auxiliary for continuative, habitual,
imperfective, unrealized (the future), repetitive, etc., with no constraint for
time (e.g. (8), (17)). (In such instances the copula is no more reduced
phonologically than in other uses.) One is justified in denying awe (from
Ngbandi a-we [PM-be.finished]) the
function of perfective; it can be rendered ‘already’. In casual speech, and
especially among young people, awe occurs in reduced forms, one
of them being w following a vowel. This adverb is based on the
predication a-we [PM-be.finished],
which still occurs authentically in Sango (as in ‘it [the gasoline] is all
gone’). It marks realization, completion, and so forth, but should not be
considered part of the verbal system. The lexically independent use of awe
is seen in (42). Although I once believed (as did others) that it was a
grammatical marker of tense or aspect, recent analysis of a large number of
examples demonstrates that this is not the case. The gloss of ‘already’, of
course, is not always necessary as some of my translations reveal.5 For a
different view on the verbal system see Diki-Kidiri (1988).

The most
frequent device to express conditional mood is the use of an equivalent
construction with tongana (or to)
‘if, when’.

(17)    Fade      gbanda           Nzapa   a-ke            mu    na        mo       [...]    ande.

quickly  distant.future              God            pm-cop         give     obl   2sg  [...]    some.day

‘Some
day God will give it to you.’

(18)
To   mo       te         a-hon’          ndo   ti       mo    aw       [...]

if     2sg      eat       pm-pass       top    of      2sg   already     […]

‘But
if you eat too much [...]’ (to <
tongana, aw < awe)

A
redundant marking with habitual ka after the verb has appeared in recent
years, probably adopted from a regional Bantu language. In the following
examples both the copula and the habitual marker occur, as they often do. They
are also used by themselves.

(19)
Nï               e        te       ka        ti        nï               gi         nyama   ti        a-zo.

1sg.log     cop   eat     hab     of      1sg.log     only     meat      of      pl-person

‘[He
said that] he made it a practice of eating only the flesh of human beings.’

(20)
Ala    ke        te    ka      ti     ala       nyama   pepe.

3sg    cop     eat  hab   of    3pl      meat      neg

‘As
for her, she doesn’t make it a practice of eating meat.’

Predications
are negated with the marker pepe, or more frequently ape, even in
verb chains, followed only by particles. Negative markers and awe never
co-occur in a clause:

(21)
Ala      ga        (na)       ndo     so           ape           ma!

2pl      come   (obl)     place   dem        neg          pcl

‘Don’t
come here!’

(22)
A-mbeni       a-ga            ape.

pl-indf         pm-come    neg

‘Some
(people) have not come.’

The rendition of something in English like (a) ‘I didn’t know
that (she/he died)’ and (b) ‘I knew that she didn’t die’ would have at one time been
something like the following: mbi hinga titene lo kwi ape [1SG know that
3SG die NEG]. Persons who are literate in French, on the other hand, in written
and spoken tests moved the negative marker according to the meaning: e.g. (a) mbi
hinga ape titene lo kwi for the first and (b) mbi hinga titene lo kwi
ape for the second.

7. Simple sentences

Reflexive and reciprocal voice are expressed in the same way with tere
‘body’. In (23) one could say tere ti mbi ‘my body.’ The logophoric
pronoun can also be used, as in (24).

(23)
Za,       mbi        sukula   tere        si.

leave    1sg        wash     body     then

‘Let
me have a bath first.’

(24)
Lo        sukula   tere        ti          nï.

3sg      wash     body      of        3sg.log

‘He/she
washed himself/herself (and not someone else).’

(25)
Ala      hinga    tere        depii.

3pl      know    body      since.long.ago

‘They’ve
known each other for a long time.’

(26)
Ala    pika  tere      sioni.

3pl    hit     body   badly

‘They
fought terribly.’

Causative voice is expressed with sara ‘make.’

(27)
Ala    sara    si         a-ga              nzoni   mingi.

3pl    make  then    pm-become  good    much

‘They
made it very good.’

The
canonical word order in a clause is Subject-Verb-Object amply illustrated in
preceding examples. With a ditransitive verb the recipient is introduced with
oblique na as indirect object. The
positions of the direct and indirect objects can be reversed.

(28)
Ala      hunda   na          mbi      nginza     ti            nze.

3pl      ask        obl        1sg      money     of           month

‘They
asked me for the month’s wages.’

(29)
Ala      hunda nginza   ti       nze           na       mbi.

3pl      ask      money   of      month     obl     1sg

‘They
asked the month’s wages of me.’

A predicated verb can occur without a specific noun subject: a-ga ti
si na bi [PM-come to arrive
OBL night] ‘just about nightfall’.
Some such constructions evoke the passive, a device used in the recent
translation of the Bible with a separated PM: a pe ti kangbi ape? [PM can to divide NEG] ‘Couldn’t it
have been divided?’ This might be considered a device by subject suppression.

8. Interrogative constructions

Polar questions are marked with a change in intonation, or with the
question marker eski/esi from French est-ce que. The use of eski eliminates a change
in pitch, as in (30).

(30)
Eski     mo    hinga     ala?

pcl      2sg   know     3pl

‘Do
you know them?’

In content questions (‘who?’ / ‘what?’ / ‘when?’ / ‘why?’) the
interrogative element occurs in initial or non-initial position, but ‘where?’
is always in final position. With these there is no change in intonation. The interrogative nyen’ ‘what?’ occurs as an
independent word in a sentence and in interrogative phrases, such as nda-li-ti-nyen’
[end(of)-head-of-what] ‘why?’, ten ti-nyen’, and tongana-nyen’ ‘how?’,
as in (34), (36) and (39). These phrases occur in several phonologically
variant forms. The nominal function of nyen’ is revealed in a tape-recorded
question: a-nyen’ ni [PL-what DEF] ‘what things (are you talking about)?’6 Wa is an interrogative that means ‘where?’ as
in Ngbandi, but in Sango it occurs with this meaning in isolation only with the
copula: a-k wa [PM-COP where?]
‘Where is he/she/it?’ It occurs most frequently in phrases where its function
is that of an interrogative determiner ‘which’: na ndo wa [obl place which?] ‘where?’ and zo
wa [person which] ‘who?’ One could consider ndwa and zwa,
two of their frequently used reduced forms, as words rather than phrases
because wa no longer means ‘where?’ in them. Some interrogatives in
content questions can be fronted with focusing laa (FOC) or with a
repeated interrogative as in (45) and (46).

(31)
Zowa   a-ga                laso?

who     pm-come         today

‘Who
came today?’

(32)
Melenge   so        a-ke            zowa?

child        dem     pm-cop       who

‘Who
is this child?’

(33)    Mo    ga          ti          sara       nyen’       la?

2sg    come     to         do          what        foc

‘What
is it that you have come to do?’

(34)    Nyen’  a-ke              so        mo?

what   pm-cop         hurt    2sg

‘What’s
hurting you?’

(35)    Mo      si         lawa?

2sg      arrive  when

‘When
did you arrive?’

(36)
Ten        ti     nyen’   (laa)    lo      tene     so?!

because of    what   (foc)   3sg   speak  thus

‘Why
in the world did she speak this way?’

(37)
Kogara              (ti)     mbi   a-k              (na      ndo)    wa?

mother.in.law  (of)    1sg   pm-cop       (obl    place)  what

‘Where
is my mother-in-law?’

(38)
Nyen’    la         a-saa        mbi?

what      foc     pm-do      1sg

‘What
would happen to me?’ (la < laa, -saa
< -sara)

(39)
Mama    ti       wal         na       a-tene,      nda        l             ti     nyen’.

mother  of      woman  def      pm-say     end(.of) head      of    what

‘The
wife’s mother said, “Why?”‘ (wal < wali, l < li)

(40)
Mo      fa      nyama   ni        toneen’?

2sg      kill    animal   def      how

‘How
did you kill the animal?’ (toneen’ < tongana-nyen’)

(41)
Koli          ti     mbi    a-gwe       n             ndwa

husband of    1sg    pm-go      obl      where

‘Where
did my husband go?’ (n = na)

(42)
Ala    ga        awe?

3pl    come   already

‘Have
they come?’

(43)
Ala      ga        lawa?

3pl      come   when

‘When
did they come?’

(44)
Mo    e        te       nyama   ti       nyen’?

2sg    cop   eat    meat      of      what

‘What
kind of meat do you usually eat?’

(45)
Samba               ti        nyen’     laa         ala    ke        nyon’?

alcoholic.drink of      what     foc        2sg   cop      drink

‘What
kind of alcoholic beverage do you drink?’

(46)
Zwa                 a-ga            zwa?

person.what  pm-come    person.what

‘Who
came?’ (zwa < zo wa)

(47)
Lawa   si       mo     ke        ga?7

when   then  2sg    cop     come

‘When
are you coming?’

9. Focus constructions

A noun or verb phrase can be focused
with the particle laa, frequently shortened to la, which follows the focused element. It
has also been called a topicalizer (“présentatif-indicateur”), a predicating
morpheme (“morphème prédicatif”), and thematic marker (“marqueur thématique”)
(Diki-Kidiri 1977, 1998).

(48)
Nda     ti       tere      ti       mbi      ni           la.

end      of      story   of      1sg      def        foc

‘That’s
the moral of my story.’

(49)
Lo        oko   la         a-ke            lango   na       a            ti       da.

3sg      one   foc      pm-cop      sleep    obl     interior  of      house

‘She
alone slept in the house.’ (a < ya)

(50)
Mo      goo      na     ndo     ti     melenge ti   mbi   ti     sara  so        laa?!

2sg      go        obl   place   of    child      of 1sg   to    do     dem     foc

‘So
you’re going to my daughter’s place to do that, are you?’ (goo < gwe)

(51)
Mo    zonga  la         mbi.

2sg    swear  foc      1sg

‘You
swore at me there.’

(52)
A-ninga,                   mbi   baa   ala     ape      laa,      le       ti     mbi      a-gi            ala,

pm-be.long.time,      1sg   see    2sg    neg     foc,     eye    of    1sg      PM-seek    2sg

‘It’s
because it has been a long time since I saw you that I missed you

si         mbi   ga        ti       baa        ala.

conj    1sg   come   to      see         2sg

and
came to see you.’8

(53)    Lo     duti   na        poko        da          si         lo      toto      so      o.9

3sg    sit     obl      back(of)  house    and     3sg   cry       thus  clt

‘She’s
sitting behind the house and is crying, I’m sorry to say.’ (poko da < poko ti da)

(54)
A-ke           melenge   ti       lo      so        a-duti       na     ya             ti     da        ti

pm-cop       child        of      3sg   rel      pm-sit      obl   interior    of    house  of

‘It
was her child who had spent a long time living with her

kogara     ti       lo         a-ninga                  laa       a-sigi               na        nda        ni.

in.law      of      3sg      PM-be.long.time   foc     PM-appear    obl      end        def

son-in-law
who explained the matter.’

(55)    Ni        laa    mbi    kpe      mbi      ga          so.

def      foc   1sg    run     1sg      come      thus

‘That’s
the reason why I came running like this.’

10. Complex sentences

The coordinating conjunction na is rarely used, but si is
versatile with several functions. Even though there
are several examples of na in Samarin (1967: 88–91), some of them
sound like “white man’s Sango.” The verbs ngba ‘remain’, ga ‘come’,
and gwe ‘go’ occur in narratives in the first clause of a verb chain
with a discourse or rhetorical function. They occur so frequently that they
might be translated ‘and then.’

Although
there are several lexical means to relate clauses, juxtaposition also
characterizes subordination and dependency, occurring at the beginning of a
sentence or following the first clause. Some of these are the following: ka oppositive,
‘but, on the other hand, so’; tenti (teti in early Protestant
usage) ‘because’ consists of the noun tene (with mid-tones) ‘word,
affair’ and ti; titene (and variant tite) ‘so that’
consists of ti and the verb tene (with low tone) ‘say’; tongana
‘if, when’. French words with temporal meaning like moment followed by so
mean ‘when’, probably a calque on one or more Ubangian languages. The recent
use of chance is quite original.

(56)
<Chance>    melenge      na       a-gwe       ti       to         ngu,    [...]

perhaps       child           DEF    PM-go     to      draw   water  […]

‘Perhaps
the child went to draw water [...]’

(57)
Ifo                   mo       zaa        gi         mbi      ge.10

it.is.necessary            2SG       leave    only    1SG   here

‘You
have to put me here.’ (zaa < zia)

(58)
To     lo         ga          ti          mu    na        mo    kasa    [...]

if       3SG    come      to        give   OBL    2SG  stew    […]

‘If
he should offer you stew [...]’ (to <
tongana)

(59)
Mbi     ga,         tite     mo         sar       na            mbi.

1SG     come     so      2SG       do        for           1SG

‘I’ve
come so that you might do the same for me.’ (tite < titene, sar < sara)

So
can have the same function as comme from French, usually followed
immediately by the subject. The co-occurrence of so [...] so can be
interpreted, as I have in the following example, as ‘since [...] thus’ or as
the bracketing of a clause analogous to what occurs with relative clauses.

(60)    So        mo       zia       ere         ti          Nzapa   da          awe        so,     [...]

since    2SG    put      name     of         God       there      already thus  […]

‘Since
you invoked God’s name just then, [...]’

So, as the marker of a relative
clause (rel), is an innovation
in Sango –that is, not derived from Ngbandi, which has its own way of
marking a relative clause. Relative clauses are enclosed here in curly brackets
{…}. The construction probably arose from a construction with the adverb so ‘thus’,
which quickly became used as the demonstrative (Samarin 2007). The verb
following the relative-clause marker in
restrictive clauses always occurs with the predicate marker, as does every noun
phrase functioning as subject of a verb. The postposition of the adverb so in
a relative clause, as in (62), may be evidence of the emergence of a bracketing
or parenthesized construction for relative clauses, similar to the one reported
for Tok Pisin. Presently it may be arbitrary to gloss it one way or another.
Subjectival, objectival, and instrumental relative clauses are illustrated
here.

(61)
mbeni    {kasa     so        a-ke            mafuta}  11

some      stew      REL    PM-COP   fat

‘some
stew that is fatty’

(62)
{Koli    ni        so      nï               mu       so}       a-ke            nzoni  koli      ape.

man    DEF    REL 1SG.LOG  marry REL   PM-COP   good   man    NEG

‘She
said that the man she married was not a good husband.’

(63)    {Zeme    so        mbi    doroko     na        nyama   ni}       a-za                 ape.

knife      REL   1SG  butcher   OBL    animal  DEF    PM-be.sharp NEG

‘The
knife with which I butchered the animal is not sharp.’

(64)
Ala      ma       {wango    so        a-<médecin>  a-ke            mu    na        ala    so}.

2PL     hear    warning  REL   PL-doctor      PM-COP   give   OBL    2PL  REL

‘Listen
to the advice that the doctors will give you.’

(65)
{Bongo  so        lo         yu     na        teer          lo         so}       a-e              ti       lo?!

clothes   REL   3SG     wear OBL    body(of)  3SG     thus    PM-COP   of      3SG

‘Are
the clothes she wears really hers?’ (teer
< tere)

11. Adverbs

Adverbs occur in the verb phrase
–some following the verb, some preceding it, and some in both positions
or alone as a predication– adding meanings of location, time, quantity,
etc. Some of them, in addition to ideophones (descriptive adverbs), are the
following: biani ‘certainly, for sure’, da ‘here, there, in
place’, fadeso ‘now’, ge ‘here’, gba ‘in vain’, hio ‘quickly’,
and mingi ‘much, very’ (from some Bantu language), and so ‘here,
thus’. In narratives fadeso is used frequently to carry the story along
as ‘and then’, and it can be used as a noun: a-wali ti fadeso [PL-woman
of now] ‘women of this age’. There are only very few ideophones (such as
ngbii ‘for a long time’), evidence of the drastic reduction of Ngbandi
during pidginization, for which see Samarin (1979).

(66)
Mo    te       kasa       ni        mingi     ape.

2SG  eat    stew       DEF    much     neg

‘Don’t
eat much of the stew.’

(67)
Mo    te         ti        mo         nde        o.

2SG  eat       of      2SG       apart     CLT

‘Please
eat yours separately.’

(68)
A-saa            kodro       ge.

PM-make     village      here

‘(They)
made their home there.’ (saa < sara)

(69)
Lo     te       kasa    ni        ngbii,          a-hunzi                  kwe        faaso.

3SG  eat    stew    DEF    long.time   PM-finish.off        all          now

‘She
kept on eating the food until it was completely gone.’ (faaso < fadeso)

A nominalized verb that repeats the
main verb is used adverbially to show intensity, as a-gi melenge-wali ni gingo [PM-look.for
child(of)-woman DEF looking.for]
‘(the girl’s mothers) looked and looked for the girl.’

12. Lexicon

Many words in Sango, apart from some
that are arguably compounds, consist of one and two syllables; words of three
and four syllables are generally Bantu in origin. Most of Sango’s very limited
vocabulary is Ngbandi, and only Banda of other indigenous ethnic languages has
contributed a substantial number of words. There are also words from Bantu
languages, even Swahili, which were adopted early in the language’s history and
a few more in recent years. French, of course, has contributed the greatest
number of foreign words of all kinds, and it has more of an influence on the
language now than ever before. Spelling of words has not yet been standardized
except in religious publications. Each author has his own conventions, and
there are always inconsistencies.
