APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Sri Lankan Malay
Lexifier: Malay | Region: South Asia
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/66
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Sri Lankan Malay

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 66.

1. Introduction

2. Socio-historical background

3. Phonology

4. Noun phrase

5. Verb phrase

6. Sentences

7. Other features

1. Introduction

Sri Lankan Malay (SLM) is
spoken on the Indian Ocean island of Sri Lanka, known as Ceylon until 1972. It
is also spoken overseas, by individuals, in families, and within ethnic social
networks in émigré communities, primarily in the English-speaking world
(Australia, Canada, Britain, and the United States), as well as in the Gulf
States, where Sri Lankans have pursued employment opportunities. There are no
statistics on the number of speakers living outside Sri Lanka, and the
statistics that are available for Sri Lanka are ethnic statistics rather than linguistic ones.
Currently there are approximately 40,000 ethnic
Malays in Sri Lanka; however, since not all ethnic Malays are fluent speakers
of SLM and not all fluent SLM speakers categorize themselves as “Malay”, the
actual number of speakers is not known. There are fluent speakers, mostly
Muslims, from other ethnic backgrounds. In Kirinda, in the southeastern
Hambantota district, Sri Lankan Malay speakers form an absolute majority of the
population, as well as a large proportion of the population in the much larger
town of Hambantota, after which the district is named. The largest number of
speakers is found in the greater Colombo area, in which traditional patterns of
vernacular transmission have shifted since language policies favouring the use
of Sinhala were introduced in the nineteen fifties. As a result of those policies,
the generation of Sri Lankan Malay speakers under fifty is less fluent in the
language than previous generations, due to the loss of sociolinguistic domains
and (in many families) a shift to Sinhala. There has been less shift in smaller
Sinhala-majority towns such as Kandy, Kurunegala, other highland areas, and in
a small number of Colombo-area enclaves.

2. Sociohistorical background

Malay speakers, many or most of whom
also spoke other Austronesian languages, were brought from Indonesia by the
Dutch beginning in the mid-seventeenth century, although there would later be
subsequent migration from Malaysia as well. Historically, the most significant
second language for native speakers appears to have been Shonam (Sri Lankan
Muslim Tamil),
based in part on the existence and content of bilingual texts
published in modified Arabic orthography in the nineteenth century (Hussainmiya
& Slomanson 2013+). Additional support for this socio-historical background
comes from communal marriage records demonstrating a strikingly high rate of
intermarriage between Malays and (Shonam-speaking) Moors. Further documentary
evidence, part of which is discussed in Hussainmiya (1987, 1990, 2008), and in
Hussainmiya & Slomanson (2013+) points to very close cultural, communal, and
familial ties between Shonam-speaking and SLM-speaking communities. The degree
of interaction with Sinhala communities and individuals was less consistent and
there is less evidence for network multiplexity in Malay-Sinhala contacts. The
maintenance of ethno-religious boundaries has historically permitted very
small linguistic communities to persist in South Asian societies, even in urban
areas. The language spoken by the co-territorial majority was not necessarily a
grammatical model language for the minority contact language in societies
organized in this way. This dynamic only began to break down in Sri Lanka in
the twentieth century, and particularly in the post-colonial period. This
displacement of the minority language by the majority language (SLM and Shonam
by Sinhala) has been quite uneven across municipalities, regions, and social
classes. While
classical Malay was cultivated by some individuals, particularly in the
nineteenth century, there is documentary evidence that Shonam continued to
enjoy high functional significance in Malay religious life generally. This
evidence includes Shonam religious literature published by and for Malays. This
cultural symbiosis only began to break down in the twentieth century,
particularly in the late British colonial period, in which urban Malays often
successfully adapted to the requirements of English-medium and external aspects
of colonial culture.

Although
the absolute number of speakers is small relative to the total population of
the country, Sri Lankan Malay is spoken in a large number of communities in the
cities, suburbs, and small towns of the Sinhala-majority part of the country.
There are also two small communities on the outskirts of Trincomalee on the
east coast (Romola Rassool, p.c.), historically a Tamil-majority area, as well
as isolated speakers in the nearby Muslim island community of Kinniyai. The
largest absolute number of speakers is found in contiguous and heavily Malay
communities in the northern periphery of Colombo, including Wattala-Hendala,
Akbar Town, and Hunupitiya, in a demographically declining Malay community in
the Slave Island neighbourhood in Colombo, and by many families in Maradana and
other Colombo neighbourhoods with substantial historic Muslim populations.
There is some functional attrition and loss of lexical material as well as
language shift among the younger generations in these areas, a matter still in
need of systematic investigation. In the highland communities, although there
is less language shift among the younger generation, the functional range and
fluency of the middle and older generations is not being reproduced in a
sufficient number of younger speakers to insure language maintenance in future
generations.1

The
communities in Hambantota district include the town of Hambantota, the Malay
settlements at Bolana and Badagiriya, and the village of Kirinda. Kirinda, a
densely-populated rural municipality, is the only SLM-speaking community in
which all resident individuals are SLM-dominant, where all young people
residing in the community use SLM preferentially, where outsiders tend to
acquire SLM and begin to adopt local linguistic norms over time, and where
there is no evidence of functional decline or shift. To the extent that this
community continues to exist, there is no threat to the survival of the
language; however, the status of the language in other communities ranges from
somewhat less stable to clearly endangered. The Kirinda community, founded as a
Malay settlement in the early nineteenth century, is also one of the few
communities in which the historic SLM-Shonam diglossia has remained
uninterrupted in recent decades, with all formal religious functions performed
in Shonam. This is in spite of the fact that the population of the village is
overwhelmingly Malay and there are virtually no resident speakers of Shonam as
a first language. In Kirinda, as a traditional community, the language of
primary and secondary education is Tamil rather than Sinhala.2 The teachers include both native
SLM speakers, and native Shonam speakers who reside elsewhere. There is also
provision for the secondary teaching of Sinhala and English, in order of
importance. (Tamil/Shonam was also the medium of education in the village prior
to Sri Lankan independence.) Although the entire population of late primary
school age and older is trilingual, children remain monolingual SLM speakers
until they begin school. While SLM is ordinarily an unwritten vernacular, an
increasing number of younger Kirinda Malays with access to text-messaging and
electronic networking do not hesitate to write the language in Latin script,
using improvised orthography that sometimes reflects the influence of Tamil
(i.e. by using a single grapheme for [t, d], [p, b], and [k, g] respectively,
as in Tamil, in which the voicing of stops is conditioned by syllabic context).

Whereas in Kirinda, Sri Lankan Malay is vigorously maintained by dense and multiplex
peer networks, its vitality in other communities is more strongly dependent on
intergenerational transmission and maintenance in the home. In urban
communities, SLM continues to be transmitted frequently in bilingual families
in which one of the parents is a native Shonam speaker, although there is as
yet no research on the proportion of the modern SLM-speaking population coming
from families of this type. The external peer group for children from such
families is increasingly likely to be a Sinhala-speaking one, as ethnoreligious
boundaries weaken, and as the traditional disassociation of the Sinhala
language and Islam begins to weaken. (The first Sinhala translation of the
Qur'an did not appear until 1986.) TheThe
monolingual Sinhala peer culture of the younger generation of urban Sri Lankans
is in the process of replacing the communal linguistic cultures of SLM speakers
and Shonam speakers, although the process is still far from complete.

3. Phonology

The vowel inventory is shown in Table 1. Close front vowels are lax in
closed syllables and close-mid front vowels are frequently lax in open
syllables. Doubling of stops and of vowels in the orthography employed in this
article represents length rather than segmental information.

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

close-mid

e

ə

o

open-mid

ɔ

open

a

The consonants are shown in Table 2. With rare lexical exceptions, the
dental/post-alveolar difference is not phonologically contrastive.

Table 2. Consonants

bilabial

dental

alveolar

post-alveolar

palatal

velar

plosive

voiceless

p

t

ʈ

k

voiced

b

d

ɖ

g

implosive

nasal

m

n

ŋ <ng>

trill

fricative

voiceless

s

affricate

voiceless

tʃ <c>

voiced

dʒ <j>

liquid

l, r

4. Noun phrase

4.1 Pronouns

Sri Lankan Malay does not
distinguish between biological genders in its pronominal system, and the
language has no grammatical gender. Null subjects occur where a pronoun might
be expected (i.e. in complement clauses and adjuncts whose subject shares a
referent with the matrix subject), and in matrix clauses in which the subject
referent is retrievable from the discourse or external context.

Table 3. Personal pronouns

nominative (unmarked)

accusative

dative/allative

adnominal possessive

1sg
informal

polite

go

se

gonya, goyang

senya, seyang

goɖang

seɖang

goppe

seppe

2sg
informal

polite

lu

lorang

lunya, luyang

loran(g)nya, lorangyang

luɖang

lorangnang

luppe

lorangpe, lompe

3sg
informal

polite

de (dia)

incian

denya, deyang

incianya(ng)

deɖang, dianang

incenang, inciannang

deppe

incepe, inciampe

1pl

kitang

kitangyang, kitan(g)nya

kitanang

kitampe

2pl

lorang, lorampəɖə

lorangna(ng)

lorana(ng)

lorampe, lompe

3pl

derang, dempəɖə

deran(g)nya,dempəɖəyang

dempəɖəna(ng)

derampe, dempəɖəpe

4.2 Case

Case markers cliticize to the right edge of noun phrases, including
pronouns. The distribution of the indefinite determiner attu, variably pre-nominal and post-nominal, provides evidence that
the case markers are not simply nominal suffixes. Attu frequently intervenes between noun and case marker, as in buk=attu=ring
[book=det=abl] ‘from a book’. Depending
on the properties of individual matrix verbs, complement clauses are also
case-marked under certain conditions. Case contrasts include accusative, dative/allative,
and ablative (which has some instrumental functions). Unlike the
dative/allative and ablative case markers, the accusative case marker (§4.2.1)
has not developed from a postposition, but its distribution (as a noun phrase
clitic, rather than a nominal suffix) does not differ from the case markers
derived from postpositions.

I
do not treat possessive forms with =pe
(see Table 3) as genitive case, since although morphological case is a contact
linguistic development in SLM, the possessive clitic and its distribution are a
straightforward retention from the isolating Malay varieties that were brought
to Sri Lanka from Southeast Asia.

4.2.1 Accusative case

Accusative case marking is present across Sri Lankan Malay dialects and speech communities. Accusative case markers are obligatory
in definite patient noun phrases, regardless of animacy. They may also be used
in indefinite contexts where they indicate specificity. There are a number of
semantically identical variant forms, including nyang, nya, yang, and ya.

(1)

Guru(*=nya)

teacher(*=acc)

buk=nya

book=acc

su-baca.

pst-read

The teacher read the book.

(2) Malay

Apa

what

yang

comp

guru

teacher

baca?

read

(or Apa yang dibaca guru?)

What is the teacher reading? (lit. What (is it) that the teacher is reading?)

Slomanson (2006) proposed an etymology for these forms in which all the
variants are derived from the complementizer nyang. In that analysis, the accusative case marker was introduced
as a generalization of a reanalyzed accusative-marked WH-element, apa (Malay ‘what’). The string apa yang in (2) was reanalyzed as the
WH-constituent, deriving originally from apa followed by complementizer yang, as we find in lexifier varieties
in Southeast Asia. The lexifier construction is a WH-cleft (see (2), from
Malay). The reanalyzed status of yang
was generalized to include accusative case-marking of non-interrogative noun
phrases (3).

(2) Malay

Apa

what

yang

comp

guru

teacher

baca?

read

(or Apa yang dibaca guru?)

What is the teacher reading? (lit. What (is it) that the teacher is reading?)

Example (3) shows apa-yang in
a question:

(3)

Apa=yang

what=acc

guru

teacher

arə-tulis.

prs-write

What is the teacher reading?

SLM yang is ungrammatical with
WH-subjects in sentences.

(4)

Sapa(*=yang)

who(*=acc)

buk=yang

book=acc

arə-baca?

prs-read

Who is reading the book?

Tense-bearing sentential complements are marked with accusative =yang
or a variant such as =nya.

(5)

[Farida

Farida

buk=yang

book=acc

arə-pi]=yang

prs-go=acc

se

1sg

arə-liyat.

prs-see

I see Farida writing the book.

4.2.2 Dative/allative case

The Sri Lankan Malay dative/allative marker =nang
(variant: =na) is derived from the homophonous allative preposition in
Javanese (Slomanson 2005, 2006). As a case marker, it is used with the dative
arguments for which individual verbs subcategorize. It also signals the
thematic status of nominal arguments as recipient, beneficiary, and experiencer
NPs.

(6)

Farida

Farida

Tariqa=nang

Tariqa=dat

duit=yang

money=acc

tər(ə)-kasi.

neg.fin-give

Farida does not give Tariqa the money.

4.2.3 Ablative case

The ablative
case marker =dəri (variant forms
=dəring and =ring) is
derived from the Malay preposition dari
‘from’. It is also used instrumentally, in contexts such as ‘with a pen’, which
is a functional-semantic extension, given the straightforward etymology of the
case marker. This is the case clitic used in all SLM varieties to express the
meaning conveyed by ‘in’ in the expression ‘in Malay’, or ‘in’ any other
language.

4.3 Relative clauses

Relative clauses obligatorily precede their nominal heads (cf. 7).

(7)

[Java

Malay

ar-omong]

prs-speak

cingala

Sinhala

poɖiyeng

boy

buk-pəɖə=yang

book-pl=acc

gulputi

white.person

attu=na

indf=dat

ɛ-kasi

prf-give

aɖa.

aux

The Sinhalese boy who speaks (Sri Lankan) Malay has given the books to a white person.

A relativizer homophonous with any of the variant phonological shapes
associated with the post-nominal accusative case morpheme (=nyang) sometimes appears as a prefix on
the verbal predicate in a relative clause. This is highly variable, and many
speakers do not have it at all. The relativizer is entirely absent from the
Hambantota district varieties.

4.4 Adjectives

Attributive adjectives precede nouns within noun phrases. Non-adjectival
modifiers in compounds also precede the head noun; however, this is subject to
dialect variation. There are lexicalized constructions in which an attributive
adjective follows a noun, but younger speakers may reverse the order in these
as well. Whereas the conservative order found in Colombo is a retention of the
Malay lexifier order, the orders are invariably reversed in Kirinda. Table 4
exemplifies terms for types of individuals, with a consistent contrast between
the items as listed in Bichsel-Stettler’s (1989) Colombo-area glossary, and
contemporary Kirinda usage.

Table 4. Linear order in noun-modifier sequences (orang=‘person’)

Colombo

Kirinda

noun - adjective

adjective - noun

orang akal

orang booɖo

orang kaaya

orang maara

akal orang

booɖo
orang

kaaya orang

maara orang

‘clever
person’

‘stupid
person’

‘rich
person’

‘angry
person’

noun - noun

noun-noun

orang justa

orang uuɖik

orang
bantuan

orang
reepot

justa orang

uuɖik
orang

bantuan
orang

reepot
orang

‘liar’ (‘lie person’)

‘simple person’ (‘village
person’)

‘assistant’
(‘help person’)

‘troublesome
person’ (‘report person’)

4.5 Categorial flexibility

Predicate adjectives are productively tense-marked and negated by most
speakers, although for many older speakers, this is restricted to a relatively
small class of items.

(8)

Ittu

det

poʈʈi

box

a(rə)-kosong.

prs-empty

That box is becoming empty.

(9)

Ittu

dem

poʈʈi

box

tərə-kosong.

neg.fin-empty

That box did not become empty.

Speakers for whom this is not completely productive use a generic
auxiliary to support non-present tense morphology to indicate change of state,
as in kosong si-aɖa [empty
PST-AUX] for ‘emptied’, and kosong si-jaaɖi [empty
PST-become] with the same meaning.

5. Verb phrase

5.1 Linear order, tense and aspect

Tense and aspect morphemes are obligatorily adjacent to associated
lexical verbs, with or without phonological reduction. Tense morphemes appear
as prefixes (10), and the sequence of tense morpheme and verb cannot be
interrupted by adverbs or other material.

(10)

Farida

Farida

nasi

rice

su-makan.

pst-eat

Farida ate rice.

5.2 Tense morphology

Tense morphemes are restricted to affirmative verbs (and adjectives) in
which there is no modal prefix. For affirmative verbs, there is an explicit
three-way tense contrast (past tense su-/si-,
present tense a(rə)-, and future
tense a(n)ti-), although the
present-tense form of the verb may be used to refer to the future, if the
future reference is recoverable from context or a temporal adverb. Past tense
markers demonstrate considerable dialectal variation in phonological shape,
although most forms are variants of su-
and nyang-. Although tense markers
obligatorily precede most finite verbs, on which they are phonologically
dependent, high-frequency stative verbs (for example tau ‘know’) may remain unmarked. The pre-verbal distribution of
functional morphemes in the verbal domain is characteristic of Malay varieties
generally, in which adverbial particles cognate with SLM functional elements
mark aspectual contrasts. Unlike the lexifier Malay varieties and unlike
canonical creoles, SLM does not permit the stacking of functional elements at
the left edge of a verb. In casual prosody, these elements are never accented,
and the vowel is typically reduced, so that in the case of su, the vowel nucleus is often reduced to schwa or deleted.
Paratactic sequences of events require repetition of the prefix on each
non-matrix verb, except in verb-verb compounds and serial verbs, even where
this is redundant. In this respect, the pre-verbal functional elements in SLM
behave as straightforward inflections.

5.3 Perfect aspect: abbis

The distribution of full and phonologically reduced variants of the
Malay perfect marker abbis (asa, as,
ai, e) depends on whether the element
is expressed in a finite clause. In a non-finite (participial adjunct) clause, abbis- precedes the verb (cf. 11), and
in a finite clause, -abbis follows
the verb (cf. 12, where the predicate has a past-tense marker).

(11)

Se

1sg

[məsigit=nang

mosque=dat/all

a(bbi)s-pi]

prf.nfin-go

ruma=nang

house=dat/all

su-datang.

pst-come

Having gone to the mosque, I came home.

(12)

Se

1sg

məsigit=nang

mosque=dat/all

su-pi-abbis.

pst-go-prf

I have finished going to the mosque.

A finite perfect construction can
also be formed by abbis-V plus the
auxiliary aɖa:

(13)

[Abbis-baung],

prf.nfin-awaken

[tee

tea

abbis-miinung],

prf.nfin-drink

Rikas

Rikas

iskuul=nang

school=dat/all

abbis-pi

prf.nfin-go

aɖa.

aux

Having awoken, having drunk tea, Rikas has gone to school.

5.4 Progressive aspect: ambe(l)

The progressive post-verbal element ambe(l) occurs in the progressive
construction (cf. 14), in which the highest ambe clause adjoins to the
auxiliary aɖa. In the perfect progressive construction (cf. 15),
although abbis appears in pre-verbal
position, ambe, also an aspectual element, does not.

(14)

[Tee

tea

miinung

drink

ambe],

prog

Rikas

Rikas

taksir

think

ambe

prog

aɖa.

aux

While drinking tea, Rikas is thinking.

(15)

Rikas

Rikas

ini

dem

ari-pəɖə

day-pl

ka

in

baru

new

ruma

house

attu

indf

abbis-rikat

prf.nfin-build

ambe

prog

(a-ɖuuɖuk).

(prs-aux)

Rikas has been building a new house these days.

The periphrastic perfect and progressive aspectual constructions are
summarized in Table 5.

Table 5. Periphrastic aspectual constructions

in
adjunct clauses

in
main clauses4

perfect
aspect

nasi abbis-makan

‘having
eaten rice’

(cf.
11)

nasi abbis-makan aɖa

‘has
eaten rice’

(cf.
13)

progressive
aspect

nasi makan ambe(l)

‘eating
rice’

(cf.
14-1)

nasi makan ambe(l) aɖa

‘is
eating rice’

(cf.
14-2)

Temporal conjunctions attach to
lexical verbs in SLM in general, with kapang
(‘when’) appearing in pre-verbal position where we would ordinarily find a
tense marker. Ambe(l), based on the right-branching
aspectually progressive subordinator sambil
(‘while’) in earlier grammars, now occurs post-verbally. This is because it
reflects aspect rather than tense. Only elements bearing a semantic
relationship to tense (a tense feature) are grammatical in pre-verbal position
in finite SLM clauses (Slomanson 2011+). It is a subordinator rather than an
auxiliary or an ordinary aspectual suffix. Other subordinators lacking a
semantic relationship to tense, such as kulung
(‘if’), also appear post-verbally.

5.5 Finiteness

Just as Sri Lankan Malay has pre-verbal tense marking, it also has
pre-verbal infinitival marking (mə-).
This is obligatory on lexical verbs in the complement clause of a matrix
predicate (cf. 16). The post-verbal dative/allative =na(ng) clitic is not
obligatory, and is subject to considerable variation in rapid speech.

(16)

Farida

Farida

nasi

rice

mə-makan=nang

inf-eat=dat/all

tərə-boole.

neg.fin-mod

Farida cannot eat rice.

In (16), a free-standing predicate modal of ability takes a complement
whose infinitival status is marked by the mə-
prefix and optional dative/allative clitic =nang.
As the matrix predicate, the modal is independently negated, and comma intonation
can easily separate tərə-boole from the rest of the
sentence, a clue to its status as a phonological word. The phonological shape
of the negation element indicates its finite status. The categorial status of
the modal is ambiguous, because many SLM adjectives can be tense-marked.

The morphological finiteness
contrast in the phonological shape of negation elements is also encoded in
syntax, as we will see. Finiteness does not make a consistent semantic
contribution to the sentence. It does however perform a discourse-pragmatic
function, permitting the reordering of clauses in sentences representing
sequences of events, in order to focus a participial adjunct clause that is not
the most recent event in a sequence (Slomanson 2011+). In common with infinitival
complements, participial adjunct clauses are not finite. Both the temporal
stacking of verbs and the finiteness contrast are demonstrated in the SLM
example in (17), in which the aspect-marked non-finite forms abbis-pi and abbis-blajar precede and contrast with the tense-marked finite form
su-tulis. The formal marking of
finiteness permits a temporally non-primary clause such as mulbar abbis-blajar to be
focused, by dislocation to the right edge of the sentence (cf. 18), while
retaining its status as a preceding event, relative to the matrix verb.

(17)

Iskuul=nang

school=dat/all

abbis-pi,

prf.nfin-go

mulbar

Tamil

abbis-blajar,

prf.nfin-learn

Farida

Farida

nyanyi-attu

song-indf

su-tulis.

pst-write

Having gone to school and learned Tamil, Farida wrote a song (in it).

(18)

Skul=nang

school=dat/all

abbis-pi,

prf.nfin

Farida

Farida

nyanyi-attu

song-indf

su-tulis,

pst-write

mulbar

Tamil

abbis-blajar.

prf.nfin-learn

Having gone to school, Farida wrote a song, having learned Tamil.

5.6 Negation

5.6.1 Negation and finiteness

Negation is affected by the finiteness contrast, yielding a system which
is not identical to the negation in vehicular Malay or Shonam, but which is
nevertheless clear linguistic evidence for specifically Shonam influence, since
pre-verbal negation rigidly blocks tense morphology in negated contexts. Its
morphosyntactic instantiation in SLM however – pre-verbal and affixal
– differs from what we find in Shonam. The negation element, tər(ə)-, modifies main verbs that are
interpreted as having tense, although there can be no tense morpheme when the
negation morpheme is present (cf. 19). Tər(ə)- is also used to negate adjectives, including modal elements with
predicate adjective distribution (cf. 20).

(19)

Rihan

Rihan

mə-tidur=nang

inf-sleep=dat/all

tərə-liiyat.

neg.fin-try

Rihan is not trying to sleep.

(20)

Rihan

Rihan

mə-tidur=nang

inf-sleep=dat/all

tərə-boole.

prs-mod

Rihan cannot sleep.

Non-finite verbs, including imperatives,
verbs in non-finite nominalized clauses and verbs in participial adjunct
clauses, are negated with jang-, a
functional extension of the negative imperative marker in the Malay lexifier
varieties. There is also a post-verbal negative imperative marker tussa. Bukang marks constituent negation.

5.6.2 Temporal contrasts in finite negation morphology

The functional contrast between the finite negation
element tərə- (and its variants) and
the non-finite negation element jang- (and its variants) obscures the
three-way tense contrast in SLM, a replication of the constraint blocking the
co-occurrence of tense and negation markers in Shonam. The co-occurence of negation
and past tense form of verbs, for example, is quite odd for Shonam and Tamil
speakers, although this is completely productive in Sinhala. The constraint is
partly circumvented with the finite marker tuma- (and its variants)
marking non-past negation on lexical verbs, and with the finite marker tərə-marking past
negation. These can be treated as portmanteau forms, and are not blocked by the
constraint, which applies to the stacking of functional morphemes.

5.7 Modality

A
syntactic subclass of modals in SLM appear obligatorily to the immediate left
of the lexical verb (henceforth abbreviated MV, based on the linear order
modal-verb), just as tense, negation, and infinitival morphology do, although
not simultaneously.

We
can see in the examples in (21) through (25) that the surface distribution of
the modal in the MV construction (21) is identical to that of tense morphemes
(22) and negation elements (23). The negation element tər(ə)-, a portmanteau form, nevertheless indicates that
the verb to its immediate right is finite.

The modal of obligation məsti, which can be phonologically reduced
to məsə or məs,
exhibits the same syntactic behavior as bər-, the preverbal phonologically dependent MV variant of boole.
The modal məsti (and its variants) cannot occur
post-verbally nor as a free-standing predicate. These modal prefixes can only
occur with verbs that would have a tense prefix if the modal were not there.
Consequently, they are associated with finiteness, just as the negation marker tərə- is.

Finite matrix verbs
preceded by a bound functional element such as a modal or a negation marker
take infinitival rather than bare verbal complements. We see this in sentences
such as Miflal [mə-pi=na] bər-liiyat [Miflal INF-go=dat/all can-try] ‘Miflal can try to go’.
The bracketed infinitival complement can also appear to the right of the matrix
verb. It is also possible for a bare verb to appear to the right of a matrix MV
form such as bər-liiyat. In that case, the verb may be part of a verb-verb compound or a serial
verb construction.5

modal of ability (phonologically
reduced)

(21)

Ali

Ali

Məlayu

Malay

bər-omong.

mod-speak

Ali can speak Malay.

past tense

(22)

Ali

Ali

Məlayu

Malay

su-omong.

pst-speak

Ali spoke Malay.

negation (tense contrast unmarked)

(23)

Ali

Ali

Məlayu

Malay

tər-omong.

neg.fin-speak

Ali does not speak Malay.

modal of obligation (M-V order
only)

(24)

Ali

Ali

Məlayu

Malay

məs(ti)-omong.

mod-speak

Ali must speak Malay.

negation and modality

(25)

*Ali

Ali

Məelayu

Malay

tərə-məs(ti)-omong.

neg.fin-mod-speak

Ali does not have to speak Malay.

Modals other than məsti can also occur in constructions
in which the modal has the same distribution as a predicate adjective, and like
predicate adjectives, can be negated and tense-marked, although not
simultaneously (cf. 26). For some speakers, these can appear to the left of a lexical
verb (cf. 27), to which they are however not bound (neg-mod v). If these bimorphemic modals (prs-mod or neg-mod) were to cliticize to the left edge of a lexical
verb, this would violate the constraint blocking the stacking of functional
morphemes at the left edge of a lexical verb.

modal of obligation (predicate adjective)

(26)

Ali

Ali

[nyanyi

song

attu

indf

mə-bilang=na]

nfin-say-dat/all

(*karang)

(*now)

tərə-boole.

neg.fin-mod

Ali cannot sing a song now.

negation and modality

(27)

?Ali

Ali

Məlayu

Malay

tərə-boole

neg.fin-mod

omong.

speak

Ali cannot speak Malay.

One frequently-occurring modal
predicate, kəmauan, is a noun that can be negated in this syntactic context.

(28)

Hambantote=na

Hambantota=dat/all

mə-pi=na

inf-go=dat/all

tər-kəmauan.

neg.fin-want

I do not want/need to go to Hambantota.

6. Sentences

6.1. Simple sentences

Word order is somewhat flexible,
with strong preference for object-verb ordering, but frequent verb-object
orders, and highly frequent use of null subjects. The extent to which VO order
marks object focus is variable depending on speaker, discourse context, and
prosody.

6.2. Complex sentences

The quotative marker kata
functions in practice as a declarative complementizer, permitting recursive
embedding of clauses. Relative clauses (§4.3) precede their heads, and can
consist of a simple clause and a gap (i.e. [learned Malay girl] meaning ‘the
girl who learned Malay’). Conjunctive participles of the form abbis-verb (‘having learned Malay’) can
be stacked, as can adjunct clauses conveying simultaneity with ambe (‘while’). Such adjunct clauses can
be used as main clauses by adjoining to an auxiliary such as aɖa or duuduk (variant: ɖuuɖung).

7. Other features

7.1 The benefactive construction

In the benefactive construction, consisting of V + kasi
(lit. ‘give’), which is productive, the activity performed by the lexical verb
is performed for the benefit of someone other than the agent. The beneficiary is frequently implied
rather than stated, as in the latter (main) clause in (29). The beneficiary,
when it is expressed, is in the dative.

(29)

Ittu

dem

sunami=na

tsunami=dat

pica

broken

e-pi

prf-go

subbat,

because

sini

here

kubalile

again

e-kinja

prf-do

kasi.

ben

Because of (its) having been destroyed by the tsunami, they have made (built) this for us here again.

7.2 Passive voice

Passive voice is marked post-verbally with kinna, which is bound to a verb with
tense morphology (cf. 30). This is
productive across verbs and contexts in Kirinda, but the function and
distribution of kinna varies across
dialects. In the Kandy-area data and description in Nordhoff (2009), for
example, kinna is a tense-marked verb
indicating surprise or adversity with respect to the event referred to by a
subsequent verb, and Nordhoff claims that a productive passivization strategy
is unavailable (2009: 502-503).

(30)

Anak-pəɖə=yang

child-pl=acc

sə-lupa=kinna

pst-release=pass

apa?

aux

Have the children been let out of school?
