APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Eskimo Pidgin
Lexifier: Other | Region: North America
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/76
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Eskimo Pidgin

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 76.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Complex sentences

9. Lexicon

1. Introduction

The Eskimo languages were the
lexifier languages of a number of pidgins used in interethnic contacts in the
Arctic region. Traces of Eskimo-based pidgins (henceforth Eskimo pidgins) have
been recorded at least since the 17th century and up until the 20th century,
albeit very rarely and extremely fragmentarily. In several cases, the Europeans
who documented Eskimo Pidgin were not aware of its pidgin status, but thought
that they documented an Eskimo language. The only conscious and serious attempt
at the documentation and analysis of an Eskimo Pidgin is the article by
Vilhjálmur Stefánsson (1909) on
the so-called Eskimo Trade Jargon of Herschel Island, which is based mainly on
North Alaskan Iñupiaq, Siglitun
(the Mackenzie dialect of Western Canadian Inuktun),
and English, but which also contains words of Athabaskan,
Hawaiian, Portuguese, and Scandinavian origin, some of which may have come via
other pidgins.

In
this survey, the Eskimo Trade Jargon of Herschel Island is taken as the main representative
for Eskimo Pidgin. The data collected by Stefánsson
(1909) are the most complete and extensive for any Eskimo Pidgin. For this
reason, it was also the main source for other secondary studies of Eskimo-based
contact languages (e.g. Drechsel 1981, Drechsel & Makuakāne
1982, Wurm 1992). Furthermore, there are a
considerable number of additional sources of this Pidgin or of closely related
pidgins that were spoken in the same region and era, such as Faber (1916),
Kelly & Wells (1890), Murdoch (1892), Ray (1885), Rosse
(1883), and Van Valin (1945).

Among
the studies on Eskimo Pidgins in other regions are, according to region:
northeastern Siberia - de Reuse (1996); eastern Canada - Bakker (1996a), Dorais (1996); Greenland - Petersen & Rischel (1987), van der Voort
(1996b). The text section in this survey contains a dialogue in 18th century
West Greenlandic Pidgin.

In
this survey, the term Eskimo is used
as a general term to refer to the languages that belong to the Eskimo branch of
the Eskimo-Aleut linguistic family. In linguistics, Inuit is used as a general term for the dialect continuum of
northern Alaska, the Canadian Arctic, and Greenland, which represents only one
of the Eskimo languages. The term Inuit
is furthermore used as an autodenomination by eastern
Canadian and Greenlandic speakers of Inuit dialects and means literally
‘people’. In accordance with the charter of the Inuit Circumpolar Council, the
term Inuit is used here as a generic ethnonym, avoiding the non-native term Eskimo for the indigenous peoples who can be referred to more
specifically as Iñupiat, Yupit,
Inuit, Inuvialuit, Kalaallit, Yuit,
etc. Where possible in this survey, the more specific terms are used, both for
people and languages.

2. Sociohistorical background

Eskimo Pidgins were reported
from all over the Arctic where Eskimo languages were spoken (van der Voort 1994, 1996a, 1997). There appear to be two major
traditions of Eskimo Pidgin usage in the contacts between Inuit and European
whalers and traders. In the northern Atlantic region, Eskimo Pidgins were used
roughly from the 17th to the 19th centuries, especially in the Davis Strait,
where it may also have been referred to as Whaler.
In this tradition, ships from different nations brought Europeans in contact
with Inuit. In the northern Pacific region pidgins were used in the 19th and
20th centuries. In this tradition, mostly American ships with international
crews formed the basis for contacts with the Inuit, from which the Herschel
Island Trade Jargon emerged. Furthermore in the 19th century, Scots and
Americans organized whaling expeditions in the Hudson Bay, while Russians
traded in the Bering Strait. In addition to these mainly seasonal contacts,
there were permanent contacts between Inuit and Westerners in which Eskimo
Pidgins were used.

In
all these regions and times Eskimo cultures and languages represented the
constant factor, which is why Eskimo became the main lexifier language of the
pidgins that emerged. Whatever the region, whatever the tradition of contact with
Westerners and however poorly documented, the Eskimo Pidgins display important
basic similarities with regard to the sound system, grammatical structure, and
lexicon. This makes the Eskimo Pidgins highly interesting for scholars of
language contact, sociolinguistics, and language typology.

Pidgins
used in contacts between Inuit and neighbouring indigenous peoples were
documented even more sparsely than those used in contacts between Inuit and
Westerners. Stefánsson (1909: 219-220) documented
scraps of Gwich’in Pidgin Eskimo (“Loucheux Jargon from Eskimo”), an Athabaskan-Eskimo
pidgin of the Yukon River region. Bakker (1996b) and Bakker & Grant (1996)
present pieces of information about Loucheux Jargon
and Broken Slavey, two French-English-Athabaskan-Algonquian pidgins of the Mackenzie River delta
that were also used by Inuit. De Reuse (1996) discusses the possibility of
Chukchi-Eskimo pidgins in northeastern Siberia on the basis of a word list in
Kelly & Wells (1890). These pidgins were also used by Westerners in the fur
trade, and it may be difficult both to determine whether they already existed
before contact with Westerners and to distinguish them from the Eskimo Pidgins
that originated in contact with Westerners.

3. Sociolinguistic situation

Today, many Inuit are
bilingual or have shifted to a national language, and no Eskimo Pidgins are
reported to be in use. Therefore, all sources on Eskimo Pidgins presently
available are written documents that contain data recorded at least 70 years
ago. No audio recordings of Eskimo Pidgins are known, although such documents
may exist. Moreover, there may still be elderly people who have used Eskimo Pidgin, and who might be able to produce it again. They could be consultants in
a fascinating research project.

4. Phonology

In the Pidgin examples of the
database and the current chapter, the transcription used in the original
sources, of which Stefánsson (1909) is the most
important, was preserved. In his introduction, Stefánsson
refers to Powell’s field manual (either 1877 or 1880) as the standard for his
transcription. In accordance with Powell, Stefánsson
indicates stress by an apostrophe following the stressed syllable, and hyphens
are used to separate syllables, as in sī’-la
‘weather’.

The
actual phonemic vowel system of Eskimo Pidgin probably had more contrasts than
the three-vowel system of the Eskimo lexifier language. It seems likely that
non-Inuit speakers of the Pidgin perceived a contrast between /i/ and /e/ and between /u/ and /o/. There is no sound
evidence for more phonemic contrasts. The sources do contain more distinctions,
but these are probably phonetic distinctions. In Stefánsson
open vowels are contrasted with close vowels by a breve
diacritic, as with the <ĭ> (IPA [ɩ]) in ka’-lĭ-kō ‘fabric’
vs. <i> (IPA [i]) in kai-li ‘come’. Neither Powell nor Stefánsson make it clear what a macron over vowels, as in sī’-la ‘weather’, is intended to convey.
Its frequent use in Stefánsson suggests that it indicates
an open pronunciation. Wurm (1992: 278-279), however,
regards it as a marker of length (representing it by doubling, e.g. <siila> ‘weather’), which may very well have been Stefánsson’s own interpretation.

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

mid

e

o

open

a

It is unclear whether either phonetic length or the open-close
opposition has phonemic status in the Pidgin. In Eskimo proper, phoneme length
and stress are unrelated, and the notation of length in the Pidgin sources
seems independent of stress notation too. However, Stefánsson’s
use of the macron above vowels, as in
ī’-la ‘he, she, it’, ĭg’-lū ‘house’, kē’-rūk ‘wood’, ō-mē’-lĭk
‘captain’ etc., is not consistent, neither in his notation of Pidgin forms nor
in the Eskimo forms in his etymological explanations. It is likely that the
notation of length in the Pidgin refers to phonetic quality rather than
(phonemic or phonetic) quantity, e.g. a ‘long’ [i]
vs. a ‘short’ [ɩ].

Table 2. Consonants
(IPA)

bilabial

labio-dental

labio-velar

alveolar

palatal

velar

glottal/uvular

plosive

voiceless

p

t

tʃ

k

(q)

voiced

(b)

(d)

g

nasal

m

n

ŋ

trill

r

fricative

voiceless

s

ʃ

voiced

v

(w)

h

lateral

voiceless

(ɬ)

voiced

l

glide

(j)

Since the Eskimo
Pidgins are extinct, it is difficult to verify whether such quality differences
correspond to phonemic distinctions (or any other spelling difference, for that
matter). In Eskimo proper they do not, whereas length does. It is likely that
the Inuit distinguished length in their pronunciation of Pidgin words of Eskimo
origin. It is more difficult to say something about pronunciation by the
non-Inuit outsiders, who formed a very heterogeneous group with regard to
linguistic background. In the questionnaire examples I have maintained the
original transcription from the sources. In the IPA charts I have chosen to
ignore much of the variation encountered in the sources, hence no distinctive
length or open-close contrasts are assumed to exist.

The
consonants <ñ>, <c>, <j> and <y> in Stefánsson
represent IPA [ŋ], [ʃ], [ʒ] and [j], respectively. Stefánsson’s <j> is encountered only in one uncertain
item, and probably does not represent a phoneme in the Pidgin. His <y> is
only attested in the Eskimo etymologies, although it may have represented a
phoneme in the Pidgin. It is possible that there was an opposition between
voiced and voiceless consonants in the Pidgin, but this is difficult to prove.
Entries in the consonant table given between brackets either represent phonemes
of limited occurrence, uncertain phonemes, or phonetic variants of other
phonemes.

The
consonant /b/ is a phoneme of limited occurrence that exists mainly in words of
non-Eskimo origin. It is encountered in the spelling of words of Eskimo origin,
but only preceding <l>, and probably pronounced as [pl], but perhaps even
as [pɬ]. The
letter <d> is usually is encountered as a spelling variant of /t/. It is
also sometimes found in a position preceding <l>, and there probably
pronounced as [tl], perhaps even as [tɬ]. It is
possible that /ɬ/ had phonemic status in the Pidgin as spoken by Inuit in words of
Eskimo origin. /ɬ/ was
probably considered by the Westerners as /kl/, /tl/
or a similar combination. Both /q/ and /k/ are represented by Stefánsson as <k>. It is likely that /q/ had phonemic
status in Pidgin words of Eskimo origin when spoken by Inuit. As Wurm (1992: 278) observes, its “pronunciation by Eskimo
speakers would undoubtedly have been in accordance with the sound-structure of
Eskimo [...]. However, European speakers would have had great difficulties with
the Eskimo uvular consonants which were either replaced by velar consonants by
them, or at the end of words usually dropped.”

It
is unclear whether consonant “length”, which is indicated in the sources by
consonant doubling, has phonetic or phonemic status in the Pidgin. Again, it is
possible that Inuit speakers of the Pidgin distinguished short and long
consonants in their pronunciation of Pidgin words of Eskimo origin, but they do not necessarily
match the consonant doubling applied by Stefánsson.

5. Noun phrase

A general
trait of pidginization that can be found in Eskimo pidgins across the Arctic is
the relati­ve scarcity of morpho­logy, especially when compared to the
main lexifier language, Eskimo. In spite of the polysynthetic nature of Eskimo
grammar, the structures encountered in Eskimo-based pidgins are highly
analytic. In the Eskimo languages, nouns and verbs may contain anaphoric person
markers, referring to possessors and arguments, whereas personal pronouns are
used for pragmatic purposes such as emphasis. In the Eskimo Pidgins nouns and
verbs are not inflected, and pronouns are used for person reference. Original
Eskimo inflections may occur as fossilizations only.

The
available sources include three pronominal forms, which originate from Eskimo
absolutive singular pronouns. In the Pidgin they can also be used with a plural
sense. No clear plural pronouns were attested. The Eskimo second person plural
pronoun illuit is attested in the
Pidgin (however rarely) also as a singular pronoun. The originally demonstrative pronoun mûgwa was translated by Stefánsson (1909: 227) as:
‘this, these, those, they’.

Table 3. Pronouns

1sg

awoña

2sg

ĭllĭpsī

3sg

ī’la

1pl

(undocumented)

2pl

illuit

3pl

(undocumented)

(1)       ababa  mûgwa  silatani  kaili

say      this        outside  come

‘Tell them to come out.’ (S 230)1

On one occasion Stefánsson (1909: 221) registered a dual form of the
pronoun ĭllĭpsī ‘you’: ĕlĭp’tĭk
‘you two’. It was not interpreted by his consultant as a dual, but it was
considered to have a special meaning: ‘you too’. It probably represents
interference from Eskimo proper.

Attributive
possession is expressed through juxtaposition of a Possessor (pro)noun and a Possessum noun, in that order:

(2)       kiñma  artegi

dog      coat

‘dog’s
harness’ (S 223)

(3)       awoña kammik

I          boot

‘my
boots’ (S 224)

Similar
expressions were attested in Eskimo pidgins all over the Arctic, throughout
different times, e.g. 17th century
Greenlandic Pidgin Uvanga Nulia ‘my wife’ (van der Voort
1996b: 177).

In
adjective constructions, both orders Noun-Adjective and Adjective-Noun are
attested:

(4)       akkīa   añaninni picū’ktu   pītcûk                             (Noun –
Adjective)

price    big           want        not

‘I don’t want to pay a big price.’; ‘He
does not ask a big price.’ (S 223)

(5)       tipi     ŏktcûk                                                                (Adjective –
Noun)

stink oil

‘kerosene’
(S 228)

The
main word order in locative expressions is Noun-Location, which also corresponds
to the order in Eskimo proper:

(6)       kamotik    kolane   innītin

sled          above    sit

‘Sit on top of the sled.’ (S 225)

6. Verb phrase

Eskimo Pidgin nouns and verbs are not distinguishable through morphology, and sometimes
they cannot even be distinguished semantically. In the following example, kaukau means both ‘to
eat’ and ‘food’:

(7)       kaukau  pītcūk  owoxña

eat         not      I

‘I have no food.’; ‘I have not
eaten.’ (S
226)

Neither nouns nor verbs
display any morphological complexity in Eskimo Pidgins. Arguments are expressed
by nouns or pronouns. There are no dedicated TAM markers, but certain nouns,
verbs or adverbs can be used to express distinctions of tense, aspect, and
mood:

(8)       ū’blû   kaili     pûgmûmmi

day      come   now

‘It is just dawning.’ (S 231)

The word tereva ‘That’s enough!’ can perhaps be considered as a perfective marker:

(9)       nanako      opinera    malo    tereva     awoña   kaili     suli      picuktu

afterward  summer   two     enough  I            come   more   want

‘After two summers are finished I
want to come again.’ (S 229)

There are no habitual
markers, although some of the documented utterances that contain the word picūktū ‘to want’ are provided (by Stefánsson) with a
habitual translation:

(10)     kimmik  innuk  kaukau  picūktū

dog        man    eat         want

‘The dog bites (is inclined to
bite) people.’
(S 226)

Other uses of ‘to want’ have a more modal
interpretation:

(11)     ō-mī-ak-pûk   a-lak’-tok   pĭ-cū’k-tok   a-woñ-a

ship                go               want             I

‘I want to go on shipboard.’ (S 218)

With
respect to the next example Stefánsson comments that,
according to context, the example may alternatively mean ‘He said nothing.’, ‘I
said nothing.’, etc. It is likely that intonation played an important
role in illocutionary distinctions:

(12)     ababa  pī’tcûk

say      not

‘Shut up!’ (S 222)

Even
though Eskimo Pidgin does not have any morphology, morphologically complex
forms from the highly polysynthetic Eskimo lexifier language have ended up in
the Pidgin as intransparent monomorphemic forms. The
etymology of Eskimo Pidgin words often shows fossilized Eskimo case markers,
person markers and derivational elements. Stefánsson
discusses this phenomenon, mentioning among others the following example:

(13)     īla   kaktuña

he   hungry

‘He
is hungry.’ (S 218)

From an Eskimo perspective,
this would be an ungrammatical sentence, since in the local Iñupiaq
dialect the verb would be analyzed as kaak-tuña [be.hungry-1.sg.indicative], and the entire sentence would mean ‘*He I’m
hungry.’ Many similar
examples can be found in the Pidgin. The second and third word
in the following sentence contain third person singular subject indicative
suffixes (here: ‑tu(k)), whereas the subject is a first
person:

(14)     tuktu      tautuk    picuktu  awoña

caribou see         want     I

‘I am hunting caribou.’; lit. ‘I want to see caribou.’ (S 231)

There
are also traces of derivational elements. Stefánsson
(1909: 229) lists picūktū ‘to want’ and picunittcu ‘not
to want’, ‘needless’ as separate entries. The latter contains the Eskimo
negative morpheme ‑nngiC-.
It was doubtlessly recognized by Stefánsson, but
there is no reason to assume it was productive in the Pidgin.

(15)     oblumi   kaili     picunittcu

today     come   needless

‘He
does not need to come today.’ (S 229)

Note that the first word oblumi ‘today’
contains a locative case marker from Eskimo (-mi) that is probably not productive in the Pidgin, even though in
this case the word is in contrast with ū’blû ‘day’ in example (8). Fossilized
Eskimo morphology was attested in the sparse samples of Eskimo-based pidgins
from all over the Arctic, and was also illustrated and discussed in van der Voort (1996b, 1997).

7. Simple sentences

The interpretation of Eskimo Pidgin utterances is highly context-dependent (Stefánsson
1909: 221). Often subjects are not expressed overtly, and the interpretation of
the argument depends on the pragmatic context.

(16)     innitin picuktu

sit        want

‘I want to sit down.’; ‘He wants to sit down.’ (S 225)

Since there is neither an
existential verb nor an expletive subject in Eskimo Pidgin, the following
example may represent an existential expression when used in the proper
context:

(17)     ekalluk  hŏmōlûktū

fish        many

‘plenty fish’ (S 224)

Although word order is
variable, the order SOV is prevalent.2 This is also
the default order in Eskimo proper.

(18)     wai’hinni artegi   annahanna pûgmûmmi

woman    coat     sew               now

‘The woman is sewing a coat now.’ (S 224)

Stefánsson
(1909) contains many examples of OVS word order, but the subject in all of
these is expressed by a personal pronoun. This was for Wurm
(1992: 279) a reason to assume that the most basic word order is not OVS (but
SOV). In Eskimo proper, pronouns are used for contrastive focus. This may not
be their function in Eskimo Pidgin, which has no other strategies of person
reference than pronouns. In view of the strong context-dependence of Eskimo Pidgin utterances discussed by Stefánsson (1909:
221), it seems possible that pronouns were used for disambiguation, and their
clause-final position (even following the normally sentence-final negation
marker, as in example (7)) reminds one of extraposition.

(19)     kapi     suli      pĭcuktu  awoña

coffee  more   want      I

‘I want coffee also.’; ‘I want
some more coffee.’ (S 230)

8. Complex sentences

Eskimo Pidgins have neither
conjunctions nor complementizers. Eskimo Pidgins were probably
mainly used in a rather limited range of discourse settings. Only few complex
sentences were documented in Eskimo Pidgins, and even those consist of
juxtaposed simple sentences and phrases:

(20)     innuk  ababa  tusara        awoña

man    say      understand     I

‘I know that a man is talking
(therefore I hear a man talking).’3 (S 231)

(21)     ō-mē’-lĭk  a’baba   ca’-vik   ka’ili    i-li’p-si

captain    say         knife     come   you

‘The captain orders you to bring
him a knife.’ (S
222)

(22)     tuktu      mûkki    ila   nanakō elekta

caribou dead      he   later      go

‘He killed (some) caribou, then he went away.’ (S 228)

(23)     awoñ’a  ca’vik  ai’tcū,  ila   awoñ’a  ekal’luk   ta’llimat   a’itcū

I             knife   give     he   I             fish          five           give

‘I gave him a knife (for which) he
gave me five fish.’ (S 223)

(24)     awoña   tai’manna  illipsi   cabakto    picuktu

I             this.way     you     work        want

‘I want you to do it this way.’ (S 231)

A distinction between
relative clauses and other attributive or even predicative constructions cannot
really be made.

(25)     kimmik  nagorok   pitcûk  uñacĭksu elekta  picuktu  pitcûk  awoña

dog        good        not      far            go        want      not      I

‘When I have poor dogs I don’t like to make long trips.’ (S 231)

9. Lexicon

The lexicon of the Herschel
Island Trade Jargon displays some notable structural and etymological features.
As is typical for pidgin languages, the origin of the lexical items is very
diverse and reflects the linguistic background of the people involved in the
contact from which the Pidgin emerged. Stefánsson
observes that the main contributing languages are English and the local Eskimo
languages, in this case especially Northern Alaskan Iñupiaq.
Furthermore, as observed by Drechsel & Makuakāne (1982), the Herschel Island Trade
Jargon contains words of Hawaiian (Pidgin) origin. As
Table 4 (adapted from van der Voort 1997: 384) shows,
these items were attested repeatedly in a variety of sources, and must have
formed part of the Pacific pidgin tradition.

Table 4. Hawaiian
etyma in the Eskimo Pidgin lexicon

Hawaiian

year

Eskimo Pidgin

meaning

?anā?anā

1907

a’-na-na

‘sickness,
pain’

hana

1882

1907

hanahana

han’naha’nna

‘work’

‘sew’

hula

1905

Hula Hula

‘party’

make

1907

1920

muk’-ki

mucky

‘dead,
broken’

‘dead,
broken’

pau

1882

1893

1881

pau

pow

pow

‘not’

‘no’

‘no,
not any’

panipani

1882

1907

pûni-pûni

pun’-nipun’-ni

‘sexual
intercourse’

‘sexual
intercourse’

wahine

1882

1905

wahine

Wahini

‘woman’

‘woman’

Also the word kaukau ‘to eat, food’
in examples (7) and (10), which is a very widespread Pidgin word, may have
entered Eskimo Pidgin via Hawaiian. The word ababa ‘to say’ in examples (12),
(20), and (21) is also found in other Pacific sources of Eskimo Pidgin, and
likely originates from Chinook Jargon wawa ‘speech, to talk’.

There
are also some items from Portuguese and Scandinavian languages which are
attested in various Eskimo Pidgins spoken at different times in different parts
of the Arctic region, in both the Atlantic and the Pacific traditions. The word
for ‘woman/wife’ may be regarded as a shibboleth for the identification of
Eskimo Pidgins. It may ultimately derive from Old Icelandic kona ‘wife’, used in
interethnic contacts between Greenlandic Inuit and Norse settlers in 13th to
15th century Greenland, and it may have been reinforced later by other
Scandinavian languages, e.g. Danish kone. It is attested in Eskimo Pidgins
all over the Arctic, as shown in Table 5 (adapted
from van der Voort 1997: 382).

Table 5. A
characteristic item of the Eskimo Pidgin lexicon

region

year

form

meaning

Greenland

1656

1687

1722

1746

1764

1817

konâ

kona

kóna

kona

kœne

cunà

‘wife,
woman’

‘woman’

‘woman’

‘woman’

‘the
son’s wife’

‘woman’

Eastern
Canada

1897

1912

koo-nee

Koo-nee

‘woman’

‘woman’

Alaska

1882

1884

1889

1907

kunia

ku-ní-ä

koo ne’a

kū’-nī

‘woman’

‘woman’

‘wife’

‘wife,
woman’

One of the characteristics of contact-induced lexicons is the occurrence
of forms with ambiguous etymology. Those forms that happen to be similar
between the languages in contact have a high chance of being retained in the
resulting pidgin. However limited the lexicon of Eskimo Pidgins, a number of
forms that may have a dual origin can be attested. About mī’lūk ‘milk’ Stefánsson (1909: 227) notes that this word is regarded by
the Westerners as originating from a European language, e.g. English milk, whereas Inuit consider it as an
Eskimo word, meaning ‘milk’, ‘nipple’, ‘to suck’ etc., which can be
reconstructed for Proto-Eskimo as *məluγ ‘suck (breast)’ (Fortescue
et al. 1994: 197). The same can be said of pau’ra or pau’dlu ‘(gun)powder’, which can
be related to the English word powder.
Alternatively, it can be related to Eskimo, where similar words exist in
various dialects, e.g. paula ‘soot’ in Iñupiaq,
which can be reconstructed for Proto-Eskimo as *paγu(la) ‘soot’ (Fortescue et al. 1994: 246).
Note that the same word was also attested in 18th century Greenlandic Pidgin,
as baussamek
(with a fossilised instrumental case ending, see van der Voort
1996b: 222). Another possible example is dak’tū ‘dark’. The Siglitun form taaq ‘darkness’ is conspicuously similar with the English
word dark, although Stefánsson (1909: 224) relates it to a Siglitun
form rendered as d’aktuak
‘it is dark’.

One
of the most intriguing examples of a lexical item with a dual origin in Eskimo
Pidgins is the word mikaninni
‘small, little, a child’ (Stefánsson 1909: 227), also
attested as pigenini
‘little child’ in Faber (1916: 264).4 The European origin of this word can be
traced back ultimately to Portuguese pequeninho ‘very small’, ‘child’, possibly via a maritime
pidgin. The Eskimo counterpart is obviously the intransitive verb root miki- ‘to be
small’, and it is almost as if the resulting form was created with a conscious
emphasis of the dual origin. In analogy with mikaninni, the Eskimo verb root angi- ‘to be big’ was given a similar
treatment: añanin’ni (Stefánsson
1909: 223), in which the first half is clearly of Eskimo origin and the second
half of undeniable Portuguese origin. The fact that also this form was attested
by an independent source (as angenini in Faber 1916: 309) shows that both words represented established
lexical items of the Herschel Island Trade Jargon.
