APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Zamboanga Chabacano
Lexifier: Spanish | Region: Southeast Asia
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/46
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Zamboanga Chabacano

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 46.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Complex sentences

9. Other features

10. Lexicon

1. Introduction

Zamboanga Chabacano is one of the
varieties of the Spanish-based creole on the Philippines commonly known as
Chabacano (see also Sippola, this volume, on the two Manila Bay creoles,
Ternate Chabacano and Cavite Chabacano). Despite its pejorative original
meaning, ‘tasteless, vulgar’, the name Chabacano is used by the speech
community as a self-designation. Alongside Papiamentu and Palenquero in the
Americas, Chabacano, with its variety Zamboangueño, is one of three
Spanish-based creoles worldwide with the highest number of speakers. It shares
interesting features with other European-based creoles in Asia, a fact that
distinguishes it from the Atlantic creoles. Furthermore, unlike these,
Zamboanga Chabacano has been acquiring a mixed character, especially from the
20th century onwards.

The total number of Zamboanga Chabacano
speakers can be estimated to be around 300,000. In scientific publications,
Zamboanga Chabacano is also named Southern Mindanao Creole. Zamboanga Chabacano
is spoken on the island Mindanao in the south of the archipelago. The highest
degree of vitality of Zamboanga Chabacano, and of Chabacano generally, is
observed in the city of Zamboanga and the surrounding area in the extreme
western part of Mindanao. Outside Zamboanga there are at least two subvarieties
in Cotabato City and Semporna (Sabah, Malaysia) which do not differ much from
it. Zamboanga Chabacano is also used in the region as a lingua franca by
diverse ethno-linguistic groups. It is codified for public and private purposes
with an anarchic Hispanic orthography; there are Bible translations and
literary writings, and there were also, until recently, press publications in
Zamboanga Chabacano. Public oral use has recently been increasing in
broadcasting, in church, and in some public schools.

2. Sociohistorical background

The Spanish-based creoles in the Philippines developed after the Spanish
conquest in the 16th century. The development of Chabacano is somewhat complex
due to different contact situations in time and space; this is especially true
for Zamboanga Chabacano, which, to our knowledge, was first mentioned by Adolf
Bastian (1870: 51). Whinnom (1956) suggested that Chabacano grew out of the
Portuguese Creole of the Indonesian island of Ternate; this creole had been
transported to the Philippines in the 17th century. Whinnom considered
Zamboanga Chabacano a layer of the Manila Bay creoles (Cavite and Ternate Chabacano). This theory was contested, principally by John Lipski (1992), who
posited a typical creolization of a Spanish-based pidgin with Tagalog
influences in the Bay of Manila. For the special case of Zamboanga Chabacano,
Lipski proposed a development of different stages from the 18th century
onwards: It arose in the garrison of the city of Zamboanga and absorbed
elements from Manila Bay Creole later. During the 19th century, Hiligaynon
elements were introduced through contact with ships coming from Manila which
had made a stop in the Central Philippines. Afterwards it was re-Hispanicized
by native speakers of Spanish who came to Zamboanga from Europe and Mexico. It
was also influenced by Cebuano, a Visayan language similar to Hiligaynon;
Cebuano was introduced by large-scale immigration. From the 1930s onwards, the
influence of English and, after the Second World War, that of the national
language Pilipino (= Tagalog) increased and especially affected the lexicon.
Consequently, Zamboanga Chabacano does not fit into the classification of
plantation, fort, and maritime creoles, nor can the dichotomy of exogenous and
endogenous creoles adequately describe the situation of Zamboanga Chabacano,
but it can probably be classified as a complex mixture of maritime, fort, and
maroon creole. In contrast to the Atlantic creoles, slavery played a marginal
role, but it was not totally absent, as claimed by McWhorter (e.g. 2000: 14,
fn. 1; for more details see Scott 1997). Recently, Fernández (e.g. 2006) has
suggested a creolization in situ due
to strong immigration from the Visayas (Central Philippines) around 1900.
Whatever the different theories on the origin of Chabacano, in the beginning
there was most probably a pidginized form of Spanish and/or Portuguese which
was used for intercommunication by different ethnic groups, namely European
Spaniards, Mexicans (including native speakers of Nahuatl), different speaker
groups of Western Malayo-Polynesian, and Chinese settlers who were mostly
Hokkien speakers. For a comparison of all varieties of Chabacano and a
comparison of these with Portuguese-based creoles in Asia, see Steinkrüger (2013+).

3. Sociolinguistic situation

Zamboanga City has a total population of 600,000 inhabitants (official
census 2000). Approximately two thirds of the population are Christians, mostly
Catholics, and the remaining part are Muslims. Besides Chabacano, the main
languages in Zamboanga are Cebuano, Tagalog, and Hokkien Chinese. English is a
widespread second language. There are also a small number of older speakers
with Spanish as their first language. Other languages, especially spoken by
Muslim immigrants from the smaller islands in the region, are Tausug, Samal,
Yakan, and Maranao. All of the languages mentioned above, except English, can
be acquired as a first or second language depending on one’s family background.
Zamboanga Chabacano is the dominant language of about half of the population;
it is decreasing as such but expanding as a second language, even in wider
areas of the Sulu and Celebes Seas. Nearly all inhabitants are at least
bilingual. For more details see Valles-Akil (2000).

4. Phonology

Zamboanga Chabacano has five (potentially) phonemic vowels in stressed syllables, namely /e, i, a, o, u/. In unstressed
syllables /i/ vs. /e/ and /u/ vs. /o/ are neutralized. It is still open to
debate whether there are really minimal pairs contrasting /i/ vs. /e/ and /u/
vs. /o/ even in stressed syllables. Taking into consideration spelling
“mistakes” such as gropo ‘group’ (< Spanish grupo) or the two variants salí and salé (both
meaning ‘leave; get out’ < Spanish salir), these two phonemes are
only potentially differentiated by the speakers (see also Forman 1972: 89).

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

mid

(e)

(o)

open

a

There are 16 phonemic consonants
in the language. The glides /j/ and /w/ in some cases show the same function;
for example, uwí and uyí both mean ‘to hear’ (< Spanish oír). The glottal stop is, in nearly all
cases, only a boundary marker between syllables starting with a vowel, and
there are only a few cases with phonemic contrasts, but these occur exclusively
in words of Austronesian origin such as bátaq
‘child’ vs. báta ‘(woman’s)
nightgown’. In cases
where the trill /r/ etymologically derives from Spanish /ṝ/, it can be
articulated with preaspiration as in péro
['pehro] ‘dog’ (< Spanish perro).
In syllable final position, /r/ is realized by many speakers as a retroflex, as
in muhér [mu'heɻ] ‘woman’.

Table 2. Consonants

bilabial

alveolar

palatal

velar

glottal

plosive

voiceless

p

t

k

ʔ <q>

voiced

b

d

g

nasal

m

ɲ
<ny>

ŋ
<ng>

trill

r

fricative

voiceless

h

lateral

l

λ
<ly>

glide

j
<y, i>

w <w>

Word stress is distinctive; for example: nadá ‘to swim’ (< Spanish nadar) vs. náda ‘nothing’ (< Spanish nada).

Orthography is more or less anarchic and
follows mixed principles: Sometimes it follows the system of Spanish, sometimes
that of English, and sometimes that of Tagalog (Pilipino). Neither word stress
nor accent is usually indicated (in contrast to the spelling system used in
this article and the database).

5. Noun phrase

The noun is invariable.
Natural gender is usually distinguished by different words, as nána ‘mother’ vs. tay ‘father’, or by muhér
‘woman’ and ómbre ‘man’ following the
noun, as in karabáw ómbre ‘male water buffalo’ vs. karabáw muhér ‘female water buffalo’. There are a few exceptions referring
to humans like méstra ‘female
teacher’ versus méstro ‘male
teacher’, which are morphologically distinguished.

Nominal number marking is
expressed by the Philippine particle mga
[maŋa], which is preposed directly to the noun: el mga kása ‘the houses’.

There is an indefinite and a definite article: un hénte ‘a person’ (úno
would be the numeral ‘one’) and el hénte
‘the person’.

Generic nouns are expressed with the preposed definite article with a singular noun,
as in el muhér kyére ómbre ‘women like men’.

There are three adnominal and pronominal demonstratives: éste (1),
ése (2), and akél (3), which occur predominantly before the noun. More or less
as in Spanish, (1) corresponds to objects located near the speaker, (2) to
objects located near the hearer, and (3) to others. This three-dimensional
system is supported by those Philippine languages in contact with Chabacano
(e.g. Cebuano) that also have three demonstratives.

Possessive constructions: In adnominal possessive constructions, the possessor follows the
possessed, as in el kása del ómbre
‘the house of the man’. There are different possessive pronouns, short and
long, with and without article, which mostly follow the Spanish pattern; for
example: el ditúyo kása, el túyo kása, túyo kása, and tu kása,
all meaning ‘your house’. The plural forms are of Austronesian, i.e. Hiligaynon
origin together with di- (<
Spanish de ‘of’) as in diíla ‘their’. The only exception is diustédes ‘yours (polite)’ (see Table
3).

The numerals are all of
Spanish origin: úno, dos, tres,
kwátro etc. Besides these, English
and Austronesian numerals are used in certain contexts (e.g. years are mostly
expressed in English). Ordinal numbers are formed with the Austronesian prefix ika- (e.g. ika-dos ‘second’).

Except for a small set referring to humans (e.g. gwápa ‘nice (f.)’; cf. example 1), adjectives are invariable. Unlike in Spanish, the order is always
adjective-noun as in un gránde kása
‘a big house’. The comparative
construction is frequently marked with kóntra
(< Spanish contra ‘against’),
which is also found in non-standard varieties of Spanish. In most cases the
standard gets the object marker kun;
the standard follows the comparative marker. Consequently, the order is
subject-marker-standard, as in mas gránde
éle kóntra kunéle ‘s/he is bigger than him/her’.

(1)

blángka

light.skinned

éle

s/he

S/he is light-skinned.

There are no indefinite pronouns.
The word úno (< Spanish uno ‘one’) is exclusively used as a
numeral meaning ‘one’. Equivalent expressions for ‘somebody’ and ‘something’
are tyéne kyen and tyéne kósa respectively, whose literal
meaning is ‘there is who/what’.

The personal pronouns are of mixed Spanish and Austronesian (mostly Hiligaynon)
origin, as seen in Table 3.

Table 3. Personal pronouns and
adnominal possessives

subject

object

independent pronouns

adnominal possessives

1sg

(i)yo

ku(n)mígo

(i)yo

(di)mi(yo)

2sg

(e)bo(s), (e)tu, usté, ka

kumbós, kuntígo

(e)bo(s), (e)tu, usté

(di)tu(yo)

3sg

éle, ‘le

kunéle

éle

(di)su(yo)

1pl

kitá (incl.), kamé (excl.)

kanáton, kanámon

kitá (incl.), kamé (excl.)

diáton, diámon

2pl

kamó, ustédes

kanínyo, kunustédes

kamó, ustédes

diínyo, diustédes

3pl

silá

kaníla

silá

diíla

The different uses of the pronouns for the second person are motivated
by degrees of intimateness: bo is the
most intimate pronoun, whereas the unmarked addressing form is tu with its variant etú. Instead of these, many younger speakers use the Austronesian
form ka (enclitic form of ikáw) as a subject pronoun. The forms usté and ustédes only occur in formal contexts.

6. Verb phrase

Zamboanga Chabacano has three verbal markers relating to tense, aspect,
and mood: ay- (irrealis marker), ya- (perfect(ive) marker), and ta- (progressive marker), plus the zero
marker. Morphonologically, the markers can be defined as prefixes. Combinations
of the markers are not possible at all. Unmarked non-stative verbs mostly do
not occur with past reference. The temporal adverb ya ‘already’ behind the unmarked dynamic verb or a verb prefixed
with ya- marks a completive. Table 4
summarizes the meaning of the verbal prefixes, i.e. their respective tense,
aspect, and mood functions, and the Spanish etymon.

Table 4. Tense-Aspect-Mood markers
in Zamboanga Chabacano

form

tense/aspect/mood

Spanish etymon

Ø

depending on the context

ya-

perfect(ive)

ya ‘already’

ta-

imperfective

está ‘(s/he) is, stays’

ay-

irrealis

hay de (or hay que) impersonal obligative ‘one has
to’

The following examples illustrate the different uses of the verb with
and without a marker:

(2)

ay-andá

irr-go

ba

q

tu

you

na

loc

chángge?

market

Are you going to the market?

(3)

légu

soon

un

a

ráto

while

komé

eat

tu

you

You will eat soon.

(4)

ya-tené

pfv-have

yo

I

tricycle

tricycle

I possessed a tricycle.

(5)

ya-komprá

pfv-buy

ya

compl

‘le

3sg

éste

this

líbro

book

S/he already bought the book.

(6)

deántes

before

tu

you

ta-mirá

ipfv-see

mga

pl

páharo

bird

alyá

there

kósa-kósa

what-what

kláse?

kind

What (various) kinds of birds did you used to see there?

(7)

ta-ablá

ipfv-say

kamé

1pl.excl

syémpre

naturally

el

art

berdád

truth

Of course, we always say the truth.

(8)

ay-káy

irr-fall

sigúro

probably

ulán

rain

Probably it will rain.

(9)

si

if

iyo

I

etú

you

ay-kasá

irr-marry

kunéele

obj.3sg

If I were you, I would marry her/him.

For verbal negation there are
at least three different strategies: The negator hendéq, which is of Austronesion origin, is used for propositions
referring to the present or the future. The negator nuwáy (< Spanish no hay
‘there is not’) is used for propositions referring to the past; this is
obviously a pattern of Visayan origin (John U. Wolff, p.c.). For negative
imperatives no is used. For a small
set of verbs like pwéde ‘can’, kyére ‘want’, and sábe ‘know’, no- [nu]
could be analyzed as a prefix: nupwéde,
nukyére, nusábe.

(10)

nusábe

neg.know

yo

1sg

kyen

who

éle

s/he

I don't know who it is.

Volition is expressed by the verb kyére (< Spanish quiere ‘s/he wants’) or keré
‘want’ (< Spanish querer). Another
modal category is potentive, which
is unknown to Spanish but widespread in Austronesian languages. It is expressed
by the verb pwéde (< Spanish puede ‘s/he can’) as in ya-pwéde le asé kebrá el ditúyo báso
‘s/he unintentially broke your glass’ (Forman 1972: 209). Epistemic modality is expressed by one the many particles of
Austronesian origin, as for instance sentence final daw for reported information. An important and frequent optative particle is éra:

(11)

éra

opt

hendéq

neg

bo

you

sentí

feel

ofendído

offended

Hopefully, you don't feel offended.

In most cases, no copula is
used. Nevertheless, for emphasis, there is amó,
which is a particle of Austronesian origin: si
Grace amó mi nána ‘it is really Grace who is my mother’ (more details in
Aoto 2002). For constructions referring to the past, the form estába (< Spanish estaba ‘(s/he) stayed, was’, the
imperfective past of estar) can be
used: estába le méstra ‘she was a
teacher’. Its use does not conform in all cases to the uses of estar in Spanish, where this copula is
mostly used for temporary qualities, as for instance with estar de mal humor ‘to be
in a bad temper’ (for the other cases there is ser ‘be’). In the last example, Spanish would apply ser (more precisely, the form era) and not estar.

There are no directional serial
verb constructions in the language. Nevertheless, up to five verbs can be
combined, and constructions with three verbs are quite frequent: ya-mandá le dále sabé ‘s/he ordered to
inform him/her’.

7. Simple sentences

The unmarked word order is
VSO, which is the typical Philippine pattern. The order SVO is also possible,
but it is pragmatically marked, and this is also true for any other order: andá le na pwéblo ‘s/he goes to the city
(of Zamboanga)’ versus éle andá na pwéblo
‘it is her/him who goes to the city’.

In Zamboanga Chabacano, double object constructions are ungrammatical.
In constructions with ditransitive verbs
such as dále ‘give’, one of the
objects, normally the recipient, has to be marked with the object marker kon (< Spanish con ‘with’): ay-dále yo
kontígo ágwa ‘I will give you water’.

In experiencer constructions,
with or without special verbs, the experiencer is sometimes treated as a
subject and sometimes not: kyére yo
mángga ‘I like mangoes’, dwéle mi
kabésa ‘I have a headache’, and ta-myédo
kitá ‘we (incl.) are afraid’.

There is no morphosyntactic passive
in Zamboanga Chabacano.

The constructions marking reflexivity
and reciprocity are clearly
distinguished from one another. The lexeme kwérpo
‘body’ (< Spanish cuerpo) is
sometimes used for reflexive constructions but shows a low token frequency. The
most frequent strategy to express reciprocity is to use the circumfix ma-X-han, of Austronesian origin.

The verbs dále ‘give’ and mandá ‘order’ are used for causative verb constructions (see the
remarks on serial verbs above), as in dále
sabé ‘to inform’ (lit. ‘give know’) and mandá
kumprá ‘let buy’ (literally ‘order buy’).

The structure of content questions follows the pattern
of Spanish and most Philippine languages: The question word (e.g. kyen ‘who’ or kósa ‘what; which’) is sentence initial, as in Kósa kyére bo kumprá? ‘What / which one do you want to buy?’ or Kyen a-bení este ága? ‘Who came this
morning?’.

All polar questions are intonationally marked with a high pitch at the
end of the phrase, without word order change. Additionally, there is the
optional question marker ba of
Philippine origin, occurring in second position of the interrogative sentence: Tyéne ba tu sen? ‘Do you have money?’ or
Éste ba ditúyo ermáno? ‘Is this your
brother?’

8. Complex sentences

There is no difference between sentential coordination conjunctions
and those of noun phrases: In both cases, it is pati (of Philippine origin) and in acrolectal texts, i (< Spanish y ‘and’). The adversative conjunction is péro (< Spanish pero
‘but’), which exists as a loan element in many Philippine languages. The
coordinator ‘or’ is o (< Spanish o).

With verbs of speaking (such as ablá ‘say’) and knowing (such as sábe/sabé
‘know’), complement clauses show zero-marking or marking by
the complementizers ke (< Spanish que) or kay, of Philippine origin. Complement clauses headed by preguntá ‘ask a question’ and kyére/keré ‘want’ are marked by kay
or are zero-marked. The complementizer ke
is more frequent in acrolectal texts.

Adverbial clauses are introduced by (enden)ántes
‘before’, kwándo ‘when’, or the
subordinators kay or porkáwsa ‘because’, si ‘if’, básta ‘lest’,
and some others.

Relative clauses generally follow the head. With a human subject which is to be
relativized, there are three markers used to construct the clause: First, kyen ‘who’ (only for humans), second kel ‘that’, and third a zero relative
marker. Direct objects can be relativized both with or without the object marker
before the marker. Pied-piping of instruments is possible but not very
frequent.

(12)

íste

this

el

art

úmbre

man

Ø

Ø

ya-lyegá

pfv-arrive

ayér

yesterday

This is the man who arived yesterday.

9. Other features

Besides the prototypical features
which Chabacano shares with other creole languages, especially of Ibero-Romance
origin, all the features and structures which differ from Spanish phonology,
grammar, lexicon, and pragmatics are due to the influence of Austronesian
languages in the Philippines. For instance, the agent marker of proper names is
si (e.g. si Teresa). There are about a dozen derivational morphemes of
Philippine origin, like maka- for
causatives or -han for locatives (for
more details, see Steinkrüger 2003). There are another dozen frequent discourse
markers which are also of Philippine origin (especially for epistemic modality;
see also §6 on verbs), like daw,
which marks quotativity in a postposed position (see Forman 1972: 95–97
and 214–218 on these particles). Other Philippine features have already
been mentioned in the sections above.

10. Lexicon

As for the lexicon, apart from Spanish, the major input from Philippine
languages comes from the Visayan language Hiligaynon (also called Ilonggo),
which was used formerly as a lingua franca in the region (following Frake 1971;
also Lipski 1992). Besides Spanish and Hiligaynon, national, regional, and
various local contact languages have influenced the lexicon of Zamboanga Chabacano. Cebuano, the major Western Visayan language in the southern
Philippines, has especially had an important impact on the lexicon, as has
Tagalog (Pilipino), which only recently began influencing the Philippine
languages all over the islands. Despite close geographical contact with
Zamboanga Chabacano, the local languages Tausug, Subanon, and Yakan have had
very little influence on the Zamboanga Chabacano lexicon. In her analysis of a
basic vocabulary of more than 6,000 entries, Riego de Dios (1989: 188) states
that 83% of the items are of Spanish origin, about 15% of Philippine origin,
and 2.5% of English origin. More than 30 years after her analysis, it can be
assumed that English influence has increased and Spanish influence has
diminished. A very small number of words, albeit structurally important ones,
are certainly of Portuguese origin: kiláya ‘how’ < Portuguese que
laia ‘what kind’; ele < Portuguese ele ‘s/he’; and na,
a multifunctional locative preposition, < Portuguese na, which is a
merger of the preposition em ‘in’ and the feminine singular article a.
The importance of Mexican input is shown by words like chángge ‘market’
< tiangue (a Mexican Spanish word of Nahuatl origin) or konsikíya ‘thirsty’ < Spanish con sequía ‘with dryness’, also
widespread in Spanish varieties of Mexico. The most complete dictionaries to
date are Riego de Dios (1989) (which takes the variety of Cotabato (Mindanao)
into consideration and also includes all the items of Ternate and Cavite Chabacano) as well as the forthcoming dictionary compiled by the Chavacano
Reader Project at Ateneo de Zamboanga University.
