APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Kikongo-Kituba
Lexifier: Bantu | Region: Central and East Africa
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/58
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Kikongo-Kituba

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 58.

1. Introduction

2. Names

3. Phonology

4. Morphosyntax

5. Other structural characteristics

6. Closure

1. Introduction

Bantu-based
Kikongo-Kituba is spoken in the southern part of the Republic of Congo, in the
southwestern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, and in the northern part
of Angola (see Map 1). It is lexified primarily by Kimanyanga, a member of the
Kikongo language cluster (Bantu H16), which was already functioning as a major
trade language by the time the colonization of the Congo (the present Democratic
Republic of Congo) started in the late 19th century. Like Lingala,
Kikongo-Kituba evolved mostly out of population movements and contacts
associated with labour migrations, especially during the 1891–1898
construction of the railway connecting Kinshasa to the Atlantic Ocean. The
Bakongo people’s resistance to participating in the colonial forced labor
prompted the colonizers to bring labourers from as far as the eastern part of
the present Democratic Republic of Congo to build the railroad (Samarin 1989).
(Kikongo‑)Kimanyanga was adopted as the labourers’ lingua franca. (The
reasons for this evolution are articulated below.) Gradually, it emerged as the
vernacular of early colonial administration posts west, south, and east of
Kinshasa (while Lingala was expanding from the North into Kinshasa and would
eventually drive “Kikongo” out of the colonial capital), thanks to the colonial
auxiliaries, who accompanied the colonizers and acted as their interpreters,
and to the merchants and Christian missionaries. They all relied on the same
language variety in their interactions with indigenous populations farther
inland. The initial auxiliaries came from West Africa and were obviously no
more familiar with the local languages than the Europeans. Thus, they relied on
the language they had learned at the coastal gateway to the colony.
(Interestingly, the relevant West African populations have typically been referred
to as Sénégalais ‘Senegalese’, though
they included other West Africans, some of them Anglophone.)

The geographical
location of the Kongo Kingdom (see lower shaded area on Map 2) as the gateway
of colonial expeditions into the hinterlands must have been an important factor
favoring the adoption of Kimanyanga as a colonial lingua franca. The need for
the exogenous labour force to communicate with the local population and buy
goods from them for their daily maintenance is another relevant factor. Perhaps
the most important critical factor was the fact that Kimanyanga had already
established itself, before the exploitation colonization of central Africa, as
the trade language of the region, even east of the Kongo Kingdom (in the Teke
area), along the trade routes for slaves and ivory, among other precious
commodities of the time.

Bantuists have hardly
expressed any interest in Kikongo-Kituba, having focused typically on languages
of the Kikongo cluster, including Kiyombe, Kintandu, Kiladi, and Kivili, among
others, in addition to Kimanyanga. The oldest academic studies focusing on or
mentioning this new vernacular include Fehderau (1966), Heine (1970), and
Samarin (1989, 1990). Noteworthy in this particular case are studies such as
Ngalasso (1984, 1989, 1993), which identify the language as Kikongo, the
prevailing name among its native speakers outside the Bakongo region,
particularly in the Bandundu region, east and south of Kinshasa.

2. Names

Kikongo-Kituba
has also been identified by several other names, including: Kikongo ya leta (or Kileta) ‘the public administration’s Kikongo’; Kikongo ya bula-matadi or bula-matari
(or Kibula-matadi or Kibula-matari) ‘the colonial agent’s
Kikongo’ (lit. ‘the stone-breaker’s Kikongo’); Mono/Munu kutuba ‘I speak/say’ (whence Kituba ‘way of speaking’); Ikele
ve ‘be not; it isn’t true’; and Kikongo
commercial ‘trade Kikongo’. Mono
kutuba and ikele ve are used
particularly in the Republic of the Congo, the second alluding derisively to
the invariant form of the verb, its lack of inflections, and the reduced
grammar of the language relative to the Bantu morphosyntactic canon. Kikongo commercial was used in the
Christian missions, during the colonial era, in opposition to Kikongo Kisantu (lit. ‘saints’
Kikongo’). The latter name appears to be associated with the mission of
Kisantu, in the Lower Congo region, where the oldest senior seminary was
situated and scholastic materials were produced by the Jesuit fathers.

All these names
are quite descriptive of the language’s identity and/or origins in opposition
to what was construed outside the Lower Congo River area as a unified Kikongo
language and a unified Bakongo population. In reality people in the Lower Congo
identify themselves by separate ethnic and language names, viz. Ki-/Ba-Yombe, Ki-/Ba-Manyanga,
Ki-/Ba-Ntandu, Ki-/Ba-Fioti, Ki-/Ba-ladi, etc. (with the prefix ki- used for the language and the plural
prefix ba- used for members of the
ethnic group, the singular prefix being mu-).
Interestingly, the term Bakongo is
not used for speakers of Kikongo-Kituba, apparently because of its origins as a
lingua franca between populations speaking their own separate ethnic
vernaculars and maintaining their diverse ethnic identities.

Kikongo ya leta is due to the fact that the contact language was
adopted by the Belgian colonial administration in the regions where it is now
spoken. For more on this, see Mufwene (2009). Kikongo-Kituba also serves as the
medium of instruction in the region, a practice fostered by the fact that it functions
as the region’s urban vernacular, although it still alternates (and therefore
competes) in many families with an ethnic vernacular, especially when the
parents have migrated recently from a rural area.

Kikongo-Kituba’s
(native) speakers outside the Bakongo area do not think they speak the same
language as the “Bakongo”, regardless of whether or not they are aware that
there is no single unified Kikongo language spoken by the latter. For one
thing, Kikongo-Kituba’s speakers hardly understand what is said in any of the
languages of the Kikongo cluster. They also know that their language is not an
ethnic one, a peculiarity which distinguishes it from traditional Bantu
languages which also serve to distinguish one ethnic group from another. They
are caught in a perversion created by the colonial administrators and Christian
missionaries who invented a “Bakongo” ethnic group, perhaps by association with
the precolonial Kongo Kingdom, and spread a derivative of Kimanyanga, under the
same Kikongo label, into the
Kwango-Kwilu area, where it was more meaningfully adopted as the natural name
for the new “language” brought to the region by the Europeans and their
auxiliaries. As the colonization of the area progressed, more and more of these
auxiliaries included natives of the Lower Congo. Later on, the speakers of the
imported language would discover that the Bakongo people actually do not speak
like them but kept the name anyway.

Overall, the names tell
us a history of the emergence of a new language (variety). They also make
evident the extent to which it has diverged and autonomized from its lexifier.
Some of them refer to the kinds of contact situations either in which
Kikongo-Kituba originated or which contributed to spreading it, while some
others such as Kikwango and Kikwilu (Mufwene 1997) identify a
geographical area where it serves as a major urban vernacular and has developed
its own regional peculiarities.

3. Phonology

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

mid

e

o

open

a

Table 2. Consonants

bilabial

labio-dental

labio-velar

alveolar

palatal

velar

plosive

voiceless

p

t

k

voiced

b

d

g

nasal

m

n

trill

r

fricative

voiceless

f

s

voiced

v

z

lateral

l

glide

w

j
<y>

Kikongo-Kituba
has five vowels: /i, e, a, o, u/ and sixteen consonants /p, b, t, d, k, g, f,
v, s, z, m, n, l, r, w, j/ (cf. Tables 1–2). The liquids /l/ and /r/
merge to /l/ in the speech of some, especially those whose ethnic languages
have no /r/. Thus some French words such as bureau
‘office, desk’ and secrétaire
‘secretary’ that have been borrowed into Kikongo-Kituba are realized,
respectively, as bilo ~ biro and sekeletele ~ sekeretere.  The only consonant clusters consist of
nasals and obstruents, as in mbombó
‘nose’ and nkísi ‘medicine’. Such
combinations can also be followed by a glide, as in nkwéso ‘rubber (ball)’. The voiced velar stop /g/ typically occurs
in combination with a nasal. Vowels do not nasalize before nasal consonants,
probably because, as should be evident from the examples above, the nasal forms
a syllabic unit with the following, rather than the preceding, segment. Thus, mbombó ‘nose’ is normally syllabified as
mbo$mbó, not as *mbom$bó. Finally, Kikongo-Kituba has none of
the phonetically complex segments that appear in Lumwamu’s (1973) “diasystem”
of “ethnic Kikongo”, e.g. /pf, ts, dz/.

The dominant syllabic
structure in a Kikongo-Kituba word is CVCV. However, as noted above, the
structure NCV is common, even word-initially, such as in the greeting mbóte ‘hello’, and the nouns nzilá ‘road, way’ and ­ńti ‘tree,
stick’. In the latter case (but not in the former two), the initial nasal is
syllabic and the tone pattern is indeed HL (see below). There are also CGV
syllables, as in bwátu ‘canoe’, and mádya ‘food’ (usually spelled madia) and fyóti ‘small, a little’ (also spelled fioti). Unlike the other Bantu languages of the area, which belong
in the B group, Kikongo-Kituba has no closed syllables. (Kiyansi, B85, has
words such as mbwúl
‘rain’, mbiin ML ‘peanut’, and mbor ML ‘hello’.) The nasal is
homorganic with the following consonant. In the latter two respects,
Kikongo-Kituba’s syllabic structures are closer to those of Kimanyanga and
related language varieties of the Kikongo cluster.

One important
structural difference between, on the one hand, Kikongo-Kituba and, on the
other, different “ethnic Kikongo” varieties and the Bantu B languages of the
area, lies in the lexical tone patterns and the absence of grammatical tone
(Mufwene 1989, 1997; Ngalasso 1989). Kikongo-Kituba has a predominantly fixed
accent system, with the accent/tone borne by the penultimate syllable, as in
any of its names. The majority of the words have only one accent (high tone)
borne by the penultimate syllable (e.g. dísù
HL ‘eye’, kwísà HL ‘come.imp’, kàpítà LHL ‘foreman’, bábà
HL ‘mute’). Derivative words and conjugated verbs are especially subject to
this accent/tone placement rule, e.g. kù-sál-à
LHL ‘to work’ > sàl-á(k)à LHL
[work-ant] ‘(had) worked’, kù-sàd-ís-à LLHL ‘help’ (lit. ‘cause to
work’) > n-sád-ì LHL ‘helper’, kù-pés-à LHL ‘give’ > kù-pès-íl-à LLHL ‘give on the behalf, or
for the benefit, of’.

However, Kikongo-Kituba
also has a significant proportion of polysyllabic words either with only low
tones (e.g. mùntù LL ‘person’, mùnòkò LLL ‘mouth, opening’, dìkùlù LLL ‘leg, foot’, mbàlà LL ‘time’ as in ‘five times’) or
with a high tone on the last syllable or on both the penultimate and last
syllables (e.g. nzìlá LH ‘way, road’,
mbàlá LH ‘yam’, dìlálá LHH ‘citrus fruit’, and màbélé
LHH ‘breasts, milk’). In this group also fit some deverbal derivatives that
also involve partial reduplication, such as bì-lómbà-lòmbà
L-HL-LL ‘habit of asking for things’ and bì-túbà-tùbà
L-HL-LL ‘habit of talking too much (thus, being indiscrete)’.

These are in contrast
with reduplications such as pòló-pòló
LH-LH ‘characteristic of a person that talks too much, indiscrete’, màlémbè-màlémbè LHL-LHL ‘very slowly’,
and mbángù-mbángù ‘very fast’, which
have identical tonal patterns in both parts of the compound. For more on
reduplication in Kikongo-Kituba, see Ngalasso (1993). Kikongo-Kituba also has a
floating tone as in the imperative form ‘d́ia
‘eat’. Several words (such as ńda
‘long, tall’, ḿbi HL ‘bad’, and
ńti ‘tree, stick’) that start with a NC cluster and
contain only one vowel (thus have the segmental structure NCV) count as
disyllabic, because the nasal bears the high tone (consistent with the
tone-on-the-penultimate-syllable pattern) and becomes syllabic. Words with a
floating tone are also disyllabic, at least from the point of view of duration,
although there is no segment bearing the high tone with which the word starts.
Below, low tones will be indicated by the absence of a high tone, also
identified in this case as pitch accent in African linguistics, in the case of
languages such as Kikongo-Kituba and Swahili.

4. Morphosyntax

4.1 Pronouns and nouns

Personal
pronouns are invariant. They are given in Table 3.

Table 3. Personal pronouns in Kikongo-Kituba

1sg

móno

2sg

ngé

3sg.anim

yándi

3sg.inan

yó

1pl

béto

2pl

béno

3pl

bó

Kikongo-Kituba
maintains noun class prefixes, which serve primarily to designate number
opposition, as it no longer requires subject-verb and noun-modifier agreement,
nor does it require pronominal elements to vary according to the nominal class
of the antecedent noun. The distinction is now based on the opposition ±human and on number (singular/plural).
However, Kikongo-Kituba continues to show derivations and noun-class shifts for
augmentative or diminutive functions in a discourse. Thus:

(1)  a.  mw-ána      ya           Ø-bakála

cl1-child   conn      cl1a-man/male

‘boy’

b. b-ána         ya           Ø-bakála

cl2-child   conn      cl1a-man/male

‘boys’

(2)  a.  Ø-bakála    na          yándi

cl1a-man  conn      3sg

‘her
husband’

b. ba-bakála   na          bó

cl2-man    conn      3pl

‘their
husbands’

Classes
1/1a–2, 3–4, 5/5a–6, and 7 are the most productive, having
attracted many nouns from Bantu classes 9 or higher, through reanalysis into 1a–2,
as in Ø-ndeke LL ‘bird’ vs. ba-ndeke
LLL ‘birds’. (Originally the form n-deke
was in class 9/10, with the invariant prefix N- governing different agreement markers on the verb depending on
whether the subject is singular or plural.) The productivity of the 1/1a–2
noun class has led to cases of double prefixation in the plural, as in mu-ndélé/mi-ndélé (cl3/4) ‘European(s)’ vs. mu-ndélé/ ba-mi-ndélé, which suggests
that the speaker has not completely reassigned the item to the cl1a–2, because *ba-mu-ndélé is ill-formed (Bokamba
1993).

This change has led to
a smaller number of class distinctions than in “ethnic Kikongo,” although this
peculiarity is not unlike in Kiyansi and Kiteke (two of the major ethnic
languages in the Bandundu region which have contributed to its development).
These languages are also like Kikongo-Kituba in exhibiting no subject-verb and
noun-modifier agreement (Mufwene 2006). In the third person, Kikongo-Kituba’s
personal pronouns are yándi
‘he/him/she/her’ (hum-sg), with no
gender distinctions, bó ‘they, them’
(hum-pl), and yó ‘it, them’ (-hum). There is no case marking on
nouns, just like in Bantu. Noun class prefixes carry no tone/pitch accent
unless they combine with monosyllabic stems with a floating tone as in má-dia (cl6a-eat)
‘food’ and kí-ma (cl7-thing) ‘a/the thing’ vs. bí-ma (cl8-thing)
‘(the) things’. The distinction with regard to definiteness is contextually
determined. The context may consist of the contextual domain of the discourse
or of the syntactic environment, as in kí-ma
yína [cl7-thing distal.dem] ‘that/the thing’.

4.2 Clauses

The
major-constituent order in Kikongo-Kituba is SVO throughout, even in questions
and in relative clauses, unlike in Kiyansi, for instance, where SOV and OSV
orders are also attested in main clauses, and OVS in relative clauses (Mufwene
2006). In questions, the WH constituent remains in situ, as in (3a–c).

(3)  a. Ngé     mon-áka         náni?

2sg      see-pst            who

‘Whom
did you see?’

b. Ngé     kwis-áka         na          náni?

2sg      come-pst        conn      who

‘Who
did you come with?’

c.  Ngé     vand-áka        wápi?

2sg      be/sit-pst        where

‘Where
were you?’ or ‘Where did you sit?’

Yes/no
questions start with the question marker ńki
(keti in some varieties), with the
sentence in the standard SVO order, as in ńki
Pételo kwis-áka? [Q Peter come-pst]
‘did Peter come?’ The maker ńki
(or keti) is simply omitted when there is a WH constituent, which remains in situ, in the sentence.

4.3 Negation

The
negation marker vé occurs phrase
finally, as in (4).

(4)  a.  Móno    kwis-áka       vé.

1sg        come-pst      neg

‘I
did not come.’

b. Muntu     mósi       vé          kwis-áka.

person     one        neg        come-pst

‘Nobody
came.’

c.  Muntu     mósi       kwis-áka      vé.

person     one        come-pst     neg

‘One
person did not come.’ ~ ‘Nobody came.’

d. Móno  mon-áka  kíma      mósi         vé            na            ńzo.

1sg      see-pst     thing     one           neg          conn        house

‘I
saw nothing in the house.’

e.  Móno    mon-áka    muntu/kíma    yína       na                 ńzo             vé.

1sg        see-pst       man/thing      dem       conn             house         neg

‘I
did not see that/the man/thing in the house.’

Since
the scope of negation can be ambiguous in (4e), with wide scope over the
sentence or narrow scope over na ńzo,
it is acceptable to guarantee the wide-scope interpretation by positioning vé before na ńzo.

4.4 Focus

Focus
constructions too keep the same standard SV order, although the focused
constituent occurs sentence-initially, bracketed by the marker si and the connective ya (the same one that is used in
relative clauses). Examples include (5a–b):

(5)  a.  Si         ngé           ya          béto        mon-áka.

foc      2sg           conn      1pl        see-pst

‘It’s
you that we saw.’

b. Si      kúna   ya           béto     kwend-áka.

foc   there   conn      1pl      go-pst

‘It’s
there that we went.’

The
syntactic structure of si … ya is
nothing at all like that of it’s … that
in English cleft constructions. Constructions such as si ngé muntu ya béto mon-áka [foc
2sg person conn we see-pst]
include no copula. Si appears to be a
general emphatic marker, which is also used sentence initially in exhortative
constructions (discussed in §4.7 under deontic modality).

4.5 Connectives

One
of the most distinctive features of Kikongo-Kituba relative to the Bantu canon
is the absence of subject-verb and noun-modifier agreement, as noted above.
Examples include Mwána méne kwísa
[child.sg prf arrive] ‘The child has arrived’ vs. Bána méne kwísa [child.pl
prf arrive] ‘The children have
arrived’ and mwána ya bakála [child.sg conn
man/male] ‘boy’ vs. bána ya bakála
[child.pl conn man/male] ‘boys’, in
which the connective remains the same, unlike in the Bantu canon. This
invariance of the connective is also typical of Kiyansi (Mufwene 2006). In
Kikongo-Kituba, the form of the connective changes only when the modifier is
pronominal, as in bakála na/*ya yándi
‘her husband’ and babakála na/*ya bó
‘their husbands’. The dominant form of the connective inside the NP is ya, which also introduces relative
clauses, as (6a–b):

(6)  a.  mwána     ya           ngé      monáka

child.sg   conn      2sg      see.pst

‘the
child that you saw’

b. mwána     ya        ngé      kwisáka      na          yándi

child.sg   conn    2sg      come.pst    conn      3sg

‘the
child that you came with’

A
resumptive pronoun is required when the relative NP is the object of a
preposition. Compared to the Bantu canon, the simplification lies in not
changing the form of the connective, by agreement, according to the head noun.

Na is an
all-purpose preposition, so to speak, which is identified as a connective in
Bantu linguistics. Its interpretations vary according to its object and the
construction it is used in. Thus Móno
kwisáka na bwála ‘I came to the
village’, Móno kwisaka na Petelo ‘I
came with Peter’, Móno tuláka yó na ńzo ‘I put it in the house’, Móno kée na mukandá yína ‘I have that book’ (lit. ‘I am with that book’), Móno méne katúka na bwála ‘I have come from the village’, and yándi
méne kóta na ńzo ‘he has gone/come into the house’. (Literally, katúka
means ‘originate’ and kóta means
‘enter’, both of which incorporate origin
and direction, respectively.
Variants of the relevant constructions are also attested without the connective
na.) This low-tone na should not be confused with the
high-tone ná ‘and’ (though the latter
is more like avec in nonstandard
French, which can also have the meaning of ‘and’), María ná Yoséfu méne balána ‘Mary and Joseph have got married’
(lit. ‘married each other’, see below regarding reciprocal verbs).

4.6 Verbal derivation

Kikongo-Kituba
has maintained the canonical Bantu verb extension system whereby new verbs are
derived from a particular verb base by suffixing an applicative, causative, reciprocal, or passive suffix. Normally, except for the passive, a verb extension
increases the argument valence of the base verb by one. Thus from (7a) one can
derive the causative in (7b), or the applicative in (7c). The applicative
suffix may also follow the causative, as in (7d), but a verb cannot have more
than two objects even if it carries more than one extension, so the patient/causee
‘somebody’ is simply implied here. (7e) shows a passive with unspecified agent.

(7)  a.  Pételo  méne     fúta        mbóngo   míngi.

Peter   prf        pay        money     much

‘Peter
has paid a lot of money.’

b. Pételo  méne     fut-ís-a            móno     mbóngo   míngi.

Peter   prf        pay-caus-fv   1sg        money     much

‘Peter
has made me pay a lot of money.’

c.  Pételo  méne     fut-íl-a            móno     mbóngo   míngi.

Peter   prf        pay-appl-fv   1sg        money     much

‘Peter
has paid a lot of money on my behalf.’

d. Pételo  méne     fut-ís-íl-a                  móno  mbóngo      míngi.

Peter   prf        pay-caus-appl-fv   1sg      money     much

‘Peter has made
[somebody] pay a lot of money on my behalf.’

e.  Pételo  méne     fut-ám-a              mbóngo        míngi.

Peter   prf        pay-pass-fv        money          much

‘Peter
has been paid a lot of money.’

From
(8a) one can derive the reciprocal in (8b):

(8)  a.  María    méne   búla     Pételo mbatá.

Mary     prf      hit       Peter  slap

‘Mary
has slapped Peter.’

b. María    ná       Pételo  méne   bul-án-a            mbatá.

Mary     and     Peter   prf      hit-recp-fv       slap

‘Mary
and Peter have slapped each other.’

In
principle one can also combine the causative and the reciprocal, as in (9), but
such constructions are not common.

(9)     Mpya     méne     bul-is-ána                   María    ná        Pételo    mbáta.

Mpya    prf        hit-caus-recp-fv       Mary     and     Peter     slap

‘Mpya
has made/caused Mary and Peter (to) slap each          other.’

In
all the applicative and causative constructions, the object of the extension
precedes the direct object. When both extensions are used, only the applicative
argument position is filled (cf. example (7d)).

4.7 Tense, aspect, and mood

As
explained in Mufwene (1990), Kikongo-Kituba has a clear morphosyntactic
division of labour between, on the one hand, tense markers and, on the other,
aspect and mood markers. The former are suffixed to the verb, whereas the
latter are free morphemes, some of them clearly verbal, that precede the verb.
The tense markers are -Ø (null suffix) for narrative
and -áka for past or anterior, as is evident from various
examples given above. The tense system is relative. The narrative tense makes possible what may be considered serial verb
constructions, as in (10a–b).

(10)

a.

Yándi

3sg

báka

take

ńti

stick

búla

hit

móno.

1sg

He/she took [a] stick [and] hit me..

b.

Móno

1sg

súmba

buy

mukandá

book

pésa

give

yándi.

3sg

I bought [a] book [and] gave him.

These
serial(-like) constructions (see §5) are more descriptive and dramatized
discourse alternatives to the following, which are also attested:

(11)

a.

Yándi

3sg

búla

hit

móno

1sg

ńti.

stick

He hit me with a stick.

b.

Móno

1sg

sumb-íl-a

buy-appl-fv

yándi

3sg

mukaná.

book

I bought him a book.

They
are not a by-product of the restructuring of Kimanyanga; they are a legacy of
“ethnic Kikongo” and languages such as Kiyansi out of whose contact
Kikongo-Kituba has evolved. They too produce serial(-like) constructions in the
narrative tense only.

Kikongo-Kituba has two
primary grammaticized aspectual markers, viz. ké(l)e ‘be’ for the durative,
which is realized as va(nd)á (sit-pst < vand-áka) in the past/anterior, and mé(n)e ‘finished’ for perfect.
The latter appears to be related to the intransitive verb mána ‘finish’ and the causative/transitive alternative manísa ‘finish’, though it is difficult
to explain why its form is different. In Kiyansi, the maker has the form ma, while the related verbs have the
form ówa ‘finish/end’ (intransitive) and omaayí ‘finish’ (transitive). Examples of the constructions include yándi kée ‘dia ‘he/she is eating’, yándi vaá ‘dia ‘he/she was eating’, and yándi mée ‘dia ‘he/she has eaten’.

There is also a habitual aspect, which is doubly marked
by the durative preverbal marker and by the past/anterior suffix áka, as in yándi kée dia-áka míngi ‘he/she eats a lot’. Sometimes the main
verb is in the infinitive, which is less common, and the aspectual marker tends
to have a fuller, non-contracted form in this case. In fact, to this native
speaker and writer the alternatives yándi
vandá kúdia and yándi vaá kúdia
sound awkward compared to the maybe less grammaticized yándi vandáka kúdia. The durative combines with stative and
non-stative predicates alike.

However, one must note
that many of the relevant constructions are not syntactic parallels of their
English translations. Examples include

(12)   a.  Móno    kée       wa              madídi.

1sg        dur      perceive     cold

‘I
feel cold.’

b.  Móno  kée    wa            nzala.

1sg      dur   perceive   hunger

‘I
feel/am hungry.’

c.  Móno    kée       na       maládi.

1sg        am       with    ailment

‘I
am sick.’

As
is evident from an earlier example regarding the connective na, the latter construction is
fundamentally a possessive one, which needs a copula to satisfy the requirement
that there be a verb in a sentence. Kikongo-Kituba does not allow verbless
clauses. It so happens that the copula also functions as a durative marker. In
the past/anterior, ké(l)e is replaced
by vandá(k)a [sit-pst], as in other copular constructions.1 The function of ké(l)e as a durative marker is more evident where it modifies a verb, as
in (12b). Durative constructions such
as yándi kée lála ‘he is sleeping’
and yándi kée béla ‘he is
ailing/sick’ alternate with the resultative/perfect constructions yándi mée lála and yándi mé béla, which have the same respective interpretations, although
they literally mean ‘he has fallen asleep’ and ‘he has taken sick’.

One can also say
something inchoatively, albeit in a less grammaticized construction where both
the marker yantíka ‘begin’ is in full
narrative form and the verb, which is its complement, is normally in the
infinitive, as in yándi yantíka kúdia
‘he begins/began to eat’. Unlike the other aspectual constructions, this one
can also be used in the future, viz. yándi
ata yantíka kúdia ‘he/she will begin eating’. The less grammaticized durative
with the full form vánda ‘sit’ and
the full verb can also be used in the future, viz. yándi ata vánda kúdia ‘he will be eating’. The constructions *yándi ata vaá/ké(l)e d́ia ‘he/she
will be eating’ are definitely ill-formed, though one can say yándi ata vánda na káti ya kúdia ‘he/she
will be busy eating’ (lit. ‘he/she will be in the middle of eating’), in which
the infinitive behaves definitely like a noun.

The basic mood is
deontic, in a form similar to the narrative tense, but easily recognizable as imperative in the second person,
regardless of number, viz. (ngé) ‘d́ia [eat-sg] vs. béno ‘d́ia
[eat-pl]. In the third person, it
is interpreted as a permission or an
invitation, viz. yandi/bó ‘d́ia ‘let him/her/them
eat’. The invitation is often preceded with the emphatic marker si, as in si yandi/bó ‘d́ia. Prohibition
is expressed by adding the negation
marker vé to the end of the
construction, as in ‘d́ia vé
‘don’t eat’ and yandi/bó ‘d́ia vé
‘don’t let them eat’/‘they should/must not eat’.

Another deontic
modality is the marking of obligation
with the auxiliary verb fwéte ‘must’,
as in (13).

(13)   Ngé     fwéte        tánga     mukándá      yáyi.

you      must        read       book             dem

‘You
must read this book.’

It
is used only in the present, but it can be embedded in a past or future
context, since the tense system is relative. Possibility is expressed with the auxiliary lénda as in ngé lénda báka yó
‘you can/may take it’ (i.e. ‘you are capable of taking it’ or ‘you have
permission to take it’ or ‘it is possible for you to take it’.). In all these
deontic constructions, negation occurs clause-finally.

There is no
grammaticized epistemic modality. This is expressed in a complex sentence, such
as mú bánza yándi kée béla ‘he must
be sick’ and mú bánza yándi mée kwénda
‘he must have left’. Literally, these sentences mean ‘I think [that] S’.
Clearly, it’s not that epistemic meaning cannot be expressed in Kikongo-Kituba;
it’s simply that there is no grammaticized, less complex way of expressing it.

5. Other structural characteristics

Kikongo-Kituba
relies exclusively on constituent order to express syntactic functions.
Pronouns have invariant forms, regardless of whether they are used as subjects,
objects, or possessives. In the latter case, they follow the head noun, to
which they are linked by the connective na,
as in mwána na móno ‘my child’, ndínga na yándi ‘his/her language’, and lupusu na yó ‘its skin’. Thus, pronouns
behave syntactically like nouns, except that their forms change by suppletion
according to their grammatical number.

Kikongo-Kituba has no
true class of adjectives worth
discussing. To be sure, there are some predicative constructions such as María kée kitóko ‘Mary is beautiful’, béto kée ngólo ‘we are strong’, and yó kée ńda ‘it is long’. On the
other hand, these predicates are not attested in attributive constructions,
which, as a matter of fact, Kikongo-Kituba does not have. Instead one finds
them in the following constructions, which are typical of the modification of a
noun by another noun: nkénto ya kitóko
‘beautiful woman’, bantu ya ngólo
‘strong persons’, and nsinga ya ńda
‘long string’, lit. ‘N with attribute’.

In Kikongo-Kituba, the comparative is expressed with the above
property items typically in predicative constructions, using the verb ku-lúta ‘(sur)pass’ in the narrative
tense, as in (14).

(14)   Yándi     kée    ńda      (ku)lúta     móno.

3sg        be     tall       surpass     1sg

‘He/she
is taller than me’

The
alternative yándi lúta móno na ńda
(lit. ‘he/she surpasses me in height’) is also attested, but the former is more
common. However, nominal constructions such as (15a–b) are also attested:

(15)   a.  nkénto   ya      kitóko       kulúta      María

woman of      beauty     surpass   Mary

‘a
more beautiful woman than Mary’

b.  muntu   ya      mayéle      *(ku)lúta    móno

person  of      wisdom   surpass      1sg

‘a
wiser person than me’

The
subject of kulúta in this uncommon
infinitival clause is understood to be the property item. Elliptical alternatives are often interpreted as superlatives, as
in muntu ya kulúta mayéle ‘a/the
more/most intelligent person’. There are no comparative or superlative
constructions corresponding to ‘less than’ or ‘the least’ in English.

Degrees of properties
expressed by such items as ngólo, kitóko, and mayéle are expressed by quantification, with the quantifier
following the modifier, as in mayéle
míngi ‘very wise/intelligent’ and ngólo
fióti ‘somewhat strong/hard’. These quantifiers mean literally ‘a lot’ and
‘a little/few/small’. The modifiers can be reduplicated in habitual contexts or
in reference to pluralities to express repetition of the state of affairs over
a period of time or its distribution across the set of entities referred to
with the head noun.

There is no clear
distinction between the above property items and some other items that may be
considered adverbs, such as mbángu
‘fast/quickly’ and malémbe ‘slowly’,
except that these items are not attested predicatively. Thus, one hears yándi kée tambúla mbángu/malémbe ‘he/she
is walking fast/slowly’ but not *yándi
kée mbangu/malémbe ‘he is fast/slow’. On the other hand, one can say that María kée sála ngólo/mbángu ‘Mary works
hard/fast’ and Wivine kée tambúla
mbóte/kitóko ‘Wivine is walking well/beautifully’. There are adverbial
constructions that are fundamentally comitative, such as béto mée sála yó na nsóni/makási ‘we did it shamefully/angrily’
(lit. ‘with shame/anger’) and yándi kée
tambúla na luléndo ‘he/she is walking boastfully’ (lit. ‘with exaggerated
pride’). Thus, it is not evident that one can speak of a clear class of adverbs
any more than we can speak of a clear class of adjectives in Kikongo-Kituba.

There are no sentences
with unspecified subjects in
Kikongo-Kituba. Constructions corresponding to the subject on in French, man in
German, or the agentless passive in English typically have the plural
pronominal subject bó ‘they’ with an
unspecified referent. Although is it usually agentless, the passive is seldom used in
Kikongo-Kituba. For instance, the English sentence John has been fired/laid off work is normally translated as (16):

(16)   Bó       mée     katúla      Jean    na          kisálu.

3pl      prf      remove    John   conn      work/job

‘John
has been fired/laid off work.’

There
are no syntactic parallels to English constructions with expletive subjects
such as it’s raining/hot, which are
translated as mvúla kée nóka (lit.
‘rain be fall’, although the verb is specific to rain) and ntángu kée makási (lit. ‘the sun is strong’). (The word makási also means ‘anger’, as in Yándi mé wa makási [he prf perceives anger] ‘he is angry’.) Likewise, there are no sentences with
expletive subjects corresponding to it
seems/appears that S, nor are there any corresponding to NP seems/appears to + infinitive. There are no existential constructions
either on the model of English there be
or French il y a. However,
Kikongo-Kituba presents a rare case of subject-verb
inversion in this case. Corresponding to there is a man in the house, one can say kée na muntu na ńzo. There are no subjectless clauses. The
translation of tell him to come is tub-íla yándi yándi kwísa [tell-appl 3sg
3sg come-sbjv].

Serial verb constructions (SVCs) are not as developed in
Kikongo-Kituba as in creoles of the Atlantic, for instance, which are more
similar to Kwa languages in this respect. Just to show that SVCs are not a
default option of Universal Grammar, or the bioprogram, as some hypotheses of
the emergence of creoles may suggest, Kikongo-Kituba shares its SVC-related
peculiarities with languages out of whose contact it has evolved. As noted
above, Kikongo varieties too, as well as Kiyansi, have SVC-like structures in
the narrative tense only. They have no SVCs involving a serial verb ‘say’, let
alone involving ‘give’. As also noted above, such constructions are used
especially to dramatize one’s narrative (Mufwene 1991).

6. Closure

As
the survey indicates, Kikongo-Kituba has a number of structural peculiarities
that set it apart from true creoles, those lexified by European languages in plantation
settlement colonies with non-European population majorities. All the properties
can be related in one way or another to those of the languages out of whose
contact it has evolved, except regarding the regular pitch-accent on the
penultimate syllable. They are all worth discussing, hopefully in a forthcoming
book, because practical space limitations preclude this option now.
