APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu
Lexifier: Other | Region: Central and East Africa
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/62
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 62.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Sentences

8. Lexicon

1. Introduction

Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu is not a creole
language but a mixed language. It has featured in studies on creole languages
since Goodman’s (1971) article on “the strange case of Mbugu” in the collection
on Pidginization and creolization of
languages edited by Dell Hymes. The language figures prominently in
Thomason & Kaufman’s (1988) seminal work on language contact, following
Thomason’s (1983) study on the language. These analyses were based on data from
earlier studies by others, dating back to Meinhof (1906). My work, Mous
(2003a), is based on much more extensive fieldwork and revealed that there are
actually two languages involved: a mixed language (Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu) and an
ordinary unmixed Bantu language (Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu). The two languages share
one and the same Bantu grammar (Mous 2003a: 5-6) and differ only in lexicon.
This constellation of languages has a double and parallel lexicon (Mous 2003a:
10). I use the term “language” for each of the two lects even though they share
one grammar. Other terms are equally problematic. The two lects differ substantially
in their core vocabulary and are not mutually intelligible (unless one has
learned the other lexicon); moreover, the purpose of the mixed language is to
create a different language; hence the term dialect is inappropriate; the term
register has the wrong connotation because it suggests a choice depending on
context, which is not the case as I show below. I argued that the mixed language
was at least partly created as a marker of ethnic identity, a non-Bantu
identity. Truly mixed languages such as Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu are extremely rare. By
a truly mixed language I mean a language in which 90 % or more of the lexicon
has an origin that is different from the grammar language (see Bakker &
Mous 1994: 5). Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu is a “symbiotic” mixed language; it is
parasitic on a non-mixed language. A mixed language such as Michif is not symbiotic
(see Bakker, this volume). I believe that Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu provides a window on
how a non-symbiotic mixed language such as Michif could have arisen (see Mous
2003b). The inclusion of a chapter on a mixed language such as Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu
in a book on pidgins and creoles is proper for several reasons. First of all in
order to understand the differences between mixed languages, pidgins and
creoles. Secondly because the double and parallel lexicon has been proposed as
one of the processes in the development of a creole (see Lefebvre 1998), and
thirdly in order to place pidgin and creole studies within a more general
context of extreme consequences of language contact.

Ma’a/Mbugu is spoken in
Tanzania,
where the language is known under the name Mbugu, or Ki-Mbugu with the Swahili
prefix ki to indicate the language,
contrasting with Wa-Mbugu for the people. The Mbugu people speak two languages:
one is
a mixed language and the other is a Bantu language, and the two languages share
one and the same grammar and differ only in lexicon. The speakers themselves
recognize this relationship between the two languages by calling them Normal Mbugu (for the non-mixed variety)
and Inner Mbugu for the mixed variety
when they speak the non-mixed variety; whereas in the mixed variety, they speak
about Normal Ma’á and Inner Ma’á. In the linguistic
literature, the name Mbugu is sometimes confined to the non-mixed variety and
Ma’a to the mixed variety. I will
use the name Ma’a/Mbugu and differentiate between Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu and
Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu where I need to differentiate the two. This article concentrates
on Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu. The Mbugu people live in the Usambara Mountains,
where the dominant language is Shambaa (or Ki-shambaa, Sambaa, Shambala), a
Bantu language (Lang-Heinrich 1921, Besha 1989, Riedel 2009). It is difficult
to estimate the number of Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu speakers. Ethnologue estimates the
number of speakers to be 7,000; see Lewis (2003) for a careful
justification of this estimation. I have no means to confirm this or to
question it. Speaker numbers are difficult to estimate in Tanzania because the
census has not included any questions about language or ethnicity for decades.
Such questions have been considered politically incorrect since independence
and the national unity politics of former president Nyerere. In the case of the
Mbugu there is the additional complication that the people live scattered and
are not confined to certain villages. The Mbugu are concentrated in roughly
three areas in the Usambara Mountains: Magamba,
Rangwi and Bumbuli, but also in these areas most Mbugu people have Shambaa
neighbours.

2. Sociohistorical background

The history of the Mbugu can be
reconstructed with difficulty using oral history and linguistic evidence. The
scenario that I consider the most likely (see Mous 2003a) is one in which the
Pre-Mbugu originated in Kenya, where they spoke an Eastern Cushitic language
related to the now extinct Yaaku and to Dahalo. Possibly together with
movements of Maasai people, the Pre-Mbugu settled in the Pare Mountains
and stayed there long enough to shift to the Bantu language Pare (also known as
Chasu or Chathu). The variety of Pare spoken by the Pre-Mbugu can be called
Pare/Mbugu. Several groups of them moved out of the Pare Mountains
and settled in the Usambara Mountains, but in
different periods and following different routes. The late groups had completed
the shift to Pare/Mbugu by the time they left the Pare Mountains
and spoke only Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu.1
Another Pre-Mbugu group came through the Maasai plains where they had been dominated
by the Maasai for a while and also absorbed a Southern Cushitic group. This
group developed a mixed language by adding a parallel vocabulary borrowed from
Maasai and Southern Cushitic. It is not clear where and when this mixed language
developed. A basis for the added parallel vocabulary was formed by the set of
remembered items from the original Eastern Cushitic language that they lost. (It
is conceivable that the long initiation period was a factor in the creation of
the extra, mixed language. It is not uncommon that adolescents learn a secret
initiation language during their initiation period. The longer the initiation
period the more elaborate such a language can be. These initiation languages
are parasitic on the common language and consist of an extra parallel lexicon,
similar to the relationship between the mixed and the non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu.
However, nothing is known about the Mbugu initiation. Thus, the relevance of a
long initiation period for the creation of the mixed language remains speculative.) The
need for the mixed language was felt as an expression of their identity as
non-Bantu. The Mbugu are different from the Bantu people among whom
they live in terms of culture, means of economy (cattle rather than
agriculture), complexion, and language (by means of the mixed language). The
persistence of the non-mixed variety in addition to the mixed one can be
explained by the fact that some Mbugu people speak only the non-mixed variety;
yet these people are considered fully Mbugu. The mixed variety is needed for a
different identity; the non-mixed variety for communication with fellow Mbugu.

3. Sociolinguistic situation

Tanzania’s policy for national unity
has been quite successful in securing Swahili as a functioning national language.
This entails that nearly everybody in Tanzania speaks Swahili and that children
learn Swahili often even before they go to school. Swahili is the dominant language
in all official and semi-official domains. Swahili dominates education even if
the official language of instruction is English rather than Swahili in secondary
schools. Since the Shambaa are the dominant population in the Usambara Mountains,
the Shambaa language is strong in that area and there is unbalanced multilingualism:
Mbugu people speak Shambaa but not the other way around. Pare (or Chasu, Asu)
is yet another Bantu language spoken in the area. There is a sizeable Pare
population in the Usambara Mountains as the
results of a slow but steady migration from the Pare Mountains
to the Usambara Mountains. The Pare
language and the Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu language are very closely related. The
grammar of Ma’a/Mbugu is very close to Pare and not to Shambaa, the dominant
language of their present environment.

Since the Mbugu people
speak two languages which differ only lexically, the question arises: When do
they speak Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu and when Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu? This is a complex
question which occupied me constantly while doing fieldwork. In terms of
language use, the term register is inappropriate for the Mbugu situation
because the choice of language variety is not determined by topic of
conversation or social context. At home one of the two varieties dominates. For
some families this is the mixed variety; for other families this is the unmixed
variety. Some Mbugu speak only the non-mixed variety; nobody speaks only the
mixed variety. There is code-switching but this is of the unmarked type
(Myers-Scotton 1993). When speakers switch from one variety to the other,
the switch is complete and clear. When a speaker opts for the mixed variety,
s/he will opt for the mixed lexicon for (nearly) all possible choices. At one
occasion when I was taping an interview in normal Mbugu, the narrator switched
unconsciously to the mixed variety when a passer-by greeted him in that
variety.

The remainder of this
article presents a brief sketch of Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu. For more details and evidence
the reader is referred to Mous (2003a), see also Mous (1994) for a similar
sketch.

4. Phonology

There are five basic vowels in both
the mixed and the non-mixed variety: /a, e, i, o, u/.
There is no length opposition; when long vowels occur, they are disyllabic
either on the basis of the fact that they have falling or rising tones or because
they are the result of two morphemes coming together.

The Ma’a/Mbugu consonants are
represented in Table 1. The velar fricative /x/, the lateral fricative /ɬ/, the glottal stop /ʔ/, and the prenasalized velar
fricative occur only in the lexicon of the mixed language. The voiceless
prenasalized sounds are common among the Bantu languages of the area (Pare and
Shambaa). The lateral fricative is considered deviant in the area and it is
viewed as a typical feature of the mixed variety. The Southern Cushitic
languages have the lateral fricative.

Table 1. Ma’a/Mbugu consonants

labial

alveolar

palatal

velar

glottal

plosives

voiceless

p

t

c

k

ʔ

voiced

b

d

ɟ

g

fricatives

voiceless

f

s

ʃ

x

h

voiced

v

z

ɣ

lateral continuant

l

trill

r

lateral fricative

voiceless

ɬ

glides

w

j

nasals

m

n

ɲ

ŋ

prenasalized stops

voiced

mb

nd

ng

voiceless

m̥p

n̥t

n̥k

prenasalized fricative

voiceless

n̥x

The palatal stops are rare and have
no prenasalized counterpart. Even though there are minimal pairs showing the
phonemic status of /r/ and /l/ there
is also variation between /r/ and /l/
in a limited number of lexemes. There are complexities in the spirantization of
velar stops: /g/~/ɣ/
in some lexemes in both varieties (and phonemic opposition shown by minimal
pairs) and /k/~/x/~/h/
in some lexemes, but only in the mixed variety.

Ma’a/Mbugu is a tone
language with two register tones like the Bantu languages in the area. Contour
tones are sequences of High and Low. Tones occur on vowels and on the syllabic
nasal /m/
that occurs as nominal prefix.

In the rest of this
article and in the database I use an orthography that has <x>
for the voiceless velar fricative /x/, <gh> for the voiced velar
fricative /ɣ/, <hl>
for the voiceless lateral fricative /ɬ/, <ch> for the voiceless palatal
stop /c/, <sh>
for the voiceless palatal fricative /ʃ/, <ny> for the palatal nasal /ɲ/, and
<’>
for the glottal stop /ʔ/. The voiced palatal glide /j/ is written as <y>, and <j> is used for the voiced
palatal stop /ɟ/. Prenasalized stops are written as digraphs: <mb> for [mb], etc.

5. Noun phrase

As Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu has a Bantu
grammar, its nouns are classified in a typical Bantu noun class system with
singular/plural class pairs. Agreement within the noun phrase and on the verb
(subject and object) is with the noun class. Classes are overtly marked with
noun class prefixes. The noun class system is practically identical to that of
Pare. The noun prefixes and the agreement prefixes are presented in Table 2.
Class 14.2 is an intrusion due to loans from Swahili. Pare has the forms in
14.1, which are reflexes of Bantu noun class 14.

Table 2. Ma’a/Mbugu Noun class markers (N represents a
nasal element)

Class

Noun prefix

Verbal subject prefix

Pronominal prefix

1

m

é

ù

2

va

vé

vá

3

m

ú

ú

4

mi

í

ì

5

i

lí

lí

6

ma

é

á

7

ki

chí

chí

8

vi

ví

ví

9

(N)

í

ì

10

(N)

jí

jí

11

lu

lú

lú

12

ka

ké

ká

14.1

vu

vú

vú

14.2

u

ú

ú

15

ku

kú

kú

16

hé

há

The singular/plural pairings are 1/2,
3/4, 5/6, 7/8, 9/10, 11/10, 11/6+11, 12/14.1, 14.1/6, 14.2/6+14.2,
15/14.1, 15/6 where 6+11 means that the class 6 prefix for plurality is added
to the singular prefix of class 11 rather than replacing it as is the norm. The
contents of the noun classes are like those in Pare and most other Bantu
languages. Class 16 is the locative class with no lexical members; addition of
the pronominal prefix hé to a noun
stem renders it locative, e.g. hé-lu-kándo
‘on the wall’, cf. lu-kándo ‘wall
(class 11)’. In order to be used nominally, verb stems are placed into class
15. What is of historical interest is that some nouns in the mixed variety
lexicon appear to have frozen suffixes, borrowed together with the item from a
suffixing source language (Cushitic or Nilotic).

Adjectives and other
modifiers follow the head noun and agree in noun class with it, e.g. luhige lu-kuhlo [11.door 11-nice] ‘the
nice door’. The adjectival agreement prefix is identical to the noun prefix.
Reduplication of the adjective is used to express intensity. Many adjectival
concepts are expressed in verbs, for example hlagha ‘be broad’, ‘aku
‘be white’. Degree is expressed by a verbal construction involving ‘to surpass,
be more’, (see line 9 of the glossed text).
Nominal modification requires the connecting pronoun that consists of a
class-agreeing pronominal prefix and the stem á:

(1)

muda

3.time(Sw)2

w-á

3-conn

ma-dámo

6-time

ma-hái

6-four

time of four hours

In the Non-mixed
Ma’a/Mbugu, possessives and demonstratives agree in noun class with the head
noun using the pronominal class agreement prefixes. In this respect the mixed
variety is markedly different: When used attributively possessives and
demonstratives are invariant and do not agree with the head noun (cf. 2a-b).
When used predicatively, possessives do show agreement (cf. 2a) but demonstratives
do not (cf. 2b).

(2)

a.

ki-sima

7-well

yá

this

ní

is

ki-kánu

7-our

This well is ours.

b.

ki-sima

7-well

kánu

our

ní

is

yá

this

Our well is this one.

Possessives distinguish
person and number but not gender, in both varieties. Demonstratives make three
distinctions in both varieties: ‘this (near me)’,
‘that (near
you)’,
‘that (distant)’.

Word order in the noun
phrase is head-initial with modifiers following the head noun: adjectives, numerals
(lines 1,
3,
24 in the
glossed text), genitives (line 2 in the
glossed text), demonstratives (example 2a),
possessives (example 2b), relative clauses
(example
(9). However, the
demonstratives can also occur before the head noun (lines 3, 12, 13 in the glossed text).

Personal pronouns (see
Table 3) need not be used since person is indicated on the verb (pro-drop);
they are used for contrastive emphasis. Instead of a third person pronoun the
distal demonstrative is used with noun class expression in the non-mixed
variety: válá (class 2) ‘that (far
away), they, them’, but the invariant distal demonstrative hú for singular and plural and all classes in the mixed variety.
The personal pronouns of Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu are identical to those in Pare.

Table 3. Independent personal pronouns

Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

meaning

ání

mmí

I

árí

wé

you

(h)ú

yé

she/he

níne, nne

úswi

we

kúné

únywi

you

(h)ú

válá

they

Adpositions are rare.
There is a form mpaká ‘until’, which
is a borrowing from Swahili where it is a noun meaning ‘border’ and also
functions as adposition ‘until’. The genitive/connective chá for class 7 is used to render a noun phrase temporal (line 2 of
the glossed text).
There is an invariable form na which
functions as a coordinator ‘and, with’ (lines 3,
15
of the
glossed text)
or it makes the phrase locative (lines 3 and 7 of
the glossed text)
or temporal (line 24); the invariable
ní is used as a preposition ‘by’ (see example 6)
and the invariable form kwa (borrowed
from
Swahili) is used in the function of ‘with’ (see example 5).

6. Verb phrase

The Ma’a/Mbugu verb has all the
complexities of a Bantu verb. Except for the imperative, all verb forms have a
subject prefix expressing person/number and class. The object can, but need
not, be referred to with an object agreement prefix. Between the initial
subject prefix and the pre-stem object prefix TAM prefixes occur. There are
some twenty different of such “tense” prefixes, which can also
occur in combination. These prefixes form a system of “tenses” together with an
inflectional suffix to the verb form. The tense system is rich and contains
categories such as expectational, narrative, background, conditional, habitual,
hortative, present unfinished, imminence, but also past, perfect, present and
the other more common categories. This complex system is identical for both
varieties. Parallel lexical verbs also have the same Aktionsart; for example, the verb ‘to be tired’, which is kwaha in the mixed variety but ghata in the non-mixed one, requires the
same tense prefix áa (glossed with pst) to express a present state, cf.
(3).

(3)

a. Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

n-áa-kwaha

1sg-pst-tired

I am tired.

b. Non-Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

n-áa-ghata

1st-pst-tired

I am tired.

Ma’a/Mbugu has the
usual Bantu verbal derivational suffixes such a causative (7), applicative,
reciprocal (5) and passive (6). The presence of a causative/intensive suffix is
a feature that the language shares with Shambaa. The applicative is used to
render a dative (4) or a locative (see line 4 of
the glossed text) constituent object. The (negatively) affected object in (4)
is expressed in the object prefix m-
in the verb. The passive is often followed by the perfect, as it is in (6).

(4)

é-ta-m-gwá-y-a

1-

evid

-1-steal-

appl

-

fv

wá

cattle

He steals cattle from him.

(5)

v-áa-té-án-a

2-

pst

-beat-

recp

-

fv

kwa

with

mhpambá

machete

They fought each other with the machete.

(6)

u-ku-dárá-w-e

2sg

-

cond

-catch-

pass

-

prf

ní

by

luáhe

flu

You are caught by a cold.

(7)

kwátó

thus

n-he-wesía

1sg

-16-look.at

ni-áho

1sg

-see

y-áa-so-isha

9-

pst

-go-

caus

Thus when I see that he goes a lot, [...].

(8)

vé-bá-we

2-say-

pass

’m-ka-na-chél-eja

2pl

-

csec

-yet-late-

caus

wá

cattle

tó

there

sarí

until

sa

hour

ikúmi

ten

ní

is

ahoní

what

They are told: “Why do you make it so late that the cattle returns home at four o’ clock?”3

7. Sentences

The basic sentence word order is
SVO; see for example line 7 in the glossed text.
The initial constituent can be a topic as it is the case with ‘my name’ in the
first line of the text, which is followed by a verb form with the 1sg subject only expressed in the subject
prefix, followed by the name as a secondary predication or predicative
complement. The next sentence begins in a time adjunct followed by the verb
form (with subject prefix), the locative complement
and a second time adjunct.

Locative phrases are
sometimes marked as such. In line 4 the locative
complement needs to be marked as such by the extra locative class prefix hé‑. In lines 3 and 7 the
phrase is rendered locative by the preposition na. But inherently locative phrases like aré ‘there’, aŋá
‘home’ (line 25), aná ‘high’ (line 13,
but na aná in lines 7
and 15)
and the place name Kinhko in line 2
have no locative marking. There is also a locative enclitic zá ‘inside’ (lines 12 and 20).

Nominal clauses have
the invariable copula ní (lines 6,
8,
16,
23 and
26)
but when it is inflected for tense the inflected verb kwa ‘to be’ is used (line 18). There is a
verb of possession in the mixed variety, lo
(line 10)
which is equal to ‘to be with’ in the non-mixed variety (line 10 would
be ni-na ikoti [1sg-with coat] ‘I have a coat’).

Relative clauses may
use a relative pronoun that consists of the pronominal class-agreeing prefix
plus the root ó. The pronoun follows
the head noun, agrees with it and marks the beginning of the relative clause.
There are no differences between the two languages in this respect, cf. (9).

(9)

a. Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

vi-aghú

8-food

vyó

8:that

ni’á

1sg:eat

ní

is

vi-kuhlú

8-nice

The food that I eat is nice.

b. Non-Mixed Ma’a/Mbugu

vi-jú

8-food

vyó

8:that

nilá

1sg:eat

ní

is

vi-tana

8-nice

The food that I eat is nice.

Alternatively the verb form can
start in such a relative pronoun as in line 10.
However, not all relative clauses are marked as such. Line 5 has
an object, ‘thing’, which is followed by a relative clause. In this instance
the relative clause is a normal clause following the head noun immediately and
consisting of a normal verb form plus an adjunct.

Infinitival complements
contain the nominal verb form with the class 15 noun prefix. Line 8 shows
such an instance of an infinitive or nominal verb used as complement of the
verb ‘to want’ (and followed by a headless relative clause with a relative
pronoun referring place). Other examples of an auxiliary plus infinitive are in
lines 9 and 15.
The infinitives in lines 8 and
9
contain an object prefix.

Sentences can become
more complex in a number of ways. Relative clauses are often used to link
clauses. Line 6 of the glossed text
shows such an instance with the continuation of the first clause consisting of
a copula plus a headless locative relative clause, and such a headless locative
relative clause can also be found in lines 8,
17
and 25.
Connectives are also used: kubá
‘that’ (line 13) or kwa kubá (line 22), mirá ‘but’ (line 15), kwató ‘thus’ (lines 16,
19 and
21).

8. Lexicon

The lexicon of the mixed variety is
on a par with that of the Non-mixed Ma’a/Mbugu with forms sharing semantics and
formal morphological properties such as noun class membership, Aktionsart and
presence of verbal derivation: If a verb is derived by a causative, it is so in
both varieties, even if this causative is lexicalized, e.g. with ‘to cure’,
which is ‘úti with lexicalised causative
ti in the mixed variety and kija with the lexicalised causative -ija in the non-mixed variety. Example
(3) shows that the parallel verbs have the same Aktionsart requiring the past
marker áa for present (resultative)
meaning.

The lexical items in
the mixed variety come from a variety of sources: from the original East-Cushitic
language (in Figure 1 indicated
as “other Cushitic”), from Maasai, from a recent Southern Cushitic source (in Figure 1 indicated
as “pre-Iraqw” and a few items from Bantu languages from the nearby Taita Hills
in Kenya. Some deviant lexical items in the mixed variety are manipulated forms
from the non-mixed variety (in Figure 1 indicated as “NMb”).
Such forms are the clearest indication that the creation of the mixed language
involved lexical manipulation.

Table 4. Manipulated words

mixed

non-mixed

meaning

source

nhkungé

nhkungú

‘ankle’

Shambaa nhkungu

makalé

makáá

‘charcoal’

Pare makáa

ndaté

ndata

‘stick’

Pare mzátá

mzimé

mzima

‘old man’

Pare mzíma

mhiné

mhini

‘handle’

Pare mhini

mnyawé

mnyáwu

‘cat’

Pare inywáwi

nhkimé

nhkíma

‘monkey’

Pare nhkíma

kigingé

kigíngí

‘stump’

Pare kigíngí

ngilé

ngilá

‘bee’

origin unknown

Figure 1. The origin of
the deviant lexicon in the mixed variety

Loans from Shambaa and Swahili are
always shared by the two varieties. This shows that the formation of the mixed
language was complete when the people settled in the Usambara Mountains and
that the mixed language is not expanding. On the contrary, the extra lexicon is
slowly crumbling. However, children acquire the mixed variety at the same time
as they acquire the non-mixed one. New concepts, which are mostly loans from
Shambaa or Swahili, are not represented in the mixed variety in a special way.
