APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Chinese Pidgin Russian
Lexifier: Other | Region: East Asia
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/65
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Chinese Pidgin Russian

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 65.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Complex sentences

9. Lexicon

Sources of examples

1. Introduction

Chinese Pidgin Russian (autoglossonyms: lomanəj
jazyk or lomanəj ruskij,
literally ‘broken language’, ‘broken Russian’) was spoken between the last
decades of the 18th and the middle of the 20th century in the vast territories
along the Russian-Chinese border in southern Siberia and the Russian Far East,
and also in northern China in the city of Harbin and along the Chinese Far East
Railway built by Russia in Manchuria in 1903. This pidgin has been extinct for
several decades already, but some elderly (over 70 years old) representatives
of Siberian minorities can still be considered semi-speakers of Chinese Pidgin Russian. Their number is probably about 50 people. It is difficult to say to
what extent the modern pidgin which has recently appeared in the course of the
shuttle trade on the Russian-Chinese border is connected with the old pidgin
that is the subject of this chapter.

2. Sociohistorical background

Chinese Pidgin Russian arose in the course of Russian trade with China and Russian
colonization of southern Siberia. The colonization of Siberia differed from the
Western colonization of Africa, the Caribbean, and the Americas: Contacts with
local ethnic groups were primarily restricted to trade and the collection of
fur taxes. There was no mass resettling of people of different nations who
would have to use Pidgin as the unique means of communication. This explains
why Russian-based pidgins were never creolized.

The first Russian-based
pidgin to be observed was the “Kyakhta language” (or “Maimachin dialect”) on
the border of the current Buryat Republic and Mongolia. The existence of a
peculiar “trade language” on the border with China was first mentioned by
George Timkowsky (Timkowsky 1827.II). The Kyakhta language was soon
noticed by linguists (N. Bichurin, S. Chrepanov, A. Aleksandrov,
H. Schuchardt, S. Bulich). It was deliberately standardized by the
Chinese: All merchants dealing with Russia had to learn “the Russian language”,
using phrase books and dictionaries where Russian words were transcribed with
Chinese characters (Flug 1935). The Kyakhta variant was therefore probably the
only Russian-based pidgin that acquired a “de facto” norm.

The origin of the
Kyakhta language is disputable. There is some evidence that it was brought to
Kyakhta by Russian merchants who used a Russian-based pidgin before in contacts
with other ethnic groups, including contacts in the White Sea area (Nichols
1996: 240) or speakers of Uralic or Altaic languages (Kozinskij 1974,
Perekhvalskaya 2006). According to another point of view, it was a result of
the relexification of an old Mongolian-based trade pidgin.

At any rate, carriers
of a Russian-based pidgin in the 18th–20th centuries were Russian
merchants, fur tax collectors, members of the religious sect of Old Believers,
Cossacks, adventurers, and officials. They brought it to new territories which
were gradually added to the Russian Empire: the basin of the Amur river, the
Ussuri region, and later to the Chinese territory along the Chinese Eastern
Railway and the city of Harbin. Chinese Pidgin Russian became the lingua franca
of the big cities of the region (Khabarovsk, Vladivostok, Harbin) where there
were large Russian and Chinese communities. In the 1920s, the number of Chinese
in Vladivostok was estimated to be 30,000; they were mostly workers and small
retailers. Chinese Pidgin Russian was the main means of communication between
the communities.

After the 1930s, the
mass migration of Russians from the European part of the USSR to rural areas of
Siberia, Kazakhstan, and the Far East transformed the local ethnic groups into
small minorities. The newcomers did not use and, most probably, did not know
any Pidgin; they spoke standard Russian to Pidgin speakers. Chinese Pidgin Russian then entered the phase of a post-pidgin continuum. Pidgin forms began
to be substituted by those which were closer to standard Russian. Still, the
Russian speech of older representatives of the local ethnic minorities displays
obvious residual pidgin features.

The Chinese population
was deported from the USSR in the late 1930s, so Chinese Pidgin Russian lost
its importance as a lingua franca. The urban variety soon disappeared
completely.

3. Sociolinguistic situation

Chinese Pidgin Russian was a means of communication between “European” and “Asian”
groups. Europeans belonged to the upper strata of the society: officials,
superiors, house owners in the cities; administrators, doctors, and teachers in
rural areas. The European community consisted of Russians and other ethnic
groups (Ukrainians, Poles, Germans). The Europeans regarded Pidgin as a
primitive means of communication solely reserved for “Asians”. The latter were
Chinese in the cities and trading centers, and also Tungusic people in the
countryside.

Chinese migration to
Russia was entirely male; women were not allowed to leave the Celestial Empire.
In the Russian territory, Chinese men married Nanai, Udihe, or Evenki women.
The means of communication in these mixed families was a simplified form of
Chinese. Marriages of Chinese men with European women were very rare. Thus,
there were no conditions for the creolization of Chinese Pidgin Russian.

As for gender-related
use of the Pidgin, the situation was different for European and Asian
communities. Chinese contacts with Russians were carried out exclusively by
men; among Tungusic groups, men also had more opportunities to interact with
Europeans. Women were either monolingual or bilingual, speaking the language of
the neighbouring group. By contrast, European women were fully integrated into
the interaction with other groups, especially with Chinese men, who were often
hired as workers.

During World War II and
later on, males of ethnic minorities began to be conscripted into the Soviet
military service. As a result, men began to speak more Russified forms of
Pidgin. Therefore, women became the predominant users of Chinese Pidgin Russian. Nowadays, the majority of semi-speakers of Pidgin are old women of Udihe,
Nanai, or Evenki origin.

The available data on
Chinese Pidgin Russian are a collection of documents and recordings made over a
significant period of time in a rather vast area. Certain details of grammar
and lexicon differ in different sources, so the spread of a particular feature
may be limited to a certain territory or epoch. However, the amount of common
features makes it possible to refer to Chinese Pidgin Russian as basically one
language which existed in several varieties.

4. Phonology

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

ɯ

u

mid

e

ə

o

open

a

Chinese Pidgin Russian has a vowel system of seven vowels (see Table 1). Central vowels
present a complete set for all degrees of aperture: /ɯ/, /ə/,
and /a/.
There are no contexts where [ɯ] and
[ə] would be opposed. /ɯ/ is usual in words of Russian and Chinese
origin: [‘sɯnka] ‘son’;
[tata’dɯ] ‘big, large’. It is always stressed; [ə] is unstressed and appears frequently between groups of consonants. In
words of Russian origin, it corresponds to reduced variants of vowels:
[tə'ri] ‘three’, [kə'rasinə] ‘red’, [gu'magə] ‘paper’.

Chinese Pidgin Russian
has 18 consonants, listed in Table 2. Allophonic variants are given in
parentheses, and special spelling counterparts are in angle brackets.

Table 2.
Consonants

bilabial

labio-dental

labio-velar

dental/ alveolar

palato-alveolar

palatal

velar

uvular

plosive

voiceless

p (ph)

t (th)

k (kh)

(q)

voiced

b

d

g

nasal

m

n

ɲ

ŋ

trill/flap

(ɾ)(r)

fricative

voiceless

ɸ

(s)

ʃ <š, sh>

x

(χ)

voiced

β

(v)

(z)

(ʒ)

affricate

voiceless

(ʦ) <c>

ʧ <č,
ch>

voiced

(ʣ)

ʤ <ʒ>

lateral/approximant

(w)

l

j

Voiceless
plosives have an aspirated variant mainly in the Chinese ethnolect. Uvular [q]
and [χ]
substitute for velar [k] and [x] before /a/ and back vowels in variants
characteristic for speakers of Tungusic languages. Trill [r] and flap [ɾ]
are free variants of the phoneme /l/, the major variant of which is represented
by the lateral approximant [l]. Labiodental [v] is characteristic only for the
Russian ethnolect. Labiovelar [w] and bilabial [β] are distributed similar
to [q] and [k]: labiovelar [w] appears before /a/ and back vowels, and [β]
occurs before front vowels: /da'waj/ ‘let us’, ['βidili] ‘you (we, they)
have seen’ (Russian davaj, videli).

Dental sibilants [s]
and [z] appear only in the Russian ethnolect. The major variant for the
voiceless fricative is the palato-alveolar [ʃ]. As for the corresponding
voiced fricative [ʒ], it is a minor variant of the phoneme /ʤ/,
[ʣ] being another variant of the same phoneme. The affricate [ʦ]
exists as a minor variant of the palato-alveolar [ʧ].

The syllable structure
is V or CV. Consonant clusters are impossible except for the combination of
sonorant (nasal or lateral) + obstruent (plosive or fricative). In these
combinations, the consonants may be separated by [ə]: ['mamka],
['maməka] ‘mother’. The complexity of onsets depends on the native
language of the speaker. Simple syllable onsets are characteristic for speakers
of Chinese, Udihe, and Nanai (and other languages of the Tungusic group).
Russian native-speakers may produce more complex onsets, though they also tend
to simplify them with respect to the corresponding Russian words. Very few
consonants may be found in syllable codas: mainly j and n.

5. Noun phrase

Nouns
are invariable, e.g. maja - liudi ‘I
am human’; dəwa liudi ‘two
people’. Natural gender is expressed
by different words, e.g. maməka
‘mother’, papa ‘father’; ʒénəs'inə ‘woman’, muʒíkə, musínnə
‘man’. There are no
instances of expressing gender of animals.

Number
marking. Depending on the context nouns may refer to singular
or plural entities: goda ‘year,
years’, lubəli ‘ruble, rubles’, kazəka ‘tale, tales’. In certain
variants of Pidgin, the
plural marker isio, sio was in the process of grammaticalization. It
could occur only with human nouns
and probably had the meaning of collective plurality: ribiatisəka isio ‘chidren’;
ibəŋka isio ‘the Japanese’. However, even in these variants it is not
obligatory. The plural marker never occurs with numerals.

There
is neither a definite nor an indefinite article.
Generic noun phrases are not marked.

There is only one demonstrative which precedes the noun.
It is attested in two forms of Russian and Chinese origin eta / chega: chega fanza
shipko shango ‘this house is very good’; eta liudi ‘this person, these people’. Chega was characteristic of the variant of Chinese Pidgin Russian
spoken in Vladivostok and Manchuria. The demonstrative eta was more widespread; in some varieties of Chinese Pidgin Russian, the demonstrative eta was
used so often that it was probably turning into a definiteness marker (see
below). There is no difference between adnominal and pronominal demonstratives:
Eta was also used as a demonstrative
pronoun.

Possessive
constructions: Adnominal possessives precede the noun and have
the same form as subject and object pronouns in the core variants, e.g. maja synka ‘my son’; ihiñ domə ‘their house’; ty babəsəkə ‘your
grandmother’ (see Table 3). No examples of independent pronominal possessors are found in the
existing data. The possessive noun phrase shows the order possessor +
possessee; both participants are unmarked:

(1)Eta     bəratə     synə        iwo  gawali-la.

this    brother  son  3sg  speak-pfv

‘The brother’s son
talked about it.’ (LJČ)1

Numerals are usually of Russian origin, but there
are instances of the use of Chinese numerals, iga ‘one’
and lianga ‘two’.

Adjectives are invariant and precede
the noun: xulaoshi
duwal ‘good merchandise’, deriani liudi ‘bad
person’, kəlasiwə liudi byli [beautiful people were] ‘there
were beautiful people’.

In
the core variants of Chinese Pidgin Russian, pronouns have a single form for subject,
object, oblique, and possessive, e.g. maja
synka ‘my son’; maja laobodaj ‘I
work’; húdo néta majá
[bad not.exist me] ‘there
is nothing bad at me’.

The
first and second person singular pronouns wo/wody
(I) and ni/nidy (you), of Chinese
origin, were widespread in the Vladivostok and Manchuria variants; the Chinese
“possessive” forms wo-dy [I-poss] and ni-dy [you-poss] were
mainly used as subject and object pronouns.

The
forms maja ‘I’ and təwaja ‘you’ (based on the Russian
feminine singular possessives moja ‘my’,
tvoja ‘your’) are typical for old
variants (18th-19th century); mine/tibi
(Russian Dative mne/tebe; Genitive menia/tebia) were widespread in the 20th
century. Forms coinciding with the Russian subject pronouns ja and ty always coexist with the forms mentioned above. They tend to be
used as subject pronouns, but are also attested in the function of adnominal
possessives.

Table 3.
Pronouns

subject

object

adnominal possessives

1sg

maja/mine/
ja/ wo/ wody

maja/ mine

maja/ mine/ ja

2sg

təwaja/ tibi/ ty / ni/ nidy

təwaja/ tibi/ nidy

tvaja/ tibi/ ty/ nidy

3sg

iwo

iwo

iwo

1pl

nasha

nasha

nasha

2pl

washa

vasha

vasha

3pl

iwo/ ixiñ

iwo

iwo/ ixiñ

Subject
pronouns are not obligatory and are often omitted:

(2)

Pasmatəri -

look

kapitan

captain

jest',

be

kazakə

Cossack

jest'.

be

Maja

1sg

tagda

then

pəriamə

straight

xadi.

walk

I saw that these were Cossacks with a chief. Then I went straightly [to them]. (A)

them].’ (A)

Special
indefinite pronouns exist only for inanimate objects, and are attested only in
the object function:

(3)

Xetsʒu

Xeczu

famili

family.name

chiwo-chiwo

something

kupi-la.

buy-pfv

A person by the name of Xeczu bought something. (Sh)

The
word for ‘somebody’ is a generic noun: adin liudi
(lit. ‘one person’).

6. Verb phrase

As
Chinese Pidgin Russian was always a spoken auxiliary idiom, it never had any
stable norm, not even a de facto
norm. Therefore the grammatical rules that are given below were often violated.

Chinese Pidgin Russian
has three tense-aspect markers and a zero-marker. All overt markers follow the
verb: budu / budi (future marker), la (perfective marker), esa / esi / ju (perfective or evidential
marker). Combinations of markers are not possible. The rare occurrences of the
forms ju-la and la-ju, which could be interpreted as a combination of ju+la, do not belong to the core
structure of the language.

The zero marker
expresses habitual and imperfective (and progressive) aspect in present or past
tense; the perfective markers express accomplished events; and the future marker
marks future events. In Table 4, the markers are displayed in relation to
different aspectual meanings of the verb: dynamic terminative (lamaj ‘break’, pusəkaj ‘let go, put down’); dynamic non-terminative (gawali ‘speak’, pachitaj ‘read’) and stative (səpi
‘sleep’, sidi ‘sit’).

There are two sets of
perfective markers; (1) la / li and
(2) esa / esi / ju / byla / jula. Nichols
(1996) considers esi/ est’ to be an
evidential marker (see the discussion below). There are no varieties of Chinese Pidgin Russian which would have perfective markers of both sets at the same
time. Esa/ esi and est’ are purely phonetic variants (<
Russian est’ ‘is’). Ju/ jula are of Chinese origin and go
back to the Mandarin Chinese verb yǒu ‘exist, have’. Byla is very rare (< Russian byla ‘was (feminine)’). The perfective
expresses an accomplished action or a change of state; there are instances of
the perfective in the future:

(4)

Tagəda

then

siwoni,

today

sontsa

sun

kanchaj,

finish

nasha

1pl

Iman

Iman

najdi

find

est'.

pfv

Then today at sunset we will already have reached the Iman-river.

Chinese Pidgin Russian does not have overtly expressed mood markers. There are two strategies
of expressing imperative meaning. It is often expressed by a zero-marked verb
with or without a 2nd person or 1st person plural subject pronoun:

(5)
Tibe   sam   pasəmatri!

2sg    self    look

‘Look
yourself!’ (A)

Imperative may also be expressed by the
modal word nada ‘it is necessary’,
the negative form of which forms the prohibitive:

(6)

Nada

necessary

tixa

still

sidi,

sit

chiwo-chiwo

what-what

lamaj

break

ni

neg

nada,

necessary

gawari

speak

tozha

also

ni

neg

nada.

necessary

Sit still, do not make any noise, do not speak either. (A)

As
Chinese Pidgin Russian simple sentences are often subjectless (because the pronominal subject
may be omitted), there is no formal distinction between imperative and
indicative forms. Subjunctive, optative, conditional, etc. forms are expressed
either by a zero-marked verb or by the combination of the verb with modal
words.

(7)

Səpichəki

matches

najdi,

find

kushaj

eat

najdi -

find

pərapadi

be.lost

netu.

neg

If one finds matches and food, one would not perish. (A)

Table 4. Tense-aspect markers

marker

aspectual class

tense/aspect meaning

Ø

any (dynamic, stative)

habitual present and past imperfective, generic present

dynamic

progressive present and past

budu/ budi

any

future

la

dynamic terminative

perfective: accomplished action; aorist

dynamic non-terminative

perfective: action limited in time; aorist

stative

perfective: completed change of state

esi/ esa/ ju/ jula

dynamic terminative

perfective: accomplished action with current relevance/
evidential

dynamic non-terminative

action limited in time; repeated action

stative

repeated action

There are two main
strategies of verbal negation; each one is typical for a particular variety of
Pidgin. Older varieties used the postverbal particle netu/ nitu (< Russian negative existential verb net, netu ‘there is no’); newer ones
used the prepositional particle ne/ ni
(< Russian verbal negation ne): iwo xadi
netu or iwo ne xadi ‘he does not
come/go’.

When combined with
other tense-aspectual markers or modal words, only ne was used in all varieties.

There are three types
of modality expressed by different modal words, as presented in Table 5. Modal
words may occupy the position before or after the verb, but normally before the
tense-aspect markers.

Table
5. Modal markers

Type of modality

marker

examples

external
modality (necessity)

nada

Posəle  adawaj     nada
budu.

after    give.back necessary  fut

‘I will have to give (it) back
later.’

internal
modality (capacity)

mogu

Adin  liudi    delaj   kushi   ne     mogu.

one   person make  eat     neg can

‘One person cannot feed (the
family).’

external
modality

(permission,
possibility, advice)

mozhənə

Səkazywaj ne
nada,
sama padumaj mozhənə.

say
neg necessary   self   think     may

‘Do not
report (to anybody), you should care about yourself.’

Evidentiality was
probably overtly expressed in the Ussuri variant of Chinese Pidgin Russian
spoken by people of Tungusic origin (Nanai, Udihe, Oroch). One of the possible
interpretations of the verbal marker esi/est’
is evidential: “…est’ is never used for events which are witnessed,
i.e. seen by the speaker and/or hearer. It is used for nonwitnessed events
which are asserted on the basis of evidence” (Nichols 1996: 247). This
interpretation is supported by the fact that verb forms with the marker esa/esi
never co-occur with the negation marker. However, in the Kyahta language, esa/esi obviously has perfective
meaning.

Volition is expressed
by the verb xochi/ xochu ‘want,
wish’:

(8)

Jewó

3sg

rabótaj

work

ni

neg

xóču,

want

guláj-guláj

walk-walk

xóču.

want

He does not want to work, he wants only to have a good time. (Ja)

Chinese Pidgin Russian
uses no copula with predicative
adjectives and predicative noun phrases. With predicative locative phrases, a
copula may appear in past time reference (byla)
(see 11), but it is still not obligatory (see 9, 10):

(9)    Mishoka  galiazyna.

sack         dirty

‘The sack was/ became dirty’.
(Sh)

(10)

Za

top

təwaja

2sg

Mikita

Mikita

deriani

bad

liudi.

person

Your Mikita is a bad person. (Ch)

(11)
[…]        ixiñ   dimə       desia   byla.

[…]        3pl   house    here    was

‘Their
house was here.’ (ZK)

Unlike
a copula, the existential verbs esi/est/ju’
‘there is’, byla ‘there was’, netu ‘there is no’ are used very
consistently; they are also used in possession constructions, turning into a
true possessive verb ‘to have’:

(12)
Tibe   ju    piati     kapeka?

2sg    be   five      kopek

‘Do
you have five kopeks?’ (Vr)

7. Simple sentences

Chinese Pidgin Russian tends to have SOV word order (see 13); the next most common word
order is OVS, especially with a pronominal subject (see 14).

(13)

Adin

one

liudi

person

dərugoj

other

liudi

person

kushaj.

eat

One creature eats another creature. (A)

(14)

Sama

seit

ne

neg

magu,

can

nichiwo

nothing

ne

neg

delaj

do

iwo,

3sg

kushaj

eat

wari

cook

ne

neg

umej

know.how

iwo.

3sg

She cannot (live) by herself, she does nothing, she cannot cook. (ZK)

Clauses
with a pronominal subject may lack an overtly expressed subject.

Chinese Pidgin Russian
in its core structure completely lacks both grammatical case and prepositions.
Syntactic functions are assigned to the clausal arguments mainly on the basis
of the general semantic context and word order:

Agent-Patient:

(15)
Eta    liudi       patom  dzimli    kapadzi.

this   person  then    ground dig

‘Then
this person dug the ground.’ (LJČ)

(16)
Heczu    liba   kupi-la.

Hedzu   fish   buy-pfv

‘Hedzu
bought fish.’ (Sh)

Location:

(17)
Sam  gorod  pashol jiwo.

self    city      went    3sg

‘As
for him, he went to the city.’ (ZK)

Instrument:

(18)
Buldozera  rovno  delaj.

bulldozer   even    make

‘[They]
leveled [the ground] with the help of bulldozer.’
(LJČ)

One
has to rely on the semantic role of the argument in order to determine its
grammatical role in the clause.

Chinese Pidgin Russian
has no category of voice. The
semantic role of agent corresponds to the grammatical relation of the subject,
and the semantic role of patient corresponds to the grammatical relation of the
direct object. The semantic structure of the clause is therefore inferred from
the word order.

With ditransitive
verbs, Chinese Pidgin Russian displays the double object construction, though
the theme object tends to occupy a position nearer to the verb.

(19)
Jevó  dúmaj majá jevó   céna    daváj.

3sg    think  1sg   3sg    price   give

‘He
thinks that I give him the (real) price.’ (Ja)

Circumstantial
expressions (location, instrument, means of transport, etc.), with the
exception of time expressions, tend to occupy the position between S and V:

(20)

Nada

necessary

lipahoza

lumber.company

kater

cutter

cho

what

vazi-la.

carry-pfv

It was necessary to carry things to the lumber company by motor boat. (LJČ)

However,
quite frequently the concrete interpretation of the argument structure of the
clause is based on the general semantic context.

Interrogative
constructions: Polar interrogative sentences normally do not
differ from the corresponding affirmative ones. There was, though, a
verb-repetition strategy, borrowed from Chinese (“A-not-A question”):

(21)
stára   wéšy    maj    pu       maj?

old       thing   sell    neg     sell

‘Do
you sell old stuff?’ (Ja)

In content questions,
the interrogative phrase is moved to the left. The most common question word is
kakoj ‘which, what kind, what, how’.
Some other question words are constructed on its basis: kakoj  liudi ‘who, whom’
(lit. ‘which person’); kakoj manera
‘how’, ‘of what kind’ (lit. ‘which manner’). At the same time, kada ‘when’ and kuda ‘where, where to’ are also often used.

8. Complex sentences

Complex
sentences are not very characteristic of Chinese Pidgin Russian. Usually
utterances consist of sentences of a rather simple structure. In order to make
the argument structure more transparent, the whole situation is often split
into smaller situations so that each predicate has only one or at most two
arguments.

(22)

Tak

so

hudo

bad

hodi,

walk

ego

3sg

mogu

can

streliaj.

shoot

Ego

3sg

dumaj,

think

nasha

1pl

chushka

pig

est'.

be

We shouldn’t walk like that, they may shoot, taking us for wild pigs. (A)

The
segmentation of the text into very simple clauses is a characteristic feature
of all variants of Chinese Pidgin Russian. The clauses
are linked by juxtaposition in the majority of cases. Coordinating conjunctions
are never used. Adverbial clauses, however, can be introduced by the
conjunctions kada ‘when’, kuda ‘where to’, and ide ‘where’, but they are optional:

(23)
Iwo pomi-la              tamə,   ide       zaxoroni-la  chasa  iwo    kada.

3sg remember-pfv  there   where bury-pfv      hour    3sg   when

‘He
remembered the place where she (mother) was buried and the time.’ (LJČ)

9. Lexicon

A
concordance of all lexical items used in all available sources of Chinese Pidgin Russian clearly shows that there was a lexical core shared by the
majority of the sources, and a lexical periphery, often belonging to the
speaker’s first language. Only about 100 words turn out to be common for the
majority of sources. These are: personal pronouns, deictic words (sichas ‘now, today’, siuda ‘here’, takoj ‘such’), cardinal numerals, quantifiers (noga ‘many’, mala ‘few’, sypka ‘very much’), modal words and
verbal markers, verbs (kupi ‘buy’, hodi / hadi ‘go, come’, gawali
‘say’, delaj ‘do, make’, kushaj ‘eat’, pomiraj ‘die’, rabotaj
‘work’, sidi ‘sit’, taskaj ‘drag, carry, steal’, lamaj ‘break’), nouns (liudi ‘person’, dom ‘house’, fanza
‘Chinese house’, miasa ‘meat’, ryba ‘fish’, xəleba ‘bread’, pampusəka
‘Chinese bread’, syna ‘son’, sontsa ‘sun, day’), and three adjectives
(xalosi ‘good’, shango ‘good’, sətary
‘old’).

These lexical items had
a rather wide range of meanings, e.g. liudi
designated: 1. person; 2. people; 3. animal; 4. any
animated creature. Verbs tended to be labile: lamaj could be transitive: ‘break, spoil, chop’, and intransitive
‘be broken, be spoilt, be chopped, be ill’.

Etymologically, the
biggest part of the lexicon goes back to Russian. There were also some words of
Mongolian origin (adali ‘as’, ‘like’,
shango ‘good’, ‘well’) and loans from
languages of local Tungusic minorities (amba
‘evil spirit’, aja ‘good’, ‘well’). A
significant number of words go back to Chinese, especially in the variants
spoken in Vladivostok and Manchuria (kunia
‘girl’, ‘daughter’, laiba ‘come
here’, juli ‘to row’, ‘boat’ and
others). There were numerous Russian/Chinese doublets in the varieties
mentioned: personal pronouns (maja/ wody;
tibi/ nidy), demonstratives (eta/
chega), verbal negation (ne, netu/
bu, pu), and the perfective form of the existential verb (byla/ ju la). The origin of some rather
widespread words is unknown: karapchi
‘steal’, sypko ‘very much’.
