APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Mauritian Creole
Lexifier: French | Region: Indian Ocean
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/55
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Mauritian Creole

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 55.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background and the current linguistic situation

3. Writing in and about Mauritian Creole

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Complex sentences

10. Lexicon

1. Introduction

The Republic of Mauritius, located about 900 km east of Madagascar
in the Indian Ocean, has a total area of 2040 km² and had an estimated
population of 1,288,000 in 2008. It comprises the island of Mauritius itself
(1,865 km²), where the overwhelming majority of the population lives, and
the dependencies of Rodrigues (109 km², ca. 40,000 inhabitants), Agalega
(24 km², ca. 300 inhabitants), and the St Brandon group of islets which,
though constantly visited by fishing vessels, lacks any permanent residents.

Mauritian Creole, the dominant spoken language of Mauritius and its
dependencies, is spoken by everyone born in these islands as their first or
additional language. It is also spoken by many thousands of Mauritians who have
emigrated to other countries, mainly in western Europe and Australia. It is
closely related to Seychelles Creole (see Michaelis & Rosalie 2012, this
volume).

2. Sociohistorical background and the current linguistic situation

After
the island was abandoned by the Dutch in 1709, it was occupied by the French in
December 1721 by a few people from Reunion (then called Isle Bourbon) while awaiting two much delayed ships from France
which eventually arrived in March 1722 after half the passengers, mainly Swiss
troops, had died en route. None of these people came as settlers. They were
joined by 30 slaves from Reunion, almost all of whom left within a year, and 65
Malagasy slaves, a third of whom quickly escaped and were never recaptured. The
Compagnie des Indes wanted some Réunionnais families to move there but this did
not happen because they feared that Mauritius, with two natural harbours
whereas their island had none, might rapidly overtake Reunion in importance. By
the end of 1725, hardly any of the Europeans who came in 1722 remained in the
island, the Swiss troops having been replaced by French soldiers.

In
1726, Lenoir, head of the Compagnie’s Indian Ocean operations, proposed a new
plan for the settlement of the island: military colonization. Unattached young
women were to be brought from France. Soldiers who married one of them would be
given land and slaves in order to become settlers. Slaves were to be shipped
from West Africa, Madagascar, and India while skilled artisans were to be
recruited in Pondicherry for construction work. These plans were rapidly
implemented. By 1730, non-Europeans already outnumbered Europeans by a
considerable margin. When appointed governor of the two islands in 1735,
Labourdonnais chose Mauritius as his headquarters, reducing Reunion to
provincial status, thereby confirming the fears of the Réunionnais. Languages
spoken by non-Europeans in Mauritius at that time include at least Bengali,
Indo-Portuguese, Malagasy, Mandinka, Tamil, Wolof, and perhaps Yoruba.1

In
the thirty years from 1735, Madagascar was the main source of slaves, but
slaves speaking Bantu languages had begun to be introduced from 1736 and their
proportion slowly increased until they overtook Malagasy arrivals decisively in
about 1765. Thereafter, Bantu slaves from East Africa accounted for the vast
majority of newcomers. Small numbers of Indian slaves continued to be
introduced throughout the 18th century.

The
terms of transfer of ownership to Britain in 1812 safeguarded French language
and culture, and discouraged any exodus of the Francophone population. A
Protector of Slaves was appointed in the 1820s, bringing the realization that
the abolition of slavery was inevitable, and leading many owners of domestic
slaves to make the latter free citizens without waiting for abolition in 1835.
Former slaves were then to be paid but required to remain on the plantations
for several years. This plan failed because the wages offered were considered
inadequate. Many slaves abandoned the plantations but then needed to find land
where they could eke out a living. This proved difficult and some emigrated to
Rodrigues, the Seychelles, and elsewhere. The plantations meanwhile found an
inexhaustible, alternative source of cheap labour in India, thus sowing the
seeds of long-term interethnic tension. This coincided with a boom in sugar
prices, leading to a vast increase in the land under cultivation and Indian
immigration on a truly massive scale. The population in 1835 was about 100,000;
in the following 35 years a total of 365,000 Indian indentured labourers
arrived, while only 81,000 of these had left on completion of their contracts
by 1871. 68% of the population was by then of Indian descent, a proportion
which has scarcely changed since. Indian immigrants brought several languages
from western (Gujarati, Maharati) and southern India (Telugu, as well as the
already represented Tamil) but the majority came from the Bhojpuri-speaking
region of northeast India.

Chinese
immigrants also began arriving in the 19th century but formed only 0.5% of the
population when first identified as a separate category in 1861, and did not
achieve their current proportion of around 3% until 1952.

Although
some primary schools, mainly run by religious organizations, had existed since
the 19th century, it was not until the 1950s that free primary education became
available for all children. This had the effect of enabling every Bhojpuri-speaking
child to acquire Mauritian Creole in the playground while exposing all pupils
to French and English in the classroom. French remained, as before, the
dominant language of the media (a radio station and several newspapers).
Television, introduced in 1965, brought some increase in the use of English,
but this remained little used outside the domains of education, government, and
big business. Mauritian Creole was the dominant spoken language of the towns
but shared this role with Bhojpuri in rural areas.

British
policy in the 1960s was to divest itself of its colonies, including Mauritius.
Hindus, about half the population, generally favoured independence, while most
of the “general population”2 (30%) was firmly opposed, and other minorities
were uncertain of where their best interests lay. Tensions came to a head in
1965 with rioting and interethnic murders leading to a state of emergency and
the arrival of British troops. In the following 1967 election parties favouring
independence won a clear majority and Mauritius became independent in 1968.

Sociolinguistic
changes since independence include a generally more relaxed attitude to
Mauritian Creole and its use in some domains where it was formerly all but
taboo (e.g. banks). However, there has so far been only a marginal increase in
the use of Mauritian Creole in the broadcasting and print media.

Other,
more significant changes are signalled by census figures relating to language
use. These have been collected since 1944 but published figures were often
misleading because they recorded ethnic rather than linguistic information.
Considerable improvements to data collection and analysis have been made since
then. The most striking change over the period 1944–2000 as a whole is
the steady increase in Mauritian Creole at the expense of oriental (Chinese and
Indian) languages. The 2000 census allowed respondents to name either one or
two languages as being “usually spoken at home”. The published figures indicated
that 81% spoke Mauritian Creole, alone or in combination with another language,
at home, while the corresponding figures for Bhojpuri and French were 18% and
6% respectively (Atchia-Emmerich
2005).  No other language was used at home by
more than 2% of the population.

3. Writing in and about Mauritian Creole

More
than 60 texts in Mauritian Creole are known from the 1730s to 1930 (Baker &
Fon Sing 2007).3 All these adopt
French orthographic conventions, with the partial exception of Anderson (1885)
in which, e.g., French <qu> is consistently replaced by <k>. Within
this period, Baissac (1880) published the first grammatical description of
Mauritian Creole. Independence in 1968 brought renewed interest in Mauritian Creole’s grammar (cf. Corne (1970), Baker (1972),
Moorghen (1972), Papen (1978)) and literary possibilities while, in newspaper
articles, the activist Dev Virahsawmy promoted official status for Mauritian Creole and offered a phonemic orthography for it.4 Several
competing writing systems have been proposed since then and, between 1968 and
2000, well over 100 books and booklets were published in one or other of them.5 This range of
orthographies reflected the diversity of the population and a reluctance to
accept a system promoted by a political or religious group with which they
might not wish to be associated. Hookoomsing’s (2004) grafi-larmoni sought to overcome these difficulties and has proved
more influential than any of its predecessors. A slightly modified version of
this, backed by the Akademi Kreol
Morisien, has now received official approval and was introduced into
primary schools in January 2012.

Two
dictionaries of Mauritian Creole were published in the 1980s (Ledikasyon pu
Travayer 1984 [Mauritian Creole to English]; Baker & Hookoomsing 1987
[Mauritian Creole to English and French]) while Carpooran published the first
monolingual Mauritian Creole dictionary in 2009 (2nd enlarged edition, 2011).

4. Phonology

In
the Mauritian Creole examples which follow, IPA transcriptions are given between
slashes or square brackets, while the Baker & Hookoomsing (1987)
orthography is used in all other circumstances, but with the additional marking
of the vowels of stressed syllables with the acute or grave accents (see §4.3
for details).

4.1 Vowels

Mauritian Creole has five oral and three nasal vowels but there are increasing signs of
schwa becoming established as a sixth oral vowel (see Table 1).

Table 1. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

close-mid

e   ẽ

o   õ

open-mid

(ə)

open

a   ã

However,
a number of remarks are needed on the above:

(i) Today /e/ tends to be pronounced as [ɛ] in closed syllables
and [e] in open syllables, and /o/ is similarly heard as [ɔ] and [o] in
closed and open syllables, respectively.

(ii) Nasalized /ẽ/ and /õ/ are always given mid-low
pronunciations [ɛ̃] (sometimes [æ̃]) and [ɔ.̃]. Nasalized /ã/ is a back
vowel, [ɑ̃]. In the orthography, these are written <eṅ>, <oṅ> and <aṅ>.

(iii) Denasalization of historically nasalized vowels distinguishes Mauritian Creole from other French creoles. This occurs in two main contexts: (1)
word-finally, inherited sequences of nasal vowel + voiced plosive have changed
to corresponding oral vowel + nasal consonant. Such words include those derived
from French from which final post-consonantal /l/ and /r/ had already been
dropped, e.g. aṅsám ‘together’ < ensemble, kokóm ‘cucumber’ < concombre, as well as the short forms of variable verbs, e.g. ván,
váṅde ‘sell’ < vendre;
(2) word-finally following /m/, e.g. lamé ‘hand’ < la main, píma ‘chilli’ < piment.

(iv) Schwa, written <ë> here, is not heard in basilectal
speech but is becoming frequent in other varieties, particularly in words which
traditionally had /i/ deriving from schwa in their initial syllable, e.g. dëló
‘water’ < de l’eau. In such words,
schwa is unstressed, but a stressed schwa is also heard as the reflex of
English [ʌ] in a few words such as rë́gbi ‘rugby (football)’. All words in which [ə] occurs also have
alternative pronunciations with [e] or another vowel so [ə] does not yet
have phonemic status.

Table
2 shows diphthongs and long vowels.

Table 2. Diphthongs and long vowels

orthographic:

Vy

Vw

Vr

IPA   i

(ij)

(iw)

iə

e

ej

(ew)

eə

a

aj

aw

ɑ:

o

oj

-

ɔ:

u

uj

-

uə

Diphthongs
in parentheses are rare. Mauritian Creole equivalents of French words such as famille with final [ij] are today
normally pronounced without a final glide. [iw] and [ew] are limited to words
of Indic origin, e.g. séw ‘vermicelli’. The IPA representations of the
realization of vowel + r in word
final and preconsonantal positions are their current values. (In all other
positions, r is today realized as a
voiced velar fricative, [ɣ].) Old Mauritian Creole texts retain French
graphic r in most positions but
provide no indication of its pronunciation.

4.2 Consonants

Table
3 shows the consonants of Mauritian Creole.

Table 3. Consonants

labial

dental

alveolar

post-alveolar

palatal

velar

glottal

stops

voiceless

p

t̪

tʃ    <ch>

[tj ~ ts]

k

voiced

b

d̪

ʤ <j>

[dj ~ dz]

g

nasal

voiced

m

n

ɲ <ny>

ŋ <ng>

fricative

voiceless

f

s

(h)

voiced

v

z

ɣ <r>

approximant

w

l

j <y>

The
dental to palatal area of the stops is rather complex and appears to be
undergoing change. Traditionally /t/ and /d/ are dental (as in French) but both
are palatalized, as [tj] and [dj], or lightly affricated,
as [ts] and [dz], before [i] or [j]. Old texts suggest
that /tʃ/ and /ʤ/ were formerly very rare but increasing numbers of
non-French words containing these affricates have become established in
Mauritian Creole over the past century, and the contrasts made in this area now
vary from speaker to speaker. This has resulted in some minimal pairs for many
speakers such as jét [ʤɛt] ‘jet plane’ and dyét
[djɛt] ‘diet’. A further complication is that, in words adopted from
English, initial /t/ and /d/ generally retain their alveolar pronunciation when
followed by [i]. For example, tḯm ‘(sports) team’ and dḯm
‘dip switch, dipped headlights’ contrast sharply with the pronunciations of the
initial consonants of e.g. tímid [tsimid] ‘timid’ and dimál
[dzimal] ‘pain’ among all Mauritian Creole speakers.

There
are several reflexes of the French palatal nasal [ɲ] in Mauritian Creole.
In the long form6 of ganye (< French gagner) ‘get’, the most usual pronunciation is probably [gan je]
(where space indicates syllable division) but several others are current
including [ga ɲe] and [gæ ɲe] (or with denasalization, [ga je] and
[gæ je]). In the short form, here written gany, the pronunciation is
typically [gaɲ] but variants include [gæ̃j] and denasalized [gæj].
Graphic sequences of <ni> immediately followed by another vowel in French
words established in Mauritian Creole have essentially the same set of variant
forms as those for Mauritian Creole words of French origin containing the
graphic sequence <gn> illustrated above.

Sequences
of oral vowel + [ŋ] in Mauritian Creole have often been misrepresented as
if they were the sequences of nasalized vowel + [g] (from which some derive
historically). This is part of a more extensive phonological rule described
earlier (see denasalization in §4.1) to which there has only been resistance
from a very few “prestigious” words such as laṅg ‘language’. For
many Mauritians, the latter contrasts with laŋ ‘angle’ (< French
l’angle). In addition [ŋ] occurs
in numerous words of non-French origin such as béŋkrep < English
bankrupt, b(h)áŋ
‘intoxicating potion made of cannabis and milk’ < Indic bhang, kóŋgolo ‘crest (of a bird)’ < Makonde (a
Bantu language) idem, váŋvaŋ < Malagasy vangovango ‘rough work’, etc.

Finally,
[h] has only very marginal status. Ha
occurs as a variant of sa ‘this,
that’ but appears to have only limited geographic distribution. It is also
found in some words of English or Indic origin as well as proper names such as Harold and Mohun, but in all cases its pronunciation is optional and appears
to be rarer than its omission.

4.3 Suprasegmentals

Mauritian Creole is a stress-timed language. Three kinds of syllable can be identified:

(1)
Unstressable in all circumstances: These include the TAM markers (§6), subject personal pronouns (§5.1) and
possessive adjectives, the articles en and la, the final syllable
of long forms of verbs with both short and long forms, most prepositions, etc.

(2)
Obligatorily stressed in all circumstances: These include the prefixes ré-
and dé-, the emphasizer mém, the number én ‘one’ etc.

(3)
Stressable: All nouns, adjectives, verbs, and adverbs contain at least one
stressable syllable which may be pronounced without stress when adjacent to
another word containing a stressed syllable, depending on the rhythm of
delivery adopted by the speaker.

Note
that stress placement can distinguish between two different words or meanings
which would otherwise be represented graphically as identical, e.g. refér
‘to recover (from an ailment)’ versus réfer ‘to make or do again’; la
‘definite article’ versus lá ‘locative adverb’; kúd-kúd ‘do a lot
of sewing’ versus kud-kúd ‘do a bit of sewing from time to time’, etc.

In the
remainder of this article where words are cited in isolation, the vowels of
obligatorily stressed or stressable syllables bear the acute accent. In example
sentences, however, the acute accent marks stress with rising intonation while
the grave accent marks stress with falling intonation.7 Thus these two
diacritics simultaneously indicate stress and intonation contours, and render
the use of graphic Ø to mark the non-existent copula unnecessary.

5. Noun phrase

5.1 Pronouns

Mauritian Creole has the pronouns set out in Table 4.

Table 4.  Personal pronouns

person

dependent subject

object and independent subject

singular

1

mo

mwá

2 (familiar)

to

twá

2 (respectful)

u

ú

3

li

lí

plural

1

nu

nú

2

zot

zót

3

zot

zót

The essential difference between the two
forms of each singular and plural pronoun is that dependent subject pronouns
are obligatorily unstressed whereas the object/independent subject forms are
normally stressed but their stress may be lost when adjacent to another
stressed syllable.

The distinction between
familiar and respectful forms of the 2nd person singular pronoun is found in
early data in almost all French creoles but is absent from the majority of
modern varieties. That the distinction is fully maintained in Mauritian Creole
may in part be due to influence from Bhojpuri and other Indic languages which
have a familiar versus respectful contrast even if it is coded on the verb
(Kriegel et al. 2008).

Dependent
subject pronouns can be, and frequently are, omitted where the referent is
clear from context. Several examples will be found in the glossed text at the
end of this article. Note also that absence of a 2nd person singular pronoun
can often be interpreted as reflecting the speaker’s uncertainty as to whether
familiar to or respectful u is more appropriate in a particular
context.

5.2 The relative pronoun ki

The relative pronoun ki ‘who’,
‘which’, ‘that’ introduces relative clauses. In many environments, ki may
be optionally omitted.

(1)

gólfis

goldfish

(ki)

(that)

mo

I

ti

pst

àste

buy

yèr

yesterday

la

def

in

prf

mòr

die

Marie met the girl (who) Gassen is going to marry.

(2)

gólfis

goldfish

(ki)

that

mo

I

ti

pst

àste

buy

yèr

yesterday

la

def

in

prf

mòr

die

The goldfish (that) I bought yesterday has died.

Note that la, generally regarded as the definite article
(but see §5.6 below), obligatorily occurs NP-finally in all
cases, even though it relates to tifí and gólfis in the above
examples.

The
relative pronoun cannot readily be omitted from an NP forming part of the
predicate.

(3)       Pyér     fin  kòz    sa      ar      Pòl    ki      travày  labàṅk  komersyàl     la

Pierre  prf talk   that  with  Paul  who  work   bank   commercial  def

‘Pierre has discussed that with Paul, who works at the Commercial
Bank.’

5.3 Nouns

All Mauritian Creole nouns are invariable
and may in consequence be interpreted as singular or plural according to
context unless the indefinite article en, a preceding numeral, or the preposed pluralizer, ban, are
present to provide disambiguation.

A
striking feature of hundreds of Mauritian Creole nouns is that their initial
consonant or syllable derives from a French article. Examples are: léd ‘help’ (< l’aide), zóm ‘man’ (< les hommes), laví ‘life’ (< la vie), lezó ‘bone’ (< les os), and dilwíl ‘oil’ (< de l’huile).

5.4 Adjectives

Mauritian Creole has a closed set of
adjectives which precede the noun and an open set which follow the noun.
Membership of the closed set is similar to, but not identical with, the French
set of preposed adjectives. Mauritian Creole additions include bezer ‘despicable’ and English-derived ful ‘complete’.  Note also that bel means ‘big and strong/extensive/impressive’, e.g. en bel tifi signifies a powerfully
built, rather than conventionally beautiful, young woman; see also the remarks
on the reflexes of French petit
below.

All adjectives may be
reduplicated, but reduplication gives preposed adjectives (with stress on the
first occurrence of the adjective) an augmentative interpretation while this
attenuates the meaning of the postposed set (with stress on the second
occurrence of the adjective).

(4)       en
gráṅ lakáz     ‘a
big house’;        en
gráṅ-graṅ lakáz      ‘a
very big house’

(5)       en
simíz rúz      ‘a red shirt’;        en
simíz ruz-rúz        ‘a
reddish shirt’

If preposed adjectives are modified in any
way other than reduplication, they are placed after the noun: en lakáz
byeṅ gráṅ ‘a very big house’ or en lakáz gráṅ teríb,
‘an exceptionally big house’.

The preposed French adjective petit has three different reflexes in
Mauritian Creole: píti, típti and ti. All these occur in preposed position. Típti derives from
the reduplication of French petit but
functions as a single morpheme meaning ‘tiny’ in Mauritian Creole. Ti is best considered a diminutive prefix
because it differs from adjectives on four counts: (1) It is inherently
unstressed whereas all adjectives contain one stressable syllable; (2) it
cannot occur as a single-word predicate; (3) it cannot be accompanied by an
intensifier; (4) while two preposed adjectives cannot readily co-occur, ti can follow any preposed adjective: en zóli ti-lakáz ‘a
pretty little house’.

Comparatives and superlatives are formed
with a preceding pli or mweṅ: Klénsi pli zèn ki mwà ‘Clency
is younger than me’; mo grámer mweṅ vyè ki mo gràṅper ‘my
grandmother is younger than my grandfather’. For a superlative reading, some
restriction of reference is generally indicated: Tíma pli zèn daṅ nu
grùp ‘Fatima is the youngest in our group’ (lit. ‘Fatima is more young in
our group’). An alternative comparative structure employs pliski or mweṅski
after the adjective: li màleṅ pliski mwà ‘s/he is cleverer than
me’.

5.5 Preverbs, adverbs, and prepositions

Preverbs are adverbs which precede the verb
but follow any TAM markers. They include áṅkor ‘still (expected to
terminate soon)’, túzur ‘still (not expected to terminate soon)’, neplí
‘no longer’, záme ‘never’, nék ‘merely’, and fék ‘just a
moment ago’.

Frequent adverbs include ísi ‘here’,
labá ‘there’, ladáṅ ‘inside’, deór ‘outside’,
astér ‘now’, tár ‘late’, byéṅ ‘in a good way’, as well
as a few such as dúsmaṅ derived from French adverbs ending in -ment.

A few adverbs also function as prepositions
but are obligatorily unstressed in the latter role: aṅba
‘under(neath)’, avaṅ ‘before’, apre ‘after’. Other frequent
(unstressable) prepositions include lor ‘on’, pu ‘for’, and daṅ
‘in, at’.

5.6 Articles and demonstratives

Mauritian Creole has a preposed indefinite
article en (unstressable), which contrasts with stressed én
‘one’: en lakáz ‘a house’, én lakáz ‘one house’.

Mauritian Creole also has a postposed (and clause-final) particle la which is
frequently described, somewhat misleadingly, as the definite article. It
derives from the second element in the discontinuous French demonstrative ce … là ‘this’. Mauritian Creole has both sa alone and discontinuous sa
… la as unambiguous demonstratives, of which the latter is by far the more
common. But in many instances it is difficult to decide whether la
alone, which occurs with far greater frequency than either sa or sa …
la, should be considered a demonstrative or definite article since, without
detailed knowledge of the context, both readings are often equally plausible. A
further complication is that bare nouns in Mauritian Creole can also have a
definite reading. A great many such bare nouns occur in Baissac’s (1888)
folktales; they are found less frequently today but are by no means rare. In
addition, since the 19th century, there are examples of the 3rd person singular
possessive pronoun so being additionally used as a kind of definite
article; see Guillemin (2007).

5.7 Genitives

The set of possessive adjectives in
Mauritian Creole is the same as the set of preposed dependent subject pronouns
in Table 4 except that the 3rd person singular possessive pronoun is so (from French son) not li: mo lakáz ‘my house’, to zárdeṅ ‘your garden’, so simíz ‘his
shirt’, etc.

Mauritian Creole also has
two genitive structures. One has the order possessed + possessor, the other
order is possessor + so (zot
if the possessor is plural) + possessed: lisyéṅ Sesíl and Sesíl
so lisyéṅ both mean
‘Cécile’s dog’. These structures can be freely combined: lisyéṅ Sesíl
so frér and frér Sesíl so lisyéṅ, both meaning ‘Cécile’s brother’s dog’.

6. Verb phrase

About
70% of Mauritian Creole verbs are variable, having both short and long forms: maṅz/maṅze
‘eat’, daṅs/daṅse
‘dance’ etc. Other verbs only have one form. Variable verbs adopt their short
form when immediately followed by a direct or indirect object and their long
form in most other circumstances, according to purely syntactic criteria.

Mauritian Creole has six preverbal markers relating to
tense, aspect and mood. They immediately precede the verb, their order with
respect to each other being: ti (past marker), fin/in/’n (perfect
marker), pe (progressive marker), a (indefinite future marker) and pu (definite future marker),8 plus the zero marker. In Table 5, the different
markers are displayed in relation to the lexical aspect (aktionsart) of the verb. We distinguish between dynamic verbs (bàt/e
‘hit’, màṅz/e ‘eat’) on the one hand and stative (krwàr
‘believe’) and adjectival (malàd ‘(be) ill’)
verbs on the other. Unmarked dynamic, stative, and adjectival verbs have the
same temporal interpretation. The aktionsart
distinction is only relevant because some verbs are, according to their aktionsart meaning, incompatible with
some of the preverbal markers or convey other semantic nuances. So, the
progressive marker in combination with states can yield inchoative meanings: mo
pe malàd (‘I am becoming ill’); the perfect marker in combination with
adjectival verbs can refer to a change of state resulting from a past event: So
fígir in rùz. ‘His face became red’.

Table
5. TAM markers

marker (French etymon)

aktionsart

tense/aspect

Ø

all

simple
present, habitual present, generic present, perfective past (in narrative
contexts)

pe (après)

dynamic

progressive
present, immediate future

adjectival

ongoing
change of state (‘become’)

ti (était, été)

all

simple past

fin/in/’n (finir)

dynamic

perfect with
current relevance

stative

completed
change of state with current relevance

a/va/ava (va)

all

indefinite
future

pu (pour)

all

definite
future

TAM markers can be
combined in a limited number of ways, as indicated in Table 6.

Table
6. Combinations of TAM markers

aktionsart

tense/aspect

modality

ti’n

all

past-before-past

ti
pe

dynamic

progressive past

adjectival

past ongoing change of state (‘was
becoming’)

ti
ava pe

all

counterfactual (with past
reference)9

ti
a

all

past conditional (indefinite)

ti
pu

all

past conditional (definite)

Wherever
the past tense has been clearly established in a narrative, by ti or an appropriate adverb, all
subsequent verbs receive a past interpretation without the need to repeat ti.

Of
the four types of modality identified in Kriegel et al. (2003), kapàv is
used to express possibility. (There is no reflex of the French verb pouvoir.) Necessity is expressed mainly
by bìzeṅ (but devèt, fòde and oblìze also occur). Bìzeṅ is used for all four types of modality,
including epistemic modality.

Table
7.  Modality

type of
modality

construction

examples
with translation

participant internal modality
(possibility / necessity)

kapàv, bìzeṅ

Kómye kán
li kapàv kùpe par zùr?

‘How much
sugar cane can he cut each day?’

participant external modality
(‘root')

kapàv, bìzeṅ

U bìzeṅ màrse pu àl traváy?

‘Do you have to walk to
work?’

participant external modality,
deontic (permission / obligation)

kapàv, bìzeṅ

U
bìzeṅ al lòpital.

‘You must go to
hospital.’

epistemic (uncertainty/
probability)

bìzeṅ

Li
bìzeṅ fin gàny enpè en sòk.

‘S/he must have been a
bit shocked.’

In
epistemic uses verbal particles (pe, fin) are postposed to the modal (see
Table 7), while in non-epistemic uses they are preposed (Kriegel et al. 2003).

Epistemic reading

(6)       mo     pà     trùv     mo       laklè, mo     bìzeṅ    (f)in     pèrdi li

1sg    neg   find     poss    key   1sg    must   prf      lose   3sg

‘I
don’t find my key. I must have lost it.’

(7)

mo

1sg

pà'n

neg.prf

trùv

find

li

3sg

daṅ

in

travày

work

ozòrdi;

today

li

3sg

bìzė

must

pe

prog

àl

go

Por-Lwì

Port-Louis

I don't see him at work today. He must be going to Port-Louis.

Non-epistemic reading

(8)

lóṅtaṅ

before

pa

neg

ti

pst

èna

have

lalimyèr;

light

dimún

person

pe

prog

bìzeṅ

must

alìm

light

lalàṁp,

lamp

labùzi

candle

Formerly, there was no electricity; people had to light an oil lamp or a candle.

The
verbal negator pa follows the subject (noun or personal pronoun), but
precedes all verbal markers:

(9)       nu     pà     ti        pe        dòrmi

1pl    neg   pst    prog   sleep

‘We were not sleeping.’

The
negator regularly combines with èna ‘have’, àṅkor ‘yet’ and
fin ‘prf’ as p’èna
‘to lack’, ‘to not have’, p’àṅkor ‘not yet’, and pà’n ‘neg + prf’.

Mauritian Creole uses the dummy copula when predicative phrases are fronted, e.g. in
questions:

(10)     kúma     so        lakáz   ète?   so      lakáz     zòli    terìb

how       poss    house  cop   poss  house    nice   terrible

‘What is her/his house like? His/her house is very nice.’

7. Simple sentences

The
word order in Mauritian Creole is SVO. In spoken informal language, if the
subject referent is set by the context, it can be dropped without any syntactic
constraints. This technique is also productive for constructions with a passive
sense: The subject position may also be left empty if the referent is
indefinite and generic:

(11)     si     Ø  mèt    mwa  daṅ    lòt        klìma     mo    pà      pu     kapàv  […]

if     Ø  put   1sg    in      other   climate  1sg   neg   fut   able     [...]

‘If
they/ you put me in another climate, I won’t be able [to cope] [...]’

Another construction type is the promotion of the
patient to subject position:

(12)     sa      lasán-la   mèt    daṅ    kàn             ùsi

dem   ash-dem  put    in      sugar.cane too

‘These ashes are also put into (the ground where) the sugar cane (is
planted).’

A very limited group of verbs of negative physical
affection allows a morphologically marked passive construction with the
auxiliary gany (‘get’ < French gagner).

(13)     en      lisyéṅ      in      gany    bàte

indf  dog        prf    get       beat

‘A dog has been beaten.’

There are different competing techniques for the
expression of reflexive voice.

(a) The most common is for the object pronoun to be used as a reflexive
marker, optionally accompanied by the intensifier mem:

(14)     li     ti       kapàv  eṅfòrm   li          (mèm)

he   pst    able     inform  him     (self)

‘He was able to inform himself.’

(b)
With body care and grooming verbs, mention of the relevant body part tends to
be optional:

(15)     Rájen  pe        ràz         (so       figìr)

Rajen  prog   shave     poss    face

‘Rajen
is shaving (or: is getting shaved).’

(c)
Traditionally poss + lekor
was used as a reflexive marker. This is now rare but survives mainly in the
expression zet so lekor:

(16)     Fídu    fin     zèt        so        lekòr    depi     en        pòṅ

Fidou  prf   throw  poss    body   from   indf    bridge

‘Fidou has commited suicide by throwing himself off a bridge.’

Reciprocal
voice can be expressed by a special construction using
the word kàmarad. ‘friend’.

(17)     sáken       èd      so           kàmarad

each.one  help  poss       friend

‘They help each other.’

With ditransitive
verbs, the indirect object generally precedes the direct object but this
order can be reversed, with the indirect object following a preposition, giving
greater attention to the direct object:

(18)     a.       mo  ti       dòn      Pyèr    lìv     la

1sg    pst give   Pierre  book   def

‘I
gave Peter the book.’

b. mo     ti       dòn   lìv        la    ar      Pyèr

1sg    pst    give   book   def with  Pierre

‘I
gave Peter the book.’

8. Complex sentences

Sentence coordination can be
achieved by coordinating conjunctions or by simple juxtaposition. The main
coordinating conjunctions are e ‘and’, be, me
‘but’, and ubyeṅ ‘or’. Mauritian Creole shows a tendency to
distinguish between sentential coordination (verbal coordination) marked by e (see 19) and nominal conjunction marked by ek (see 20), even if ek is increasingly used even in contexts
of verbal conjunction (see 21).

(19)

mo

1sg

pe

prog

lèv

lift

en

indf

bàl

big.sack

kàtroveṅ

eighty

kìlo

kilo

é

and

mo

1sg

pe

prog

gàlupe

run

avek

with

sà

that

I am lifting a large 80 kilo sack and I am running with that.

(20)     pápi   ek      mámi   prè      pu   àle     zòt     ùsi

dad   and   mum   ready  for  go      3pl   too

‘Dad
and mum are about to go, them as well.’

(21)

bìzeṅ

must

brìl

burn

èn

one

azòrdi

today

ìsi

here

ek

and

brìl

burn

èn

one

lot

other

kòte

side

One has to be burned here today and one burned the other side.

Object
clauses are zero-marked or introduced by ki
(< French que) (including with
verbs of speaking and of knowing).

Adverbial
clauses are introduced by different
subordinators, e.g. kàṅ ‘when’, si ‘if’, parskì/akòz ‘because’, àpre
‘after’, avàṅ ‘before’ etc.

9. Other
structures

9.1 Interrogatives: total questions

Any statement may be turned into a question
simply by switching the intonation on the final syllable from falling to rising
pitch regardless of whether this is a stressed syllable or not.

(22)     Zórz       en     bòṅ       profesèr                   Zórz         en     bòṅ       profesér?

Georges indf  good    teacher                     Georges   indf  good   teacher

‘Georges
is a good teacher.’                      ‘Is
Georges a good teacher?’

Alternatively, the statement can remain
unchanged but be turned into a question by adding nóṅ? ‘no?’ (corresponding to English isn’t it?, etc. or French n’est-ce pas):

(23)     Zórz       en     bòṅ       profesèr,  nóṅ?

Georges indf  good    teacher    no

‘Georges a good teacher, isn’t he?’

9.2 Interrogatives: partial questions

Partial questions are those in which a noun
phrase (NP) or adverbial is replaced by an interrogative element. A subject NP
can be replaced by ki ‘who, what’ or the longer structure ki senla (or sanla) ki (from which
the first ki is often omitted):10

(24)

a.

tú

all

dimún

people

in

prf

à

go

Everybody has gone to the races.

b.

lekùrs

race

((ki)

who

sénla)

who

ki

rel

'n

prf

àl

go

lekùrs

race

Who (is it that) has gone to the races?

An NP within the predicate is normally
replaced by ki and moved to sentence-initial position, again without any
change of intonation pattern at the end of the sentence:

(25)     a.       èna   en        pagòd    Sanmàrs

have indf     pagoda Champ.de.Mars

‘There is a pagoda at Champ de Mars.’

b.      ki      èna      Sanmàrs?

what have    Champ.de.Mars

‘What is there at Champ de Mars?’

If the verb in the sentence in which the NP
in the predicate is preceded by a verb in its short form (see §6), the
replacement of the NP by ki and its movement to sentence initial
position also requires the verb to adopt its long form:

(26)     a.       so        sér     apel       Àyvi

poss    sister call        Ivy

‘Her sister is called Ivy.’

b.      kí           so          sèr         apèle?

what     poss      sister     call

‘What is her sister called?’

In verbless (zero copula) sentences, moving
the NP replaced by ki to the front also requires the introduction of the
dummy copula ète (see also example (10)):

(27)

a.

so

poss

gráṅ

old

frer

brother

ti

pst

en

indf

sòfer

driver

tàksi

taxi

His elder brother was a taxi driver.

b.

kí

what

so

poss

gràṅ

old

frer

brother

ti

pst

éte?

cop

What was his elder brother?

9.3 Focus

Focus is generally achieved by suffixing mem
to the emphasized item. With an object or independent subject pronoun, this can
be glossed as ‘self’, e.g. li-mem ‘himself’, nu-mem ‘ourselves’.
Additional focus can be achieved by fronting this:

(28)

a.

nu

1pl

fin

prf

rèsi

succeed

fèr

do

sa

it

nu-mèm

1pl.emph

We have succeeded in doing that ourselves.

b.

nu-mèm

1pl.emph

nu

1pl

fin

prf

rèsi

succeed

fèr

do

sa!

that

We ourselves have succeeded in doing that!

With pronouns, focus can also be achieved
by placing the stressed independent subject pronoun before the dependent one:

(29)

twá,

2sg.indp

to

2sg.dep

fin

prf

rèsi

succeed

fèr

do

sa!

that

You have succeeded in doing that!

The first two above possibilities are also
available for object NPs, but mem is
perhaps best translated ‘real’ or ‘really’ in most cases:

(30)

a.

sa

dem

kómi-la

shopkeeper-dem

en

indf

vóler-mèm!

thief-emph

That shopkeeper is a real thief!

b.

en

indf

vóler-mèm

thief-emph

sa

dem

kómi-la!!

shopkeeper-dem

That shopkeeper really is a thief!!

Fronting is not available for focusing
subject NPs but mem is available for
emphasis and additional prominence is achieved by adding the appropriate
resumptive pronoun before the mem:

(31)

a.

Misye

Mr

Bége-mém

Begué-emph

ti

pst

víni

come

Mr Begué himself came!

b.

Misye

Mr

Bége

Begué

li-mém

3sg-emph

ti

pst

víni!

come

Mr Begué came in person! (not one of his clerks)

10. Lexicon

Due to the wide range of origins of its
non-Francophone population throughout its history, Mauritian Creole’s
vocabulary is drawn from many sources. Baker (1982b) identified 1535 words of
apparent non-French derivation. Given that the Baker & Hookoomsing (1987)
dictionary contains entries for some 15,000 individual words (excluding
compounds), that suggests that fully 10% of the lexicon is of non-French
origin. However, 554 of these are from English and obviously postdate the
transfer to British rule in 1812. The second largest source is Indic languages
(292 words) and, while such languages were marginally represented in the 18th
century, there can be no doubt that the majority of these date from
19th-century Indian immigration. Words for which no etyma have yet been
identified form the third largest category (257). Together, these three
categories account for 72% of the non-French lexicon.

Lesser,
but nonetheless important, sources include Bantu languages (collectively),
Malagasy, and Tamil, each with between 60 and 100 items. Smaller sources, each
accounting for fewer than 20 items, are Chinese, Manding, Portuguese, Wolof,
and languages of the Benin area.
