APiCS Online -- Survey chapter: Media Lengua
Lexifier: Spanish | Region: South America
Source: https://apics-online.info/surveys/73
License: CC BY 4.0 -- APiCS Online edited by Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus
Cite: Michaelis, Susanne Maria & Maurer, Philippe & Haspelmath, Martin & Huber, Magnus (eds.) 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

---

Survey chapter: Media Lengua

Structure data for these languages can be found in
structure dataset 73.

1. Introduction

2. Sociohistorical background

3. Sociolinguistic situation

4. Phonology

5. Noun phrase

6. Verb phrase

7. Simple sentences

8. Complex sentences

9. Other features

1. Introduction

The variety of Media Lengua (literally ‘half language’ or ‘halfway
language’) described here is spoken natively by ca. two hundred people (men,
women, children) near Salcedo, Central Ecuador. Other varieties have been
discovered in Saraguro (Province of Loja), outside of Cañar, both in the
southern part of the Ecuadorian highlands, and in Imbabura province in the
north (Gómez Rendón 2008).

Linguistically speaking, Media Lengua is essentially Quechua with the
vast majority of its stems replaced by Spanish forms. Ecuadorian Quechua is
often called Quichua, but I will use the more general term Quechua here. Examples
of Media Lengua utterances are given in (1) through (3), with the (b) examples
giving the regional Quechua equivalent, and the (c) examples the regional
Spanish equivalent.

(1) a.   unu  fabur-ta       pidi-nga-bu     bini-xu-ni             (Media Lengua)

one    favor-acc     ask-fn-ben     come-prog-1sg

‘I come to ask a favor.’

b.   shuk    fabur-da      maña-nga-bu    shamu-xu-ni  (Quechua)

one   favor-acc     ask-fn-ben     come-prog-1sg

c.    vengo  a          pedir       un       favor                        (Spanish)

It is clear that (1a) has resulted from putting the phonological shapes
of the words in (1c) into the lexical entries in (1b). Thus shuk is
replaced by unu, maña- by pidi- etc. Several things should be
noted. First, we get an emphatic form of the indefinite article in Media Lengua, unu, rather than Spanish unemphatic un. Second, the
Spanish irregular verb form vengo appears in a regularized stem form
bini. Third, the Quechua rule voicing the accusative case marker -ta to
-da after fabur has not applied in Media Lengua; Quechua
dialectological evidence suggests that this is a recent rule. Fourth, what is
peculiar about Media Lengua is not so much that it contains Spanish words (many
dialects of Quechua do as well), but that virtually all Quechua roots, including
all core vocabulary, have been replaced. Fifth, the Spanish forms have been
adapted phonologically to Quechua; mid vowels have been replaced by high
vowels. Quechua word order and morphology have been retained.

(2) a.   kuyi-buk   yirba    nuwabi-shka              (Media Lengua)

cavia-ben  grass   there.is.not-mir

‘There turns out to be
no grass for the guinea pigs.’

b.   kuyi-buk      k'iwa         illa-shka             (Quechua)

cavia-ben     grass                                        there.is.not-mir

c.    no     hay   hierba    para    los    cuyes   (Spanish)

Note that the Quechua word kuyi ‘guinea pig’ appears in the local
Spanish as well. The Media Lengua verb maintains the Quechua-specific “sudden
discovery tense” (or mirative) marking -shka. The Quechua negative
existential verb stem illa· has been relexified with a newly formed “frozen”
stem nuwabi-, derived from Spanish no and haber ‘have’. The Spanish verb ‘have’ has
an impersonal form hay which also has existential meaning.

(3) a.   yo-ga     awa-bi        kay-mu-ni             (Media Lengua)

1sg-top water-loc  fall-cis-1sg

‘I come after falling
into the water.'

b.   ñuka-ga yaku-bi      urma-mu-ni          (Quechua)

1sg-top   water-loc  fall-cis-1sg

c.    vengo  despues     de     caer     en        el  agua   (Spanish)

Examples such as (3) show the extent to which Media Lengua utilizes the
possibilities of Quechua verbal affixation. Cislocative -mu can be
attached to non-movement verb stems indicating that the subject comes after
some action. This possibility exists in both Media Lengua and Quechua.

What
examples (1) to (3) illustrate is that:

(a)
Media Lengua is essentially the product of replacing the phonological shapes of
Quechua stems with Spanish forms, maintaining the rest of the Quechua
structure;

(b)
the Spanish forms chosen have undergone regularization and adaptation to
Quechua morphophonology;

(c)
Media Lengua is conservative in sometimes reflecting earlier stages in Quechua
pronunciation;

(d)
it is not made up on the spot every time it is spoken;

(e)
the occurrence of Spanish strong alternants, frozen composites, etc. is an
indication that we do not have a simple process of vocabulary replacement here;

(f)
the Quechua and Spanish that have contributed to Media Lengua have influenced
each other in other ways as well.

2. Sociohistorical background

Media Lengua probably came into existence because acculturated Indians
could not identify completely with either the traditional rural Quechua
culture, or the urban Spanish culture. Thus, it was not communicative needs
that led to it, but rather expressive needs. It appears that ethnic self-­identification
is of crucial importance in determining the relation between Quechua, Media Lengua, and Spanish in the Ecuadorian Highlands. Media Lengua is not the
product of an interlanguage arrested and fixed, resulting from an emergency
contact situation; but rather it is a departure from Quechua through massive
relexification, and not at all along the path of Quechua-Spanish interlanguage.

The Ecuadorian capital of Quito went through a phase of rapid expansion
in the period between 1905 and 1925, after the railway linking it to the
Pacific port of Guayaquil had been built. Many of the construction workers were
recruited in the provinces south of the capital, where also the speakers of
Media Lengua are to be found. The variety reported on here is spoken about two
kilometres from a station on this railway. While now it has lost its
importance, the influence of the railway station after the turn of the century
and its pulling effect on the Indian labourers must have been tremendous, and
there is a long history of cyclical migration to the capital. It is not at all
unlikely that Media Lengua emerged as a result of the migration to the capital,
among the young adult males who were suddenly much more affluent and
independent than their peasant relatives, and suddenly confronted with a
Hispanic urban society.

Why
then did Quechua speakers relexify their language and create Media Lengua? It
may be useful here to compare Media Lengua with pidgins and creoles. Most
theories of pidgin (and hence creole) genesis assume that pidgins emerged
through the need for communication among people with different language
backgrounds, processes of incomplete target-language learning due to
quantitatively restricted second language input, and qualitative restrictions
on the target-language input through the use of foreigner-talk registers by
speakers of dominant groups. None of these processes contributed to the
emergence of Media Lengua.

First, Media Lengua is an intragroup language, not known outside the
communities where it is spoken. Because its structure is almost entirely
Quechua and the vocabulary taken from Spanish has been both relexified and
adapted to Quechua phonology, it is no more intelligible to Spanish speakers
than Quechua is. In fact few, if any, Spanish speakers understand Media Lengua,
while a substantial number of them have some knowledge of Quechua through
contacts with Indians from different communities in the region. And when I
played tapes of Media Lengua to Quechua speakers from nearby areas, they could
recognize it as some sort of strange Quechua - ­presumably because of the
suffixes - but could not understand it.

Second,
Media Lengua cannot be considered to be a case of learning Spanish as a second
language, since many Media Lengua speakers speak fluent Spanish and Media Lengua is very different from Spanish interlanguage. If it were the product of
an ongoing process of second language learning we would expect much more
variation in the language.

Finally,
Media Lengua and Spanish foreigner talk have different features. Spanish
foreigner talk is characterized by the use of diminutives, and a general
reduction of Spanish functional categories. Only in the absence of articles do
we find coincidental similarity with Media Lengua.

3. Sociolinguistic situation

The Media Lengua-speaking communities studied here are located on the
fringe of a Quechua-speaking area, to which the community historically
belonged. Due to its geographical situation and due to the necessity for and
possibility of its inhabitants to make frequent trips to the capital to look
for work, the community has come to be culturally differentiated from neighbouring
areas to the extent that its people find it necessary to set themselves apart
from the neighbours.

It is not used with outsiders, but neither is it a secret language.
Rather it is an ordinary, day-to-day community-level form of
communication.

Media Lengua is either learned as a first language or, now that language shift
towards Spanish is more advanced, as a second language, in any case before
Quechua. Only the oldest generation may still have Quechua as its first
language, but everyone has some knowledge of Media Lengua. Many people now in
their early middle age are fluently trilingual in Quechua, Media Lengua, and
Spanish. Some older people have less fluent Spanish, many younger people only
rudimentary Quechua.

In the communities, Spanish is the language of contacts with the
non-Indian world and that of the school, while Quechua is the language of
tradition and of contacts with the Indian campesinos higher up the slopes, and
Media Lengua is the language of daily life within the community.

4. Phonology

Media Lengua phonology resembles that of Quechua, so that Spanish words
are often adapted. Since we are concerned with the fate of the Spanish words in
Media Lengua, when incorporated into a predominantly Quechua phonology, the
most important differences involve elements or combinations of elements present
in Spanish but not in Quechua. The voiced stops [b], [d], and [g] occur in
Quechua primarily in loans from Spanish and from unidentified Amerindian
substrate languages. In addition, they can result from rules that voice initial
consonants of affixes. We find that Spanish /e/ and /o/ are often, but not
always, pronounced as [i] and [u], respectively (with some variation
that also occurs in the Quechua pronunciation of Spanish loans). The Spanish
vowels [e] and [o] are often retained in names and interjections. In stressed
position [e] and [o] are more frequently retained than in unstressed position.

Tables 1 and 2 give the phoneme
inventory of of Media Lengua. Unlike Peruvian and Bolivian Quechua, where [e]
and [o] often occur as the result of the (sometimes lexicalized) lowering of
/i/ and /u/ in the context of the postvelar stop /q/, Ecuadorian
Quechua, lacking /q/, only has [i] and [u].

Table 1. Consonants

bilabial

alveolar

palatal

velar

pharyngeal

plosive

voiceless

unaspirated

p

t

ch [c]

k

aspirated

ph

kh

voiced

b

d

g

affricate

ts

fricative

voiceless

s

sh [ʃ]

x

h

voiced

z

(zh [ʒ])

nasal

m

n

ñ [ɲ]

(ŋ)

liquid

r, l

ll [ʎ]

glide

w

y [j]

Table 2. Vowels

front

central

back

close

i

u

mid

e

o

open

a

5. Noun phrase

There are no genders or noun classes in Quechua, and the category
nominal includes pronouns, numerals, adjectives, and nouns. These can be
distinguished semantically and through their distribution, but not
morphologically. Derivational morphology on the noun is quite limited. The case
suffixes of Media Lengua are listed in Table 3.

Table 3. The most
frequent case suffixes of Media Lengua

-ta/-da

accusative

-mu(n)

dative or directional

-pi/-bi

locative

-munda

ablative (‘from’, ‘because of’)

-pu(k)/-bu(k)

benefactive, genitive

-(u)n

instrumental, comitative

-kama/-gama

‘until’

The typical order of elements in the noun phrase is head final:

(4)    adjective-noun     (preferred)

kura       bindizia-xu-n        mushug/nwibu  iskwila-da

priest     bless-prog-3        new                    school-acc

‘The
priest blesses the new school.’

(5)    noun-adjective

papa    frita-da-mi/fri-shka-da-mi           kiri-ni

potato fried-acc-aff
/ fry-nmlz-acc-aff   want-1sg

‘I
want fried potatoes.’

(6)    possessor-possessed

isi-guna    mio               muxer-pu        hermana-guna

that-pl      1sg.poss      woman-gen    sister-pl

‘Those
are my wife’s sisters.’

(7)    postpositions/case
suffixes

morocho-da-ga  inki-bi       sika-chi-shun

corn-acc-top    what-loc  dry-caus-fut.1pl

‘In
what shall we dry the corn?’

The personal pronoun system of
Media Lengua includes the elements shown in Table 4.

Table 4. The
personal pronouns of Media Lengua

main form

alternate forms

1sg

yo

miu

1sg poss

miu

1sg non-subject

ami

me

2sg

bos

tu

3sg

el

ele

1pl

nustru

nustrus, nosotros, ñukuchi

2pl

bos-kuna

3pl

el-kuna

6. Verb phrase

The Media Lengua verb receives regular suffixes,
as in Quechua. These fall into several categories. In Table 5 the person
marking suffixes are listed:

Table 5. The person
marking suffixes of Media Lengua

1sg

-ni

sabi-ni

‘I know’

< saber

2sg

-ngi

ga-ngi

‘you are’

3sg

-n

komi-n

‘s/he eats’

< comer

1pl

-nchi

abla-nchi

‘we speak’

< hablar

2pl

-ngichi

kiri-ngichi

‘you want’

< querer

3pl

-naku-n

i-naku-n

‘they go’

< ir

Notice that all the verbs in Table 5 have a
Spanish base (with the exception of ga- ‘be’, cf. Muysken 2010), but are
all regularized. Person marking is derived from Quechua. The -naku-
reciprocal marker is used here to mark verbal plural in the third person.

The
majority of the derivational suffixes found in Quechua occur in my Media Lengua
data as well (cf. 8).

(8)    bi-chi-        see-caus-             ‘show’

bi-ri-          see-refl-             ‘see
oneself’

bi-naku-    see-recp-             ‘see
each other’

bi-naya-    see-desid-            ‘like
to see’

Consider now the tense / mood / aspect marking suffixes of Quechua, presented in Table
6.

Table 6. Tense / mood / aspect
marking suffixes in Media Lengua

form

example

gloss

free translation

-(r)ka-

bi-(r)ka-ni

see-pst-1sg

‘I saw’

-shka-

bi-shka-ngi

see-mir-2sg

‘it turns out you saw’
(mirative use)

bi-shka

see-mir

‘s/he saw (in the remote
past)’       (narrative
use)

-xu-

bi-xu-ni

see-prog-1sg

‘I am seeing’

-xu-(r)ka-

bi-xu-(r)ka-ni

see-prog-pst-1sg

‘I was seeing’

-y

bi-y

see-imp

‘see!’

-chun

bi-chun

see-hort

‘let her/him see’

-sha

bi-sha

see-fut.1sg

‘I will see’

-nga

bi-nga

see-fut.3

‘S/he will see’

Obviously, elements from these
different categories of suffixes can be combined freely, as in:

(9)    ki-da             azi-ndo   chaiku-mu-rka-ngi?

what-acc     do-subord                        tire-cis-pst-2sg

‘How
did you tire yourself out?’

7. Simple sentences

In simple sentences the subject is often not explicitly present, and XV
order is dominant though not obligatory. Arguments are typically marked with case,
but this can be absent in the accusative. Some typical examples are:

(10)  yo-ga               fiti-wa-lla-di-mi                    kiri-ni

1sg.pro-top   little-dim-delim-emph-aff want-1sg

‘I
only want a very little bit!’

(11)  inki      kuchillu-n-di        korta-ka-ngi   pan-da

what   knife-ins-emph     cut-pst-2sg    bread-acc

‘With
what knife did you cut the bread?’

Negation is marked with a pre-constituent negator no and a
post-constituent (often post-verbal) negator -chu. The latter is not
always present.

(12)  llubi-kpi       mañana       no        i-sha-chu

rain-subord.ds  tomorrow          neg    go-fut.1sg-neg

‘If it rains, I won’t go tomorrow.’

(13)  boskuna-ga    no        xwirti      toma-shka-ngichi

2pl.pro-top   neg      strong    drink-mir-2pl

‘You
(pl) did not drink a whole lot!’

8. Complex sentences

Media Lengua complex sentences are formed in
various ways. The principal way, as in Quechua, is through verbal suffixes.
These can be nominalizations:

(14)  -y         ‘infinitive’

-shka   ‘definite’

-na      ‘indefinite’,     ‘infinitive’

-k         ‘agentive’

Alternatively, they mark adverbial subordination:

(15)  -sh(p)a  ‘same subject’

-kpi      ‘different
subject’

-ndu    ‘no differentiation for
subject’

The elements marked in bold in the fragment below illustrate these
suffixes.

(16)

Media

Media

Lengua-ga

lengua-top

así

thus

Ingichu-munda

Quechua-from

Castellanu-da

Spanish-acc

abla-na

talk-nmlz

kiri-xu-sha

want-prog-subord

abla-naku-ndu-mi

talk-pl-subord-aff

asi,

thus

chaupi-ga

half-top

Castellanu

Spanish

laya,

like

i

and

chaupi-ga

half-top

Ingichu

Quechua

laya

like

abla-ri-na

talk-refl-nmlz

ga-n

be-3

isi-ga

this-top

asi

thus

nustru

our

barrio-ga

community-top

asi

thus

kostumbri-n

accustomed-3

abla-na.

talk-nmlz

Media Lengua (/contributions/73) is thus if you want to talk Spanish from Quechua, but you can’t, then you talk half like Spanish, and half like Quechua. In our community we are accustomed to talking this way.

On the whole, subordinate clauses precede the head
(in the case of relatives), the main verb (complements), and the main clause
(adverbials), but there are exceptions in this respect.

In addition, a number of Spanish coordinating
conjunctions have been introduced into Media Lengua. Most productive are i
‘and’ and pero ‘but’, but o ‘or’ and sino ke ‘but rather’
occur as well. There are also a few cases of subordinating ki ‘that’, porque
‘because’ and aunke ‘although’.

9. Other features

The most important other feature of Media Lengua
(and Quechua) to be mentioned is the presence of a number of class-free
suffixes or enclitic markers. Examples are:

(17)  chango-bi-ga       warangitu       sinta-xu-n-chari

Chango-loc-top cactus.beer     exis-prog-3-dub

‘There
may be cactus beer at Chango’s.’

(18)  todabia   llubi-xu-n-lla-mi

still         rain-prog-3-delim-aff

‘It looks like it is
still raining a bit.’

Thus we find a topic marker -ga, and
uncertain knowledge marker -chari, a delimitative marker -lla and
an affirmative marker -mi.
