---
title: Radiant heat transfer to absorbing gases with flow and conduction
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19650011211
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19650011211
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-05-22
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 613a262a4b5b6cb987da40a9f0f401efcd6f3c85a62d7bf2b28e6f143c7786d4
pages: 8
words: 1458
cv_look_pages: 0
---

t   A   .
Prepared for ARS/ANS/IAS
Nuc3.ear Propulsion Confererce
Aug. 15-17, 1962,
                                   .*     .
Monterey, Calif.
                                                                                                   %.
            RADIANT HEAT TRANSFER TO ABSORBING GASES WTI" FLOW AND ck3NTUCTION                         6




            By T. H. Einstein                                         N65-20812                        *..--
            Lewis Research Center                                                         -   -'   /
            National Aeronautics and Space Administration
            Cleveland, Ohio
                                                                      M€-/
            INTRODUCTION
                 During the past five years there has
                                                                                         0-
            interest in the problem of radiant heat transfer to absorbing gases.
            Recent activity in this area has been motivated by the advent of heat
            transfer problems arising in space vehicle reentry, MKD energy conver-
            sion, and energy transport in a gaseous nuclear reactor.

                 Hottel was one of the earliest workers in this field, having inves-
            tigated radiant heat transfer from furnace gases as early as 1927.
            Although other workers have recently become active in the field by ob-
            taining analytical solutions for heat transfer and temperature distribu-
            tions (11, ( z j , ( 3 ) , Eoiiei'b &i&>-sLS < 4 ? sf t h e h e s t t r n n s f e r problem
            remains probably the most realistic since it is applicable to real
            (nongray) gases and may be applied to geometries of almost arbitrary
            shape.

                 There has been very little done so far in obtaining generalized
            results for radiation to a flowing gas or for combined r a d m i o n and
            conduction. Adrianov, ( 3 ) , investigated radiation heat transfer to a
            flowing gas, but some of the assumptions in his analysis render his
            results valid only for the case of weak absorbtion in the gas. Viskanta,
            42& has presented a rather complete analytical treatment of combine2
            radiation and conduction between two infinite parallel plates separated
            by an absorbing gas, but only a few specific results were presented.
                                                                                     '*

                 It is the purpose of this investigation to expand on the work done
            by both Adrianov and Viskanta which is cited above. The method used in
            the present analysis is a modification of Hottel's zoning technique (4).
            Results are obtained f o r a gray gas in a rectangular channel formed by
            two black, parallel flat plates of finite length, and are presented in
            generalized form for the case of radiation to flowing gases and also for
            combined radiation and conduction.

            ANALYSIS
                 A two-dimensional analysis of radiation heat transfer is made for
            a gray gas enclosed in a rectangular channel formed by two black parallel
            flat plates of finite length and infinite width. A sketch of this con-
            figuration is shown in figure 1. A rigorous treatment of this problem
            requires the solution of the following two dimension integro-differential
            equation which represents the heat balance on an infinitesimal volume,
            dV, at any point in the channel.
 c   . -

                                                - 2 -

                 4'
           -4kcrT (ro) + Gc
                              &(f)
                              -          + A
                                               a',(?)




                 An explanation of the various terms in equation (1) is given below

        k                   absorbtion coefficient of the gas

           -4k oT4 ( ?o )                                       +
                            energy emitted per unit volume at r = r0
                                                                    +


                                                                            + - +
                            rate of enthalpy increase of the flowing gas at r = r0


                            net conduction heat trmsfer per unit volume


        integrals on        radiation absorbed from emission due to surrounding gas
        the right             volume and radiation absorbed from emission of flat plate
        hand side             surfaces, respectively

        If the conduction and convection terns are removed in equation (I), its
        solution is greatly simplified since the equation will then be linear in
        the emissive power oT4. If in addition the length of the channel also
~.   --I3emm * M W ?t h e * m s         caK*pZ=t*ally    Fml&& fm clusd3b?m
        in terms of exponential-integral functions, as was done by Usiskin (1).

             In the absence of these simplifying restrictions, the only feasible
        way to solve this problem appears to be application of a method similar to
        Hottel's where the two-dimensional integral-differential equation (1) is
        approximated by a system of algebraic equations. This is done by first
        dividing the region between the plates up into a l O x l 0 array of rectangular
        zones, 100 zones in all. The gas temperature variation within each of
        these zones m y be approximated by a two-dimensional linear function.
        Heat balance equations in the form of equation (1)are now written for
        infinitesiml volume elements located at the center of each of 100 zones.
        The integral on the right of equation (1)is approximated by a finite
        summation over all the zones and surfaces. The derivatives are replaced
        by numerical approximations obtained from fitting a paraboloid through
        the temperatures of the zone in question and those of its adjacent
        neighbors in both directions. Each of the 100 zones is labeled by a dual
        subscript (i,j), i is the position along the length of the channel and j
        represents the position in the transverse direction. The resulting system
        of nonlinear algebraic equations, which is given below, are then solved
        for the 100 Tralues of Tijr the gas temgeratures at the center of the
        zones, for a given set of boundary conditions (plate and end temperatures).
                                            - 3 -

        The conditions of the two ends of the channel are represented by assuming
        that the ends are porous black plugs having the same temperature as the
        effective gas temperature at the ends. The equations to be solved are thus:




                = k   >:-
                       10

                      m,n=l
                              O4 f(g(m,n)
                               m,n
                                            - -+r(i,j))



        The principal difference between the present approach and that of Hottel's
        is that here the heat balance is taken on an infinitesimal volume of the
        center of the zone, rather than on the e n t i r e zcc?. %is appiuacii results
        in a large reduction in the effort required to compute the "exchange
        factors" f(2) and g(f). Since the system of 100 equations ( 2 ) is gen-
        erally nonlinear due to the presence of convection and conduction terms,
        it was solved using the Newton-Raphson iterative method for nonlinear
        algebraic equations. This method rapidly converges and the correct solu-
        tion is obtained after only a few iterations.

        RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

             The system of equations described by equation ( 2 ) was solved o n p a -
                                                                     ~~   -p   ~   ~




~
    ~   WM-7098csmpt&er fer a &ray gas cTco3sXGit-aFsCrpt~vi%y-enclosed in a
        black walled rectangular channel of aspect ratio, L/D, of ten and for a
        range of optical thickness T ~ ,(0.1S T~ 2 6), T~ = kD, where k is the
        gas absorptivity and D is the plate spacing. Cases were run for either
        combined convection and radiation or combined conduction and radiation, for
        a wide range of gas flow rates and thermal conductivities. The walls of the
        channel were considered to be at constant temperatures. To establish a
        reference several cases were run for radiation only, without flow or
        conduction.

             Figure 2 illustrates the heat transfer between the two plates for the
        case of a stagnant nonconducting gas. Since in this case equation (1) is
        linear in the emissive power, oT4, the heat transfer results may be normal-
        ized by dividing by the difference in the emissive powers of the two plates.
        The results given in figure 2 compare favorably with those obtained by
        Usiskin, (l), for infinite parallel flat plates. The agreement is not
        perfect because of end effects due to the finite length of the channel.

             In order to discuss the effect of conduction on radiation in a stagnant
        gas it is desirable to present the results in some type of nondimensional
        parametric form to obtain complete generality. Equation (1) may be
                                        - 4 -

     nondimensionalized by dividing through by kdC$    where T, is the tempera-
     ture of the hotter plate. It can also be shown that the integrals on the
     right, for a given temperature field, are a function only of To, and the
     channel aspect ratio L/D. On the basis of the above observations it can be
     shown that the solution of equation (1) is a unique function of the boundary
     conditions (ratio of cold plate and end temperatures to T+), and of the
     following set of dimensionless parameters   (3, $).
                                                      z0,      For the sake of
     brevity the parameter         will be designated NCR.   Figure 3 shows the
                             fl2
     effect of combined conduction and radiation on the transverse temperature
     profile for the cases of both weak gas radiation ( T =~ 0.2), and a relatively
     opaque gas ( T =~ 3.0). In both cases, the temperature gradient and therefore
     the heat conduction at the cold wall were substantially higher than those for
     pure conduction (linear temperature profile). At the hot wall the temperature
     gradient may be either greater or less than that for pure conduction, depend-
     ing upon the value of Nm and the opacity of the gas.

           hotner el’f‘ectof’ combined radiation and conduction is tnat the total
     heat transferred is greater than the sum of the heat transfer for radiation
     and conduction, taken separately. This effect is shown in figure 4 where
     the ratio of combined heat transfer to the sum of both conrponents taken
      separately is plotted versus T~ for various values of NCR. This augmenta-
     tion is due to interaction between radiation and conduction resulting from
     the nonlinear nature of the combined process. There is no augmentation for
     the case yo = 0 since the gas is then not involved in the radiation trans-
      fer process, and the energy transport by conduction and that by radiation
     are independent. For large values of yo, the radiation transport becomes
~~   i&&kt~   t~ d5Ffuskon pl-ocess-(Rossel&T& ap7rox%tl’on]    Gd again the inter-
     action with conduction diminishes.

              For the discussion of the effect of gas flow on radiation without con-
     duction it is again desirable to present the results in the form of dimen-
     sionless parameters. In the discussion to follow both plates are at the same,
     constant temperature rC and the gas enters the channel from one end through
     the black porous plug at a temperature Ti. The gas flow is in the direction
     of length L, as sham in figure 1. The results to be given are for slug
     f l o w , G is constant. In a manner similar to that described earlier, the
     solution to equation (1) is a function of the dimensionless inlet tempera-
     ture (Ti/T+) and the follaring set of dimensionless parameters
     The parameter   5 is known as the Boltzmann number NBo
                                                                      ( - , $).
                                                                            To.’
                                                                 and was also
                     02
     used by Adrianov (3) in presenting his results. In figure 5, the parameter
         To - Ti
     A =
         T+ - T represents the ratio of the actual heat transferred to the gas
               i
     to the maximum theoretically possible. The striking feature of figure 4
         . -
     8




                                                         - 5 -

               is that for a given value of NBo the heat transfer to the gas goes
               through a m a x i m with increasing zo. k e reason for this behavior is
               that as T~ increases the layers of gas next to the wall effectively
               absorb most of the radiation fromthe wall and thereby shield the bulk of
               the gas stream from any direct radiation. Because of this the bulk of the
               gas absorbs less radiation with increasing zo, resulting in reduced
               overall heat transfer.

                    The effect of this self shielding can also be seen by comparing the
               transverse temperature profiles at the channel exit for a weak and a
               strongly absorbing gas as shown in figure 6. At T~ = 1.0 there is very
               little self skielding and the temperature profile across the channel is
               fairly flat. For a higher degree of' gas opacity at the same value of A,
               T~ = 4.0, the temperature profile shows the variation expected, the tem-
               peratures next to the wall being higher but the temperatures in the re-
               mainder of the stream being reduced due to the heavy self shielding. The
               preceding remarks have indicated some of the effects of conduction and gas
               flow on radiant heat transfer to absorbing gases. The interaction between
               nnm~,,n+;  --a .--a:
                          cwlu L a u ~ a L . l ~ i i i - e s L l s i l l rn increase in net heat trarsfer in
               _uA_-y-yIyIL
                                       -A:



               comparison to the sum of the conduction and radiation heat transfey taken
               separately. For the case of radiation to a flowing gas from a constant
               temperature surface, the net heat transferred to the gas goes through a
               maximum as the gas absorbtivity is increased.



               1. Usiskin, C . M., and Sparrow, E. M. : Thermal Rsdiation Between Parallel
                    Plates Separated by an Absorbing-Emitting Nonisothermal Gas. Int.
-~
                                    Mass Trcsfer, xl. I, no. 1, Jm-
                    Jour. Heat and ~-
                     ~~
                              ~
                                                                       196L-                      ~




               2. Viskanta, R., and Grosh, R. J.: Heat Transfer by Simultaneous Conduction
                    and Radiation in an Absorbing Medium. ASME Trans., see. C, vol. 84,
                    no. 1, Feb. 1962.

               3. Adrianov, V. N., and Shorus, S. N . : Radiant Heat Transfer in a Flowing
                    Radiating Medium. izvestiga Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R. 1958. (AEC
                    trans. 3928.)

               4. Hottel, H. C., and Cohen, E. S. : Radiant Heat Exchange in a Gas Filled
                    Enclosure: Allowance for Nonuniformity of Gas Temperature. A.1.Ch.E.
                    Jour., vol. 4, no. 1, Mar. 1958.

