---
title: Total research activity related to the science of materials  Fourth annual technical report, Jul. 1, 1964 - Jun. 30, 1965
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19660014637
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19660014637
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONTRACTOR_REPORT
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-05-28
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 980cbd4a329b8932ccf82389fd65f8f6e3cc33e11a53a2472c3e9e7389d605ce
pages: 150
words: 25384
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                                    General Disclaimer

    One or more of the Following Statements may affect this Document



      This document has been reproduced from the best copy furnished by the
      organizational source. It is being released in the interest of making available as
      much information as possible.



      This document may contain data, which exceeds the sheet parameters. It was
      furnished in this condition by the organizational source and is the best copy
      available.



      This document may contain tone-on-tone or color graphs, charts and/or pictures,
      which have been reproduced in black and white.



      This document is paginated as submitted by the original source.



      Portions of this document are not fully legible due to the historical nature of some
      of the material. However, it is the best reproduction available from the original
      submission.




Produced by the NASA Center for Aerospace Information (CASI)
                                                                           a




       •' QO ) ulv



                         N



       O^(QAh IZED4X09



r!                                       ANNUAL TECHNICAL REPORT




                                                SUBMITTED TO THE

                                    ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY

                                                     OF THE

                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE




               C,t-^ /                           CONTRACT SD-87




     41 0--v                 I   //^ &-f-,

                                      July 1, 1964 to June 30, 1965




                CENTER. FOR MATERIALS RESEARCH
                         STANH)RD UMVERS I Y • STANF = ORD. ('AI.IFORNIA
                                                       w




           ANNUAL TECHNICAL REPORT




               SUBMITTED TO THE

      ADVANCED RES^'ARCH PROJECTS AGENCY
                    OF THE
            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE




                CONTRACT SD-87




        July 1, X96=+ to June 30, 196




                      By
        CENTER FOR MATERIALS RESEARCH
             STANFORD UNIVERSITY
             STANFORD, CALIFORNIA




Reproduction in whole or in part is permitted
for any purpose of the United States Government.




                                                   v
    .r




a




                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                                     Page

         A INTRODUCTION

         B MATERIALS RESEARCH AT S'T'ANFORD                                            2

         C MATERIALS RESEARCH PROGRAMS
               1. Spectra of Rare Earth Ions in Semiconductors and Glasses
                    W, W. Anderson                                                     4

               2. Interaction of Acoustic and Other Electromagnetic
                    Radiations in Solids, B. A. Auld zad M. Chodorow                   8

               3.   Properties of Surfaces and Catalysis, M.            Boudart       11

               4.   Photoelectronic Properties of Solids,          R.   1i.   Bube    13

               5.   Experiments at Liquid helium Temperatures on Macr scopic
                      Quantum Effects and General Relativity, W. M. Fairbank          18

               6.    Macromolecular Research,    P.   J.   Flory                      21

               7.   Ion- Implantation in Semiconductors, J. F. Gibbons                28

               8. Optical Network Synthesis using Birefringent Crystals
                    S. E. Harris                                                      30

               9.   Optical Second Harmonic Generation at Metal Surfaces
                      H. Heffner                                                      32

              10. Imperfections in Metals and Reaction Kinetics in Solids
                    R. A. Huggins                                                     33

              11. Electron Magnetic Resonance Studies of Transition Metal.
                    Ions, V. W. Lau:ie                                                .37

              12. Co-operative Phenomena in Solids, Liquids and Gases
                    W. A. Little                                                      39
              13. Chemical and Physical Properties of Solids
                    H. M. McConnell                                                  42

              14. Relation between Crystalline Imperfections and the
                    Physical Properties of Crystals, W. U. Nix                       45

              15. Physics and Chemistry of Oxide Surfaces, G. A. Parks                52

              16. Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Gas-Metal Reactions
                    N. A. D. Parlee                                                   56




                                                Li
                                                                          ~--Am




                                                                  Pa ge

    17 Electrical, Optical and Metallurgical Properties of
          SemiconduC.ting Materials, G. L. Pearson                 60

    18 Scattering of Radiation by Liquids and Polymers
          R, Pecora                                                64

    19 Solid State Oscil la; ion, C. F. Ovate                      66

    20. Internal Friction Studies of Cement and Concrete
          C. W. Richards                                           68

    21. Spectroscopy and Quantum Electronics, A. L. Schawlow       69

    22. Microwave-Optical Double Resonances in Solids
          Peter L. Scott                                           73

    23 Interactions of Electromagnetic and Acoustic Radiation
          with Solids, 11. J. Shaw                                 74

    24. Cathodic Protection and Hydrogen Embrittlement of Steel
          0. Cutler Shepard                                        79

    25. Mechanical Behavior of Solids, 0. D Sherby                 80

    26. Kinetics of Some Solid State Reactions, J. C. Shyne        86

    27. Optical Phenomena in Solic'.s, A, E. Siegman               89

    28. Theoreticai Solid State Physics, M. S. Sparks              92

    29. Photoemission and Electronic Structure of Solids
          W. E. Spicer                                             95

    30. Thermodynamic Properties and Defect Structure of Solids
          D. A. Stevenson                                         10.5

    31. Fundamental Aspects of Reactivity in Inorganic Systems
          Henry Taube                                             107

    32. Strain Hardening and Fracture of Alloys and Composite
          Materials, A. S. Tetelman                               111

    33. Applications of Dislocation Theory to the Deformation
          of Olivine, (Mg,Fe) 2 SiO4 , G. A. Thompson             113

    34 Crystallogenics, W, A.. Tiller                             11-4

    35. Fundamental Studies of Magnetic Materials, R. L. White    115


D PUBLICATIONS                                                    116

E DOCTORAL DISSERTATIONS                                          124




                                  iii

                                                                                  e


                                                                                  ,
                                                            Page



APPENDIX


   I FACULTY 'MEMBERS PARTICIPATING IN MATERIALS RESEARCH    127

  II RESEARCH ASSOCIATES AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF              129

 III GRADUATE STUDENTS - MATERIALS RESEARCH PROGRAMS         131

  IV GRADUATE DEGREES C014F ERRED                            134

   V NAME INDEX                                              137




                                    LV
                                                                           SECTION A



                                                                       INTRODUCTION




                                   This fourth Annual Technical Report includes information

                 on the total research activity related to the science of materials
                 at Stanford UniverGity during the period July 1, 1964 to June 30,
                               This research received financial support from a variety of
                 sources. In addition to the broad-base support received through
                 Contract SD-87 with the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the
                 Department of Defense, which contributed either directly or indi-
                 rectly to almost all of this work, the majority of the specific
                 research programs were directly supported by other agencies of the
                 United States Government or by private sources. Sources of direct,
                 non-ARPA Government support are mentioned in connection with the
                 description of each research program.


                                   This report contains descriptions of the research programs
                 under way during the period, arranged alphabetically by principal
                 investigator. Also included are lists of publications, Ph.D.
                 dissertations, and relevant personnel,




                                                                                -1-


:++^.w►gp^11#rc, :^--- -°--1•....^- -. ^:^""..a-...,v.»..r-.w._ . 7-   -_.. -          ,..s.'.^ws .^.... :.....^ _
i




                                     SECTION B


                    MATERIALS RESEARCH AT STANFORD UNIVERSITY



        Research on materials and related problems is being conducted within
        a number of academic departments at Stanford. As call      seen from
        the accompanying Lists of research programs, faculty, and students,
        activities r.elat(3d to the science of materials reside primarily in
        the departments of chemistry, electrical engineering, materials
        science, and physics.


        Work on materials engineering, materials applications, and other
        peripheral areas is being undertaken in these, as well as in other
        departments, but is not included in this report.


        The Center for Materials Research was established in July 1961 to
        administer activities related to Contract SD-87 between Stanford
        and the Advanced Research Projects Agency. A Director and a small      t

        Executive Comrr'.ttee were appointed by the Provost. The members of
        this committee during; the period covered by this report were
        Professors Flory, Huggins, Pearson, Schawlow, Shepard, Siebman, and
        Associate Provost Heffner (ex officio). Professor Huggins is Chair-
        man of the Committee and Director of the Center. Professor Pearson
        was appointed actin-, director for the period September 1965 through
        August 1966, during Professor Huggins' sabbatical leave.


        The activities undertaken in connection %,,ith Contract SD-87 are
        intended to complement and assist those receiving support from
        other sources in order to increase most effectively the quality
        and quantity of graduate education and research in the science of
        materials, The nature of the contract is such that the Center is
    I   able to alleviate several of the major difficulties normally en-
        countered in graduate research programs at universities.




                                         -2-
-   -   .....L_r... s+. VOPW. - -. —   - ...^ _^ _ __........_




                 In addition to supporting a relatively small number of individual re-
                 search programs, ii,ide rtaken primarily by new faculty members, the

                 Center allocates funds for the acquisition of major items of equipmcnt
                 to be used for materials science research. Central facilities related
                 to the production and analysis of materials for experimental purposes
                 are being established, and construction watt completed durin.; the
                 period on a large, new laboratory, called the Jack A. McCullou^li
                 Building, in which a large fractir ► n of the total effort on the science
                 of materials will be consolidated. Occupancy of the new building
                 started ii, Jt.ne 1965, and will allow expansion of the central facili-
                 ties as well as the research activitios of CMR Members during the
                 next report period.


                 The central facili.t;i will include initially the following major items
                 of equipmc nt:
                                            Precision machine tools
                                            Measuring and calibration instrument pool
                                            Recording Spectrophotometer
                                            Superconductin g magnet
                                            Dual grating spectro-raph
                                            Microfocus X-ray generator
                                            Fluorescence-diffraction X-ray analyzer
                                            Microdensitometer
                                            :1:ti ^a1 microscopy facilities
                                            DTA and TGA systems
                                            Mechanical property evaluation sy^-. tem
                                            Mossbauer spectrometer
                                            Electro , nicroscopes (2)
                                            EB vapor deposition cell
                                            Clean room cubicles (2)
                                            Crystal growth furnaces
                                            Precision rolling mill
                                            Magnetometers (2)

                 As can be seen from the information included in this report, research
                 grams are being undertaken on i wide variety of programs within the
                 general field of materials science at Stanford. There has been no
                 deliberate attempt to place particular emphasis on any one area or
                  ,,roup of problems, since the research programs are selected and
                 initiated by individual faculty members.



                                                                 -3-
                                 SECTION C
                        MATERIALS RESEARCH PROGRAMS


SPECTRA OF RARE EARTH IONS IN SEMICONDUCTORS AND GLASSES

W. W. Anderson, Assistant Professor, Electrical Engineering


Graduate Students:
       1. C. Ch ag
       T. C. Lee
       W. B. Hemphill
       S. Raz i


Agency Support:
       DA 36-039 SC-90839                      A:^OSR 323-63
       NONR 225(24)                            ARPA SD -87
       DA 28-043 -AMC -00446

Technical Objective:
       To study the properties of rare-earth ions in semiconductor lattices
and in glasses, with application to possible microwave and especially
optical masers Having improved characteristics, such as d-c pumping.


Approach:
       Preparation of new combinations of rare-earth ions in -lasses and
semiconductor lattices, and study of their properties by spectroscopic
means. Preparation of glasses; pre?aration of 3-5 and 2-6 semiconductors;
and doping of semiconductors by ion bombardment Have all been included.


Research Report:
       This program has involved a multi-faceted approach, including the
following efforts.
(1) The paramagnetic resonance of erbium in certain cubic lattices was
studied as a potential candidate for improved microwave maser performance)
with the following observations. With a CaO host, and the magnetic field
rotated in the (110] crystallographic plane, three resonances were observed
that could be identified as cubic field spectra. The reversible +2 to
transition is an intense line with eight hyperfine lines due to the nuclear
             167
isotope Er         The reversible ±3/2 to f transition lines were very broad,




                                     -4-
probably due to random deviations from purely cubic fields. Two sets of axial

spectra were observed which exhibited tetragonal symmetry about the 11001

crystal lo;raphic direction with Sr0 as the host. The axial field spectra
observed were almost the same as those in CaO within experimental errors.
This portion of the research was described in Ur. Chang's Ph.D. dissertation

in Electrical En;ineering.


(2) Major, but unsuccessful efforts, were made to obtain blue-green laser.
action in the terbium ion in glasses prepared in this laborator y . Development
of spacial UV-enriched pumping sources was part of the effort. 'The lack of
laser action is now thou,;ht to be due to absorption to higher lying states
from the upper laser Level. Spectroscopic results on terbium in a semi-
conductor lattice were also reported, 2 the abstract of which follows.

            "T}ie fluorescence and infrared-stimulated emission of ZnS:Tb has
       been studied. Excitation of the 4f8 electronic system of the Tb^
       ion occurs during recombination of a   }sole - electron pair at the rare-

       earth site. This is the predominate radiative recombination center
       in the crystal. Simple rate equatio ;is describe the infrared stimulated
       release of }soles from a trap 1.02 eV above the valence band and their
       recombination with electrons at the Tb Hi site. An estimate of the
       rate of resonance transfer of energy compared to direct radiative
       recombinations shows the former to be at least forty rimes faster."


(3) Because of the difficulty of putting sufficient concentrations of rare-
earth ions into semiconductor crystal lattices, ion bombardment was success-
fully employed as a method for putting large ion concentrations into at least
a thin surface layer of a semiconductor lattice, 3 with the following obser-
vation. The rather stron lattice background in the Nd-bombarded samples

reflects the fact that Nd-ion emission is a rather shallow surface phenomena.
Photo excitation extends deep into the crystal compared with the depth of
bombardment doping. Because of this the system studied is not of great
interest for its luminescence properties. However, the illustration that
replacement collision doping and defect annealing; does occur in semiconductors

opens up interesting device possiblities. The ion bombardment was performed
at Arhus University, Denmark.



                                    -5-
           (4) A theoretical study was made of mode cont:inemeilt Ln semiconductor junction
                                                                                                                        4
           laser devices such as mi'ht result from this prograin.



           (5) Extensive efforts were devoted to the preparation of 3-5 and 2-6 semi-
           condu ,.tor lattices with rare earth dopin , ;s, and to the study of their

           spectroscopic and llimineScent properties. A possible patent application
           on one of these preparation-from-powder method; is now being considered,
           and the results were reported in t •,,o publications, 55b abstracts of which
           follow.

                                        "Recombination radiation in man;anese doped GaAs at 4.2°K shows
                          a set of lines, separated by the longitudinal optical phonon energy
                           (0.036 eV '). This is interpreted to be of the same recombination

                          mechanism involved in the edbe emission of such polar crystals as
                          ZnS and CdS                   Reiati 3 e line intensities approximately follow a
                          Poisson distribution in accordance with Hopfield's theory."


                                        "The line structure of the photoluminescence of ZnS:Tb, ZnS:Nd,
                          ZnS : Tm, and ZnS : Dy has been studied under various preparative con-
                          ditions. There is a strong tendency for rare-earth pairing; with
                          other lattice defects in the presence of excess S. This pairing
                           is manifested by the appearance of new emission lines and excitation
                          bands           Of the many distinct sites for the rare-earth icon,                                                                 one seems
                           to stand out as most important                                     in electro-luminescence,                                althou;}i it

                           ; gives only a minor contributionto the p}irtoluminescence. Using a
                          variety oi. luminescent phenomena, we arc- zhle to count aL J cast four
                          distinct sites for trivalent rare-earth ions in ZnS, and there is
                          strong evidence that more exist."


           Dr. Lee's and Dr. Razi's dissertations in Electrical Engineering elaborate
           on these two publications.




                                                                                        -6-


^....._.       Laws   , ,wm..cm.,,,,!     _.•___.,,......._^..^....^,...^,r.w^:•..s.-         .,,.ems..----   .... .a- . ,   . __..   ..inn,..._.. --.,.._.   ^. .,..   ..._.
K. Lerence PublicatiotlS and Presentations:

     1.   W. W. Anderson, Paramagnetic Resonance of Er b in Calcium and
          Strontium Oxide", submitted to Phys. Rev. Let.

     2.   W. W. Anderson, Tb  + as a Recombination Center in "LnS", Phys. Rev.
          136, A556 (Oct. 1964).

     3.   W. W. Anderson, "Nd Ion Bombarded CdS", Appl. Pl l ys. Let. 7, 193
          (Oct. 1965).

     +. W. W. Anderson, "Mode Conf:neme11L and Gain in Junction Lasers",
         J. Quant. Elect. (Sept. 19651).

     5. W. W. Anderson and T. C. Lee, "Edhe Emission Involving Manganese
         Impurities in GaAs at 4.2°K", Solid State Communications 2, 265-b8
         (Sc pt . 1965) .

          W. W. Anderson, S. Rari, and U. J. Walsh, "Luminescence of Rare-
          Earth-Activated zinc Sulfide", J. Chem. Phys. 43, 1153 (,1u;. 1965).




                                     -7-
       2. INTF.PACTION OF ACOUSTIC AND OTHER ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATIONS IN SOLIDS

             B. A. Auld, Research Physicist, Hansen Laboratory
             M. Chodorow, Professor, Applied Physics & Electrical Engineering



             Profession-,,1 Associate:
                      D. K. Winslow


             Graduate Students:
                      C. S. 'Tsai
                      R. C. :'iddison
                      R. E. Tokhe im
                      J. Wilkinson


             Agency Support:

                      AF49 (638)1429
                      ARPA SD87
                      AF 19 (638- 342cr
                       NONR 225(48)


             Research Report:

             (1) Doppler Shift Methods in Solids
                       Graduate Student: C. S. Tsai


                       This is primarily a theoretical study to examine the possibility of
             producing a useful frequency conversation and/or amplification by means of
             moving interfaces between regions Navin; different wave propagation character-
             is ti^s. Some experiments have been performed on the Doppler Shift of light
             scattered from travelling and standi- ; acoustic waves in transparent solids.
             Theoretical studies of reflection and transmission at a moving abrupt inter-
             face or series of interfaces have been extended by treating the case of a
             tapered transition. This has been treated by both the Lorentz transformation
             method and an enemy balance method. On the basis of this theory a method
             has been devised for adiabatically converting a transverse acoustic wave into
             an amplified longitudinal wave at approxiriately twice the frequency, using
                                                                                                                 A
             ferrimagnetic materials. ) Measurements rave also been made of light diffraction




                                                   -8_.




                                                     _ ..,.._ ...r.. -              -.....-zs-- -- ..
- .I-- --^               -                __                             _. - . -
                                                                                                        -T-.'_
                                                                                              t
                                                                                              r




from acoustic beams generated in rutile andstrontium titanate crystals, usin;
Zn0 wafer g rid CdS film transducers. Second-order and third-order Bragg dif-
fraction has bean observed. By means of li;ht beam diffraction it was observed
that ;r,ll 1It     1 acotist is beams can be generated by means of a tapered wafer
transducer. This provides a possible method for realizing a microminiature
FM detector 'L- ()r k i lome , ;acyc l c- f rc quenc ies .
                 F uture plans include an attempt to verify the transverse-longitudinal
wave conversion described. Mr. Tsai's thesis and several papers are nearing
completion..


(2) Ma .4netoelastic P h enomena in Ferrites


                 Graduate Student: R. C. Addison


                 In order to stud^1 the deflection and focussin.; of acoustic waves
in yttrium iron garnet (YIG) in the presence of nonuniform magnetic fields,
we have undertaken excitation of acoustic waves in YIG rods by means of
piezoelectric transducers and measurement of transmission as a function of
magnitude and direction of an applied magnetic field.
                 Transmission has been observed between quartz and US film trans-
ducers offset by an angle of 8° at opposite ends of a single crystal YIG
rod . 2)3
                 Future plans include the computation of magnetoacoustic ray path
trajectories in nonuniform magnetic fields and an experiment.ol investigation
of beam focussinh.


(3) Saturation Phenomena in Ferrites at Frequencies Below Resonance

                 Graduate Student: R. E. Tokheim


                 To study the parametric saturation mechanisms which limit the magnetic
precession angle at excitation frequencies below the spin wave manifold,
measurements were made of the breakdown threshold for transverse pump pulses
-is a function of bias field intensity.




                                                 -9-
                                                                                          Y
                                                                                          a


                                                                              ORPMMWr .
         Materials studied were Zn 2Y and YIG. Inconclusive results were
obtained for YIG. In Zn 2 Y pronounced breakdown was observed. The magni-
tude of the threshold and its variation with bias field indicated that a
iezenerate acoustic wave instability was involved. A theoretical analysis
indicated that this was a transverse wave instability with propagation in
the easy plane of magnetization. This project was completed in December
1964.


(4) Geometrical Optics of Acoustic Waves

         Graduate Student: J. Wilkinson


         The objective was to study the use of Lhe geometrical or short wave-
len,th approximations in analysing; propagation of microwave acoustic waves
in nunma;netic inhomo ;;eneous media. Calculations have been made of the
surface shape required for the excitation in sapphire of a focussed acoustic
beam.
         Equations have been obtained for the ray path trajectories of
acoustic waves in a piezoelectric semiconductor subjected to a nonuniform
do electric field. These results have been used to study the possibility
of ohtainin,; beam steering; and focussin , in amplifying CdS.


Reference P ,-:'-, lications and Presentations:

        1. C. S. Tsai and B. A. Auld, Record of Invention Docket No. M-195,
            Microwave Laboratory, Stanfcrd University, 1965.

        Z. R. Addison, B. A. Auld, H. J. Shaw, and D. K. Winslow, "Acoustic
            Beam Deflection in YIG by a Magnetic Field", Appl. Phys. Let. 6
            (May 1965).

        3. B. A. Auld, "Acoustic Beam Sceerin-, in YIG", talk presented at
            the Electron Devices Conference, Urbana, Ill., June 1965.




                                        -10-
j. PROPERTIES OF SURFACES AND CATALYSIS

   M. 3oudart, Professor, Chemical Engineering and Chemistry

   Professional Associates:
             J. E. Benson
             C. G. Harkins
             K. }leckingbottom

   Graduate Students:
             A. Voge 1
             A. Alda:,
             D. E. Mears
   Agency Support:
             Am. Chem. Soc. - Pet. Res. Fund
             AF49 (638)- 1423
         0

   Research Report:


    (1) Dispersion   01-   MuLals
             Graduate StudClIts: A. Vo;e1
                                  A. Aldag
                                  1). E. Mears

             The principal objective of the program is to obtain stable dispersions
   with maximum availability of metals. Metal powders are prepared by reduction
   of salts by means of sodium borohydride or by impregnation of a high surface
   area material with an appropriate solution. The catalytic properties and
   surface areas of the materials reduced are studied by a series of techniques.
             A test reaction chosen, the liquid phase dehydrogenation of iso-
   propylalcoliol was studied in considerable detail and some unusual effects
   of structural promotion of nickel by chromium have been elucidated. It was
   discovered that addition of a small amount of chromium by a few weight per
   cent to nickel increases the surface area of the latter by a factor of up
            1
   to tell.
             A novel method of measurement of platinum surface area has been
   elaborated and involves the hydrogen-ox_yJen titration method. Particles
   produced on porous alumina spheres were smaller than could be measured by
    -rely techniques. Both the measurement of the particle size and the resultant
    : .-italytic reaction will be continued in the coming year.2                      9




                                       - 11 -
         A new technique to reduce tungsten trioxide catalytically at room
temperature has been found. It relies on platinum as a catalyst and water
as a co-catalyst.3


(2) Catastrophic Carburization

         In order to understand and prevent corrosion of metals by hydro-
carbons at high temperatures, the sticking probability of various molecules
on hot tungsten wires has been measured at various temperatures. The
technique of measurement has been elaborated and put on a sound basis. It
relies on changes in electrical conductivity of the tungsten wire as a
result of the formation of a new phase a-1420.
         During the ccv.Ing year we are planning to initiate some work on
the infra-red spectroscopy of zeolites and to look at hydrocarbon fragments
desorbed from hot surfaces by means of a quadrupole mass spectrometric
probe.


Reference Publications:
         1.   D. E. Mears and M. Boudart, "The Dehydrogenetion of Isopropanol
              on Catalysts Prepared by Sodium Borohydride Reduction",A.I.Ch.E.
              Jour. (in press).

         2.   J. E. Bention and M. Boudart, Hydrogen-Oxygen Titration Method
              for the Measurement of Supported Platinum Surface Areas",
              submitted to the Journal of Catalysis.

         3.   J. E. Benson, It. W. Kohn, and M. Boudart, "On the Reduction of
              Tungsten Trioxide Accelerated by Platinum and Wator", submitted
              to Journal of Catalysis.




                                    -1.2-
         ^. PHOTOELI-XTROhIC PROFERTIES OF SOLIDS

                  R. ll. liube, Professor, Materials Science and Electrical Engineering


                  Professional Associates:
                                        P. B. P. Phipps
                                        G. A. Dussel


                  Graduate Students:
                                        A.     L. Robinson
                                        C.     S.      Kant;
                                        J . Saura
                                        C.-T'. Ho
                                        P. Lindquist
                                        G. Blount
                                        L. D. Miller


                  Agency Support:
                                        ARO DA - 31 -194-ARO(D)-73
                                        AL:C Through Sandia P.O. 74-8581
                                        ARPA SD-87


                  Technical Objective:
                                        To investigate the photoeluctronic properties of imperfections in
                  crystals with a view toward improving; the properties and performance of
                  photoelectronically active materials.


                  Approach:
                                        Utilization of a whole range of conductivity, photoconductivity, .-:nd
                  Hall effect techniques to investigate the properties of imperfections under
                   the combined influence of optical excitation, electrical fields, and magnetic
                   fields; coupled with a materials synthesis and crystal growth progg ram to
                  provide meaii,n^ful materials for investigation.




                                                                                                          -13-




^.Nwt.+.S.... ....rs..v^aw-^.r +"'M!*^ . ^ l•^.i._.,-..,—.w--.^-^. _ .' ^ -. -.. :.:.. '^.»._ __._._. _          _. _ --.-°.—.^-ms's ...^^r ^""-'^..   r,, w^.y^z^-l4 ►!'sT'^'^EE!+^APQ r.
Research Report:


(1) SupeilinCarity in CdS and Related Materials


       An extension of the theory of Cardon and Hube to include the effects
of a high density of shallow traps, either discrete or in a quasi-exponential
distribution. New characteristics introduced in this case appear directly
applicable to describing certain observed properties of sintered layers and
highly-impure single crystals. A complete tabular summary of the processes
involved in superlinearity breakpoints was drawn up, with particular emphasis
on the physical processes involved.I


(2) Oxen Adsorption Effects on Photoconductivity

       Graduate Student: A. L. Robinson


       Both free carrier density and Ball mobility were found to be reduced

by the adsorption of oxygen and increased by the desorption of oxygen on
sintered layers. A significant mechanism for control of properties and
stability of photoconducting layers is indicated.2



t3) Electron Trapping; Parameters

       Graduate? Students: C.-T. Ho
                            L. U. miller

       A detailed investigation of the applicability of methods of analysis
of photoconductivity decay curve and of thermally stimulated current curves
were made on single crystals of CdS-CdSe. A particular feature of the
investigation was the evidence that a particularly prominent trap is actually
a Coulomb repulsive center with energy level 0.43 eV below the conduction
band edge and surrounded by a barrier extending 0.30 ?V above the edge.
Trap en ying by both tunneling and surmounting the barrier were observed.3




                                    -14-
(4) Luminescence and Photoconductivity in ZnS Crystals

       Graduate Student : C. S. Kant;


       Crystals of ZnS were g ►-own by chemical   transport from the vapor

phase usink,11C1 as the transport agent.   A wide variety of   luminescence
and electrical conductivity measurements were made simultaneously. It is
shown that inLnS:C1:Cu, the luminescence center is not the same as the
sensitizing canter for photoconductivity, and that the Klasens-Schon
recombination model is more appliccible than the Lambe-Klick model. If
an associated-pair model is used, the upper state must lie in the con-
duction band.4




(5) Defects in COSc , Crystals


       Graduate Student: A. L. Robinson


       Single crystals of CdSe are being grown from specially purified

starting; materials either from the vapor phase or from the melt. The final
properties of high-resistivity photosensitive CdSe will be photoelectronically
investi;ated after annealing in Se or in an inert atmosphere, or after Cu
diffusion in various atmospheres.




(6) Electric Field Effects on Electron Traps

       Pronounced effects of increasing the electric field have been found
on the filling of shallow electron traps in CdS-CdSe single crystals.
Increasing the field markedly increases the speed of response during the
rise of photocurrent and may have some relevance for improving the speed
of low-level detectors.




                                    -15-
     7 -




           (7) Point-Contact Space Charge Injection Studies

                  Graduate Student:    P. F. Lindquist


                  Experimental tests of the theory governin g space-charge injection
           from a point contact have shown some of the problems in applying the simple

           theory for this effect.




           (8) Rad ioactive Impuritie s inLnS Crystals

                  Graduate Student: G. Blount


                  Single crystals of 7.nS are being grown with radioactive sulfur that
           decays to chlorine in the crystal lattice. Simultaneous measurements of
           luminescence and photoelectronic properties will be made as a function of
           donor chlorine concentration in the crystal. Preliminary studies on ohmic
           contacts to ZnS have indicated a solution for this practical problem.




           (Q) Laser-(Quenchin; of Photoconductivity

                  Graduate Student: J. Saura


                  MFasurcments of electron capture cross section of sensitizing centers
           in GaA and US single crystals using optical quenching of photoconductivity

           by laser li - ht from a lle-Ne laser showed that the appropr ,-ate Au ;er recombi-
           nation coefficient for the sensitizin, centers is less than 10 -28 cm 6-1
                                                                                  sec,

           i.e., at least 4 orders of magnitude less than that calculated for a hydro-

           genic imperfection .5




           (10) Recombination Processes for High Intensity Excitation

                  Graduate Students: J. Saura
                                      C.-T. Ho

                  Detailed measurements are being made of the dependence of free electron

           lifetime fur strongly absorbed excitation in CdSe crystals as a function of


                                                -16-

^G
                                                                                     r
                                                                                Rw




ten,jWI-atur,,- and of excitation intensity using a He-Ne -as laser and a ruby
pulse Laser.




Reference Publications and Presentations:

       L. G. A. Dussel and R. 11. 13ube, "Further Considerations on a
           Theory of Superl inearity in CdS and Related Materials",
            J. Appl. Phys. to be published (Dec. 1965).

       2.   A. L. Robinson and R. H. Bube, "Photo-hall Studies of Oxy,,en
            Adsorption Effects on Photoconductivity in Si:itered Layers",
            J. Electrochem. Soc. 1.12, 1002 (Oct. 1965); M. S. thesis for
            A. L. Robinson; also presented at March American Physical
            Society Meet in ,.; in Kansas City.

       3.   R. It   Bubo, G. A. Dussel, C.-T. Ho, and L. D. Miller, "Deter-
            minati.on of Electron Trappin ., Parameters", J. Appl. Phys.
            (Dec. 1.965); also presented at March American Physical Society
            Muetin; in Kansas City.

       4,   C. S. Kan:; and P. B. P. Phipps, "Luminescence and Plio^o-
            conductivity in LnS Crystals", Ph.D. thesis for C. S. Kang.

       5.   J. Saura and R H. BUbc-, "Laser-Quenc:hin,^; of Photoconductivity
            and Recombination Processes in Sensitive Photoconductors", J.
            Appl. Phys., to be published (Nov. 1965).

Publications During Period from Research in Previous, Period:

       6.   R. H. Babe and F. Cardon, "Determination of Capture Gross Sections
            by Optical Quenching, of Photoconductivity", J. Appl. Phys. 35, 2712
            (S -, t. 1964) .

       7.   R. It. Bribe, "Comparison of Methods for Determinin;; Electron Trap
            Distribution", J. Appl. Plays. 35 306? (Oct. 1964).

       8.   F. Cardon. and R. H. Bube, "Theory of Superlinear Photoconductivity
            in CdS and Related Materials", J. Appl. Phys. 35, 3344 (Nov. 1964).




                                                                                     t^
                                     - 17-

                                                                                      R
                                                                              • %%
t                                                                           —dom.— -   _   ._.......,.. ,...   _^ ^.^




J-           5. EXPERIMENTS AT LIQUID HELIUM TEMPf.RATUR`:'S ON MACROSCOPIC QUANTLTI EFF'EC'TS
                 AND GENERAL RELATIVITY

                 W. M. Fairbank, Professor, Physics

                 Professional P..ssociates:

                            B. S. Deaver, Jr.
                            C. W. F. Everitt
                            W. G. Hamilton
                            A. L. Kwiram
                            11. A. Schwettman

                 Graduate Students:
                            M.    Bol
                            It.   D. Colie n
                            A.    M. Goldmaii
                            A.    F. Hebard
                            G.    B. Hess
                            L. V. Knight
                                  M. Pierce
                            14.   J.   Tre la
                            J.    P.   Turnea<<re
                            J.    P.   Webb
                            P     B    WiLson
                            F.    C.   Witteborn

                 Agency Support:
                            AFOSR 348-63
                            NSF G19889
                            DA - ARO(D)-31-124-0352
                            ti5;-375
                            Nonr 225(66)
                            ARPA SD-87


                 Research Report:
                            (line ob jectivc, of this research is to study the special quantum
                 properties of the supertluids liquid He     and liquid He 3, The second ohjec-
                 tive is to use low-temperature techniques to perform fundamcntal experiments
                 on the free tall of a positron, on general relativity, and on time-reversal
                 invariance as it relates to tike possible e-cistence of an electric dipole in
                 the He   nucleus. The third objective is to construct a superconducting
         1
                 linear accelerator and to study the magnetic properties of DNA, using super-
                 conductin; circuits. During the last year this research has resulted in
                 the following progress relating to materials:
    It




                                                      -18-
                                                                                     •




          The surface of lead-plated microwave cavities has been improved
to the paint where a Q of 6 x 10 9 at 1.8°K, and 2856 me ,ya.-ycles has bean

obta i ned . The cavity retained its high Q in rf magnetic fields in excess
of the do critical field. A working; model of an accelerator has been
opera tcd with an electric field of 4.5 x 10 6 volts p.---r foot. Plans area
under wa y to construct a ten-foot superconducting, accelerator section.         0


          As a nceessary prerequisite to measuring the force of ;cavity on
a positron, a pilot modal was built to produce electric fields in a copper
cylinder ten inches long and .75 in. in diameter, of less than 10 -10 volts
per CT11. Such low 1- i(-Ids were previously regarded as impossible to attain,
since this is several orders of magnitude less than would be expected if
the small crystals on the surface of the copper were randomly oriented as
to contact potential difference. It may be that adsorbed gas on the surface
plays a part in this dramatic improvement at low terperatures.
          The discovery of quantized magnetic flux in superconductors has
made possible the attainment of a truly zero magnetic field inside a super-
condoc t in ; sh ie Id . The trapped flux throu-;h a superconducting shield is
quantized in integral units of         = 2    10-7 ;auss cm 2 . If a supercon-
                                  Ze
ducting shield is cooled tllrou ,;h its transition temperature in a flux of
less than one-half   2c,   then experiments indicate that no flux will be
trapped. An experimental region, 30 in. in diameter and i5 £t. long, from
which all magnetic flux will have been excluded, is under design and con-
struction. The re jon of zero magnetic field will be attained by expanding
successively several superconducting bladders in very low external fields.


Reference Publications and Presentations:

          1.   C. B. Hess and W. M. Fairbank, "Angular Momentum of Helium II
                   in a Rotating Cylinder," Proceedings of the IX Inter-
                   national Conference on Low Temperature Physics, Plenum
                   Press, N.Y., p. 188 (1964).
          2.   J. Trela and W. M. Fairbank, "An Attempt to Observe the
                   Creation of a Single Quantized Vortex Rink " ihicl. p. 71.
          3.   J. M. Pierce, 11. A. Schwettman, P. B. Wilson, and W. M.
                   Fairbank, "RF Losses in Siiperconducting Lead and Niobium,"
                   ibid. p. 396.




                                       -19-



                                                                                         Aw r N
                      _`. _                       -    ^.-              ^^^.^                                  -- — - .-^.^^....•      a ^.___                       r—AWN.
                                                                                           ._      -- -   —'




                          4.       M. Bol and W. M. Fairbank, "Measurement of the London Moment,"
                                           ibid. p. 471.
                              5.   F. C. Witteborn, L. F. Knight, and W. M. Fairbank, "Use of
                                       Low Temperature Techniques to Measure Gravitational Forces
                                       on Charged Particles," ibid. p. 1248.
                              6.   A. M. Goldman and W. M. Fairbank, "Persistent Currents and
                                       Flux Quantization in Superconducting Rings Interrupted
                                       by Josephson Junctions," ibid. p. 421.
                              7.   A. L. Kwiram, B. S. Deaver, Jr., and W. M. Fairbank,
                                       "Quantized Flux in Superconducting Cylinders," ibid. p.451.




                                                                             -20-




             r ....      ..^.^,n,^,.,.• r_,.-A, r.--r.-^-.r——___._.^.r.+w.
                                                ...                                 . _.^w . . . ^..+..                             .....r - —7• R......,.^e- •.•^.- . '"T.   .,..-. _y.. ^...^^..,n,,..,,,..^,..**^
rF'" rte;,
                                                                                          J
                                                                                  t




MACR(k1OLECULAR RESEARCH

P. J. Flory, Jackson-Wood Professor, Chemistry


Professional Associates:

       A. Abe
       J. A. Semlyen


Graduate Students:

       R. Orwoll
       R. Jurni;an
       B. Eichinger
       S . Fisk


Agency Support

       AF49 (6 38)1341
       AFOSR 62-131


Technical Objective:

       Theoretical and experimental investigations concerned with physics
and chemistry of macromolecular substances, including biological macro-
molecules. Also, investigations on the staoistical thermodynamics of
solutions .




Research Report:


(1) An Equation of State for Normal Paraffin Hydrocarbons
       Graduate Students: R. Orwoll


      "A partition function is formulated for chain molecule liquids using a
model consisting of a linear sequence of segments endowed with hard sphere
type repulsive potentials and soft attractions of unspecified character. The
intermolecular energy- is represented as varying inversely with the volume over




                                   -21-



                                                                                      w   -T v
                                                                    .




the comparatively small range of volume of the liquid. Account is taken of
intermolecular constraints on the segments by expressing the number of
external degrees of freedom per segment as 3c where c ( 1) enters as a
parameter. In this respect the formulation follows recent treatments based
on the cell model, use of which is avoided. A reduced equation of state
p = p(T,v) is derived, with reduced variables dLffined by three primary
parameters, namely, a segment net volume v*, a quantity s         characterizing
the interaction per segment, and c. These can be evaluated from the volume,
thermal expansion coefficient, and compressibility, for example. Data for
the n-paraffin hydrocarbons from C 6 to C a are very well represented in this
manner. The values of the parameters are slightly dependent, however, on
the temperatures to which the experimental data refer.l



(2) Liquid Mixtures of Normal Paraffin Hydrocarbons
       Graduate Student: R. Orwoll


       "The partition function and equation of state of the preceditig paper are
reformulated for mixtures of homologous chain molecules. Thermodynamic prop-
erties of mixtures of n-alkano3 are interpreted according to relationships
thus derived. The excess volumes, always negative for these systems, are
readily interpolated from the volumes of the pure components with the aid of
the reduced equation of state. This scheme is formally equivalent to the
Br6nsted principle of congruence as it applies to the volume. The theoretical
expression for the chemical potential affords an accurate and rational account
of experimental results of McGlashan and Williamson for C 6 - C 16 at 20° and at
S0°, and those of van der Waals and liermans for C 7 - C 32 at 73° and C 7 - C ... at 73 0 .
A single choice in the value of one parameter suffices to establish agreement
between theory and experiment for all of these systems. Previously neglected
contributions from characteristics of the pure liquids, as expressed throug;11
parameters determined front their equations of state . are large. The contact
term -- the only one usua'.ly considered -- is small for these systems. The
theory correctly predicts a decrease in the excess enthalpy with temperature,
its sign ultimately becoming negative as has been observed. Quantitative



                                       -22-
                                                                                          ^
      1




  comparisons of observed with calculated enthalpies are less satisfactory,
  owing in part to the deficiency of equation of state data for the n-alkanes.
  The theory accounts in a straightforward way for the appearance of lower
  critical miscibility among mixtures of lower paraffins with higher homologs.
  LCS T values are calculated for mixtures of several n-alkanes with polyethylene.)




  (3) The Configuration of the Polyoxyethylene Chain

          it
                              coefficients have been determined for networks of
  polyoxyethylene (POE) in the amorphous state. The results yield d In (r 2 )o/dT =
  0.23 10.02 x 10 -3 deg. -1 for the temperature coefficient of the meansquare,
  unperturbed, end-to-end dimension of the POE chain. According to published
  intrinsic viscosities in aqueous solvents at the 9-point, the characteristic
                 2
  ratio(r 2 )o/nl = 4.1 t 0.4. The ratio and its temperature coefficient aye
  calculated on the basis of structural data using the rotational isomeric state
 model, a trans and two gauche states being assumed about each bond. Previous
  theoretical methods are adapted to the treatment of chains having a repeat
  unit of three bonds. The energy for gauche rotational states about CH2-0
  and 0-CH 7 bonds appears to exceed that for the trans state owing to inter-
  actions, primarily steric, between adjoining methylene groups. The reverse
  holds for the CH 2 - Cif 2 bond according to comparison of observed and calculated
  results. A lower energy for the gauche rotational state compared to the trans
  for this bond is attributable to a favorable dispersion interaction between
  the adjoining 0 atoms. Successive gauche rotations of opposite sign about
  a CH 2 -0-CH 2 pair of bonds are excluded by severe steric repulsions of methy-
  lene groups. Analogous rotational states for CH 2 -CH 2 O and 0-CH 2 -CH 2 bond pairs
  bring about encounters between the adjoining 0 and CH     groups, but, owing to
  the smaller domain of 0 and the favorable dipole interaction, these gauche
  rotations of opposite sign appear not to be greatly suppressed. The dominant
  effect of increasing temperature is to increase the trans population about
 CH 2 -CH 2 bonds, and this is the main factor causing d In (r 2 ) o/dT to be
  positive. The configuration of lowest energy consists of the succession
  g, t, t for the bond sequence CH 2 -CH2O-, which duplicates approximately, the




                                       -23-



mow
              the helical conformation occurring in the crystal. An unambi;uous assignment
              of the more important statistical wei.;hts for the various rotational states
              is thus achieved by comparison of calculated ar^d experimental values of both
              (r 2 )o/n1 2 and d In (r2)o/dT."3




              (4)   The Configuration of Vinyl Polymers


                       "The characteristic ratio           Cr      ` ) o /nl for isotactic poly(n-pentene-I)
              deduced from intrinsic viscosities of fractions in 2-pcntanol at the Apoint
              (62.4°) is 9.2 i 0.5. This result, though larger than the characteristic
              ratios for polyethylene, polyisobutyleine, and poly(dimethylsiloxane"I , is
              less tha-i would be expected on the basis of steii, interactions within the
                                                                                                                                                         2
              isotactic chain structure. The temperature coefficients, d In (r )o/dT in
              10 -3 deg. -1 , determined for several isotactic and atactic vinyl polymers
              from stress-temperature measurements on cross-linked networks in the
              amorphous state, are found to be positive but small with values as follows:
              isotactic holy(butene-1), 0.09; isotactic poly(n-pentene- 1), 0.34; atactic
              poly(butene-1), 0.50; atactic poly(n-pentene-1), 0.53; and atactic poly-
              (isopropyl acrylate), 0.25. The temperature coefficient for isotactic
              poly(n-pentenc- l) deduced from the temperature dependence of its intrinsic
              viscosity in n-hexadecane is in satisfactory agreement with the stress-
              temperature value. The significance of these results is discussed in
              relation to those for other vinyl polymers and also with reference to
              predictions from analysis of the chain structure and the interactions of
              its substituents. "5




              (5) The Thermodynamic Properties of Mixtures of Small, Non-Polar Molecules

                      GrAuate Student: A. Abe

                      "The excess enthalpies, volumes, and entropies of 23 equimolar binary
              liOUid mixtures for which necessary data are available in the literature are
              interpreted according to the relationships presented in Elie preceding paper.




                                                            -24-


   I
^.. •^-...^                     ^       -    r..^_............—.      .,^..^^.- ,.-..   _.:_ .._.. .^s.,...^.,..,.-.,   -, ^.._....^.,x„ .. .-.....tea   - ir rY.   -r---^.a^-.•-^,Rr^•wel^+.e•-fr...   ..   .   ..
                                                                                         k

Most of the :mixtures comprise pairs of small globular molecules from the
group c-C 6 H 1L , C 6 H 6 , C(CI: 3 ) 4 CC1 4 SiC1 45 TiC1 4 , and SnC1 4 or from the

condensed uses Cli o , Ar, U 2 , and N 2 . Also included are mixtures of C H
                                                                          6 6
and of             with n-hexane and n-heptane, the benzenediphenyl system, and
       c-C5H12                                                                                   till

two hydrocarbon-fluorocarbon mixtures. Previously unaccounted equation of
state terms, which depend on properties of the pure couiponents , make impor-

tant contributions to each of the excess quantities. Through use of pair
interaction parameters chosen to achieve agreement with the observed excess
enthalpies, excess volumes are calculated which agree in nearly all cases
with those observed within limits set by experimental errors. Although
excess entropies calculated on the same basis tend to be somewhat lower than
those observed, the agreement is favorable for most systemL.. Excepticns
involve benzene as one component or cycl.ohexane in admixture with n-alkanes.
Because account was taken of equation of state contributions, the present
interaction parameters differ from Ciose deduced from experimental results
by previous procedures. Departures from the Berthelot geometric mean rule
                6
are discussed."




(6) Statistical Thermodynamics o f Liquid Mixtures


         "Liquid mixtures of nonpolar molecules are treated on the basis of a
simple partition function affording an approximate, but satisfactory, repre-
sentation of liquic' state properties. Parameters characterizing the pure
components (specifically, the density, thermal expansion coefficient, and
thermal pressure coefficient) are thus brought to bear on the analysis of
properLies of mixtures. Theoretical expressions for the "equation of state"
contributions to the free energy, enthalpy, entropy, chemical potential, and
excess volume are derived. The theoretical entropy of mixing in excess of
th.e combinatorial, or "ideal", entropy depends on the re:iuced volumes of
the two components and of the mixture; it does not vanish, in general, when
the excess volume is reduced to zero, contrary to a tenet of regular solution
theory. The treatment is applicable to mixtures of molecules differing in size .,,7



                          a
                                           -25-



                                                                                             i      t
                                                                                         }
                                                                                                     •a.00. -- ---




    (7) Second and Fourth Moments of Chain Molecules

            Graduate Student: R. L. Jernihan


           "Exact methods are developed for calculating second and fourth
                        4
    moments klm ) and (M ) of chain molecules, where
                                    n
                              M = 1 `_-- 1 mi


    and m i is a vector associated with Bond i but nct necessarily col inear with
    it. The rotational isomeric-state approximation is adopted to represent
    the effects of hindrance potentials affecting, bond rotations. No other
    approximations are invoked in deriving the statistical-mechanical averages
    denoted by ( )       Account is taken of tiei-hbor correlations, and the treat-
    ment is applicable alike to finite and infinite chains. Illustrative
    calculations of ( r 2 ) /n1 2 and of ( r 4 ) /11 2 1 4 , where r is the end - to - end lenr;th
    of the chain, 1 the bond length, and n the number of bonds, are presented
    for normal alkane homologs H- (Cli 2 )^l -H, throughout the range of n from
    t < n <   cn.   The methods are applicable also to chains having any variety
                                           8
    of bonds in linear succession."




    (8) Thermodynamic Properties of Solutions of Helical Polypeptides


              "Partial pressures of mixtures of pyridine and of 1,2-dichloroethane
    with poly-y-benzyl-L-glutamate have been determined at 25° for volume
    fractions of solvent from cpl = 0 to ca. 0.4. Similar experiments have been
    carried out on mixtures of chloroform with poly               benzyl-L-aspartate. In
    all cases the solvent activities increase gradually and smoothly with solvent
    concentration; they are insensitive to the molecular weight of the polymer.
    The Henry's law slope at c I = 0 is very much less than would be required by
    ideal solution theory, which should apply to a system of impenetrable rod-
    like particles at high concentration. The observed behavior is readily
    explicable in terms of solvent mixing with side chains of a a-helical solute
    particles. The driving force for this mixing is primarily entropic. It



                                               -26-


t
              ;Wr.




dominates the concentrated solution thermodynamic behavior of these systems
and appears to be a requisite for solubility of polypeptides in the form of

intact helices. The solvent activities are devoid of evidence of phase
transitions. The occurrence of conformational change.; with dilution is

rendered extremely unlikely by the results presented. The side chains of
the undiluted polypeptide evidently are disordered."9


Publications and Presentations;

     1.   P. J. Flory, R. A. Orwoll, and A. Vrij, "Statistical Thermodynamics
          of Chain Molecule Liquids. I. An Equation of State for Normal
          Paraffin Hydrocarbons. II. Liquid Mixtures of Normal Paraffin
          Hydrocarbons", J. Am. Chem. Soc., 86, 3507-20 (Sept. 1964).

     2.   P. J. Flory and A. Abe, "Thermodynamic Properties of Nonpolar
          Mixtures of Small Molecules", J. Am. Chem. Soc., 86, 3563-65
          (Sept. 1964).

     3.   D. A. Brant and P. J. Flory, "The Role of Dipole Interactions in
          Determining Polypeptide Configurations", J. Am. Clem. Soc. 87,
          663 -4 (Feb, 1965) .

     4.   J. E. Mark and P. J. Florv, "The Configuration of the Polyoxy-
          ethylene Chain", J. Am. Chem. Soc., 87, 1415-23 (Apr. 1965).

     5.   J. E. Mark and P. J. Flory, "The Configuration of Vinyl Polymers.
          Exp,_rimental Results", J. Am. Chem. Soc., 87, 1423-29 (Apr. 1965).

     6.   A. Abe and P. J. Flory, "The Thermodynamic Properties of Mixtures
          of Small, Nonpolar Molecules", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 1838-46
          (May 1965).

     7.   P. J. Flory, "Statistical Thermodynamics of Liquid Mixtures",
          J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 1833-38 (May 1965).

     8.   P. J. Flory and R. L. Jernigan, "Second and Fourth Moments of Chain
          Molecules", J. Chem. Phys . 42, 3509-19 (May 1965) .

     9.   P. J. Flory and W. J. Leonard, Jr., "Thermodynamic Properties of
          Solutions of Helical Polypeptides", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 2102-08
          (May 1965).




                                     -27-
__'" •n




   :j




          7. ION -IMPLANTATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS

             J. F. Gibbons, Professor, Electrical Engineering


             Graduate Students:
                     W. Kleinfelder
                     A. E1-Y.oshy
                     T. Sigmon
                     W. Johnson


             Ag , ncy Support:
                     Nonr 225(24)
                     Nonr 225(83)
                     ARPA SD-87


             Technical Objective:
                     To study the theory of ion--implantation in semtcunductors, with
             particular reference to material damage and the effects of annealing;
             to study the relationship between the theory and experimental realities;
             to develop the ion implantation process as a tool for making p-n
             junctions in II-VI compounds, and in SiC.



             Approach:
                     Experimental determination of the properties of ion-implanted
             material, including optical aad electrical properties, defects, ion
             penetration profiles; comparison with theory and utilization in practical
             devices.



             Research Report:
                     Progress to date has been in two areas: (1) development of
             experimental equipment at Stanford for performing ion bombardments
              (now essentially completed), and development of an end station for use
             with a high-energy ion source available at Convair Space Sciences




                                             -28-
Laboratory, (2) study of the theory and its application to measured
ion profiles in semiconductor s , ibstrates. 1,2 The initial ion-
implantations were dcne at the University of Aarhus, Denmark.




Reference Publications and Presentations:


     1.   J. F. Gibbons, N. I. Meyer, and J. L. Mull, "The Doping of
          Semiconductors by Ion Bombardment", Nuclear Instruments and
          Methods 37, (1965). Also presented at the Internation Con-
          ference on Isotopes, Separators and their Applications in
          Physics, Aarhus, Denmark, Jtne 1965.

     2.   J. F. Gibbons, A. E1-Hoshy, K. Manchester and F. L. Vogel,
          "Implantation Profiles for 40 KEV Phosphorus Ions in Silicon
          Substrates", submitted to Applied Physics Letters.




                                -29-
    r

    i




        iL




             8. OPTICAL NETWORK SYNTHESIS USING BIREFRINGENT CRYSTALS

                 S. E. Harris, Assistant Professor, Electrical Engineering


                 Graduate Students:

                             C. M. McIntyre
                             C . L. Robinette, Jr.


                 A ;ency Support:

                             AF 04(695)-305


                 Technl..al Objective:
                        To develop methods for the synthesis and construction of optical
                 networks.


                 Approac'i : Analytical and E .perimenta 1


                 Research Report:
                        A procedure for the synthesis of birefrin-ent optical networks
                 havin; arbitarily prescribed transfer functions has been developed. The
                 basic network confi ,;uration consists of it identical cascaded bire-
                 frin_;ent crystals between an input and an output polarizer. A network
                 of n crystals allows the approximation of a desired function by
                 (n + 1) terms of a Fourier exponential series. Bandwidths of less than
                 1 A should be possible.l
                        Present work is aimed at the experimental realization of a seven
                crystal network.


                Reference Publications:
                      1. S. E. Harris, E. 0. Ammann, and I. C. Chang, "Optical Network
                          Synthesis Using Birefringent Crystals. I. Synthesis of Lossless
                          Networks of Equal-Length Crystals", Jour. Opt. Soc. Amer. 54
                          .;10) 1267-79 (Oct. 1964).
.




                                                     -30-
                                                                                                                  t
j--   ,^-   ^"'• !T!l. ^... 1. Y:..^. __- +^+^+---^_. ^.^   -.-^•f   ^-rte•--^ --w..^^- r^ -^^. .....-. -.. ^.r       J




                  2.     S^ E. Harris, "Demodulation of Phase-Modulated Light Using
                         Birefringent Crystals", Proc. IEEE 52 (7) July 1964).

                  3.     S. E. Harris and R. Targ, "FM Oscillation of the He-Ne Laser",
                         Appl. Phys. Let. 5 (10) 202-204 (Nov. 1964).




                                                             -31-
                                                                                      10


9. OPTICAL SECOND HARMONIC GENERATION AT METAL SURFACES

  H. Heffner, Professor, Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics


  Graduate Student:
             H. Sonnenberj


  A llency Support:

             Notir 225(24)
             Nonr 225(83)
             ARPA SD-87


  Technical Objective:

             To study optical second harmonic generation at metal surfaces.


  Approach:
             Measurement of second harmonic generated at a metal surface by an
  intense laser beam, using a photomultiplier detector and filters,.



  Research Report:

             Initial results clarified an ambiguity in the theory of Jha and
  brought it into closer agreement with experimental results. 1,2 Further
  work was oriented at establishing an upper limit on the second harmonic

  intensity.
             During the next period we plan to use a Q-switched laser beam to study

  anular dependence and related material parameters.


  Reference Publications:

        1.     H. Sonnenberg,H. Heffner, and W. Spicer, "Two-Photon Photoelectric
               Effect in Cs 3 Sb", Appl. Phys. Let. 5 (5), 95-6 (Sept. 1964).

       2.      S. S. Jha, "I. Theory of Optical Harmonic Generation at a Metal
               Surface; II. Width of Resonance Lines in a Double Frequency RF
               Field", Ph.D. Thesis in Department of Physics; submitted to Appl.
               Phys. Let.



                                        -32-
10. IMPERFECTIONS IN METALS AND REACTION KINETICS IN SOLIDS

    R. A. Huggins, Professor, Materials Science


    Professional Associate:
           T. K. Halstead


    Graduate Students:

           T.    W.   Barbee, Jr.                 T. 0. Ogurtani
           J.    L.   Brimhall                    M. L. Rudee
           L.    D.   Clark                       T. G. Stoebe
           R.    R.   Dils
           R.    W.   Helliwell
           D.    L.   Kendall



    Agency Support:

           AEC AT (04- 3) 298
           NONR 225(34)
           ARPA SD-87



    Research Report:


    (1) Studies of Imperfections in Metals

           Graduate Students:       M. L. Rudee
                                    J. L. Brimhall
                                    T. W. Barbee, Jr.


           In order to study the nature and behavior of dislocations in metals,
    expc-.imental studies of dislocation configurations and stacking faulto using
    transmission electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction weto conducted. In
    addi-rion, low temperature measurements of electrical transport properties
    wore made.
           .information concerning the role of finely dispersed second phase
    part-i cles on the mechanical properties and annealing kinetics in metals has
    been obtained by use of transmission microscopy techniques. Contrary to




                                           -33-
Of




     earlier models in which such particles were assumed to act primarily as
     barriers to dislocation motion, it has been shown that their primary influ-
     ence is as dislocation sources. The ;veneration of slip on secor•dary planes
     at low stresses significantly influences the nature and configu--ation of
     imperfection debris resulting from deformation. These changes have been
     shown to cause the very drastic effects that such particles produce or
     annealing bchavior.1-3
            Several aspects of the interaction of impurity atoms with dislocations
     have been studied. Experiments on hydrogen in copper showed that inter-
     stitial solutes c;:,.n affect the stacking fault energy. The rapid segregation
     of substitutional solutes to dislocations in FCC metals was also experi-
                              S
     mentally demonstrated.4'
            Combined transmission electron microscopy and low temperature
     electrical measurements are rein;; used to study the influence of dislocation
     configuration ,; on the electrical transport properties of tantalum at low
                    6-8
     temperatures .




     (2) Reaction Kinetics in Solids

            Graduate Students:    L. D. Clark
                                  R. R. Dils
                                  R. W. Helliwell
                                  D. l,. Kendall.
                                  T. 0. Ogurtani.
                                  T. G. Stoebe

            Experimental work has been undertaken to study defect types and
     diffusion mechanisms using radioactive tracer, x-ray diffraction, elec-
     tron beam microprobe,    and nuclear magnetic resonance techniques.    The
     materials investissated include InSb, a type 3-5 semiconductor with the ZnS
     structure,LiF, an alkali halide, and PbTe, a type 4-6 semiconduc jr, both
     having the NaCl structure, Al 2 0 3 , which has the corundum structure, and
     several oxides with the spinel structure.
            A radiotracer study has been completed of both In and Sb diffusion in
     InSb. Two branches were found in the diffusion profiles, which were shown




                                         -34-
                                                                                                          A# ­'^*




-_   ^-.r.^ ^......,! . 3'T   J. . .arw...               ...-.-   __   _mow     ..   -   -ter   ,   !"I




          by careful autoradiographic techniques to be associated with the presence

          of surface pits which developed during the diffusion process. Activation:
          energies and values of D o were found for self diffusion of both constituents,
          and on the basis of both these and other results, it was concluded that self
          diffusion in this material involves the migration of divacancies.
                      The use of the observation of the temperature dependence of the width
          of nuclear magnetic resonance lines to study diffusion was refined. It was
          applied to the study of self diffusion in aluminum in the presence of sub-
          stitutional impurities, and self diffusion in LiF doped with divalent
          impurities. From these latter results information was obtained concerning
                                                                       9-12
          the association of vacancies with such impurities.
                      Quadrupole effects due to electric field gradients associated with
         dislocations in cubic metals were treated theoretically and applied to the
          experimental nuclear-magnetic-resonance results of Faulkner in plastically
         deformed copper. A new theory of the second moment, which takes into account
         not only the asymmetric character of the strain field of a screw dislocation,
         but also the contribution due to the long-range charge-density oscillation of
          the conduction electrons around it, was developed. It was found that the use
         of both strain and charge effects can quantitatively explain many of the
         discrepancies between the experimental results and the strain-only theory of
         Watkins and Bloembergen. The effect of dislocation cell structure on the
                                 63
         second moment of the Cu    nuclear-magnetic-resonance line broadening due to
          first-order quadrupole interaction was also examined. The contribution due
          to the charge effect is about 20% of the total at high values of deformation
                    13
          in copper.
                      Results of studies of diffusion of chromium in Al 2 0 3 using the electron
         beam microprobe technique have indicated that the diffusion rate of Cr is
         highly sensitive to the ambient oxygen partial pressure.
                     Work is continuing on studies of the defect structure in corundum and
         s pinel lattices employing careful x-ray diffraction experiments, and on the

         further application of nuclear magnetic resonance techni q ues to studies of
         atomic migration.




                                                  -35-
t^   - , _.^ . - . _ .            ....i.^w,




     Reference Publications and Presentations:
                                                                                                  11

                1.       J. L. Brimhall and R. A. Huggins, "Electron Microscopic Observations
                         of Deformed Internally Oxidized Alloys", Trans. AIME 233, 1076 (1965).

                2.       J. L. Brimhall and R. A. Huggins, "Structu,e of Deformed Internally
                         Oxidized Alloys", Presented at Fall Meeting, AIME, Philadelphia
                         (Oct. 1964) .

                3.       J. L. Brimhall and R. A. Huggins "The Annealing Behavior of
                         Internally Oxidized Alloys", Presented at Fall Meeting, AIME
                         Philadelphia (Oct. 1964).

               4.        M. L. Rudee and R. A. Huggins, "Some Aspects of Solute Segregation
                         to Stacking Faults", Phil. Mag. 11, 539 (1965).

                5.       M. L. Rudee and R. A. Huggins, 'Observations Relating to the Time-
                         Dependence of the Stacking Fault Probability in a Substitutional
                         Solid Solution", Presented at Fall Meeting, RIME, Philadelphia
                         (Oct. 1964).

               6.        T. W. Barbee, Jr. and R. A. Huggins, "Dislocation Structures in
                         Deformed and Recovered Tantalum", J. Less Com. Met. , 306 (1965).

                7.       T. W. Barbee, Jr. and R. A. Huggins, "Dislocation Morphologies in
                         Deformed and Recovered Tantalum", Presented at Fall Meeting, AIME
                         Philadelphia (Oct. 196 ^) .

               8.        T. W. Barbee, Jr. and R. A. Huggins, "Dislocation Morphologies at
                         Luders Fronts and in Luders Bands in Tantalum", Presented at Fall
                         Meeting, AIMS, Philadelphia (Oct. 1.964) .

               9.        T. G. Stoebe, T. 0. Ogurtani, and R. A. Huggins, "Influence of Para-
                         magnetic Impurities on the Temperature Dependence of Nuclear Magnetic
                         Resonance Lines", Phys. Rev. 138, A239 (1965).

             10.         T. G. Stoebe, T. 0. Ogurtani, and R. A. Huggins, "Nuclear Magnetic
                         Resonance Studies of Diffusion of Al 27 in Aluminum and Aluminum
                         Alloys", Acta Met. 13, 701-08 (July 1965). Also presented at Fall
                         Meeting of AIMS, Philadelphia (Oct. 1964).

            11.          T. G. Stoebe and R. A. Huggins, "Diffusion of Li z in Mg-Doped
                         Lithium Fluoride", presented at the Winter Meeting, American
                         Physical Society, New York (Jan. 1965).

             12.         T. G. Stoebe and A. B. de Bellis, "Dislocation Annealing in Lithium
                         Fluoride Crystals", phys. stat. sol. 10, K127, to be published
                         (Aug. 1965).

            13.          T. 0. OgurLani and R. A. Huggins, "Contribution of Conduction
                         Electron Redistribution to Quadrupole Interactions in Plastically
                         Deformed Copper", Phys. Rev. 137, A1736 (1965).

                                                    -36-
11. ELECTRON ?R.%GNETIC RESONANCE STUDIES OF TRANSITION METAL IONS

     V. W. Laurie, Assistant Professor, Chemistry


     Graduate Student:
                   T. B. Swanson


     Agency Support:

                   ARPA SD-87


     Technical Objective:
             1) To study the nature of the interactions between paramagnetic ions
     at high temperatures.
            2) To study ferric ion complexes in nonaqueous solution.


     App_-oach :
                   Observations of the electron magnetic resonance spectra of these
     systems .



     Research Report:


     a) Exchange and Dipolar Interactions at Elevated Temperatures

                   The EMR linewidth variations from room temperature up to approximately
     1200°K for various manganous, chromic, ferric, nickel, and gadolinium compounds
     have served as an indication of important changes in the relaxation processes
     i.n these salts. In addition, linewidths as a function of temperature have
     been studied      for   molten manganous halides and for several transition metal
     salts in LiCl/KC1 eutectic.        This work is described in Dr. Swanson's Ph.D.
     tnesis.




                                             -37-
I

      (2) Ferric Chloride in Nonagueous Solution

               'The equilibrium constant for the reaction 2FeC1 3 .'FeC12 + FeCl4
      in various solvents has been determined. The electronic spectrum of the

      FeC1 4 ion has beer observed and the nature of the UV transitions has been
      explained.)



      Reference Publication:


            1. T. B. Swanson and V. W. Laurie, "Electron Magnetic Resonance and
                Electronic Spectra of the Tetrachloroferrate(III) Ion in Non-
                aqueous Solution", J. Phy,. Chem. 69 (1), 244-50 (Jan. 1965).




                                         -38-


t-_
12. CO-OPERATIVE PHENOMENA IN SOLIDS, LIQUIDS AND GASES


    W. A. Little, Professor, Physics


    Professional Associates:

                D. J. Griffiths
                R. S. Safrata


    Graduate Students:

                J. McCarthy
                M. R. Moldover
                N. C. Shah
                S. T. Spence


    Agency Support:

                NONR 225(76)
                NONR 225(86)
                NONR 225(58)
                NSF GP 3368
                ARPA SD-87


    Technical Objective:

                To study the properties of superconducting and super-
    fluid systems, and co-operative phenomena near the critical points
    of the systems.



    Approach:

                The approach to this study has several facets:

                A theoretical investigation of the possibility of super-
    conductivity occurring in organic polymers, and investigation both
    theoretical and experimental of ways in which such polymers might
    be synthesized; an investigation of the zero-sound mode in He   by



                                  -39-
J —




      a study of the temperature dependence of the cross-section for
      scattering X-rays from the liquid; an investigation of the nature
      of the specific heat anomal y of fluids at the liquid ga.; critical
      point; an investigation of the quantization of magnetic flux and
      rotation in superfluids; and the design and operation of a low-
      temperature target assemhly for producing, polarized nuclei for

      experiments on high energy electron scattering


      Research Report:

                   Work on high temperature organic Superconduction has
      been promising and is being extended with further theoretical and
      experimental work on simple systems.1,2,3
                   All the equipment for the X-ray experiment on He     has
      been completed, but re,;ults have not yet been obtained.
                   Studies of the specif is heat of helium have shown the
      existence of a logarithmic singularity at the critical points and
      some interesting quantum effects as well. 4,5,6
                  The cryogenic target SCONT has been completed, and
                                                 165
      has been used for studying the shape of Ho     n1lelei. A paper on
      its use has been submitted to Physics Review Letters.


      Reference Publications and Presentations:

              1.   W. A. Little, "Superconductivity at Room Temperature,"
                       Sci. Amer. 212, 21-28 (Feb. 1965).

              2.   W. A. Little, "Supralcitung in orginischen Makro-
                       molekulen bei Raumtemperatur," UMSCHAU, Heft. 7,
                         197-8 ( _365) .

              3.   Ro y alt y -free rights on patents involving the above
                   subject granted to the U.S. Government, Sept. 1965.



 At




                                           -40-
                                                                       _0




4.   M. R. Holdover and W. A. Little, "An Investigation of
         the Nature of the Specific Heat in the Neighborhood
         of the Critical Point of He 4 ," presented at LT9
         Conference, Columbus, Ohio (1964).

5.   M. R. Moldover and W. A. Little, "The Specific Heat
         of He 3 and He 4 in the Neighborhood of their Critical
         Points," submitted to the Proceedings of Conference
         on Phenomena in the Neighborhood of Critical Points,
         National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D.C. (1965).

6.   M. R. Moldover and W. A. Little, "The Specific Heat of
         He 3 and He 4 in the Neighborhood of their Critical
         Points," Phys. Rev. Let. 15, 54 (Ju.l y 1965) .

7.   L. Meyers and W. A. Little, "Apparent Lack of Lor.g- Range
         Order in Superconducting Vanadium," Phys. Rev. Let. 13,(11)
         Q523C (Sept. 1964) .




                     -41-



                                                                            ae
1


    13. CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS


        H. M. McConnell, Professor, Chemistry


        Profc ,;sional Associates:
                     T. D. Buckman
                     0. ii. Grif ^ ith
                     A. W. Merkl
                     Z. G. Soos
                     T. J. Stone
                     D. D. Thomas

         Graduate Students:
                     F. R. Gamble
                     B. M. Hoffman
                     R. C. liu;;hes
                     M. S. Itzkowitz
                     M.-A. Marechal
                     Y. *larecha 1
                      R. M. Metzger

         A ,;ency Support:
                      NSF GP-930 and 3430
                     AEC AT(04-3)326PA11
                     ARPA SD8 7

         Research Report:


         (1) Ele mentary Excitations in Io nic M olecular Crystals
                     Graduate Students: R. C. Hughes
                                        M.-A. Marechal
                                         Y. Marechal
                                         R. M. Metzger

         Technical Objective:
                To study the elementary (paramagnetic) excitations in ionic molecular
         crystals.

        Approach:
                Techniques such as paramagnetic resonance, high-pressure,X-ray dif-
         fraction, low- temperature. and theoretical calculations are used to determine
         the "structure" of the electronic excitations (excitons, spin waves) in
         ionic molecular crystals.



                                            -42-
                                                                                                                                              id




                                                                                                                                               r

           Publications 1-8 inclusive describe the results of these investi-
gations during the report period. Additional publications,10-20 inclusive,

concerning related work done earlier alpeared its journals published during

the report period.


(2) New Superconducting Solids
                     Graduate Students: F. R. Gamble
                                                      B. M. Hoffman
                                                      M. S. Itzkc,witz

Technical Objective:
           To prepare a fundamentally new type of superconducting solid, es-
pecially one with a high transition temperature.

Approach:
           Metal atoms (e.g. vanadium) and organic molecules (e.g. ortho-
phenanthroline) are deposited on top of one another in a high-vacuum system
and the superconducting properties of the mixture are compared with the

metal alone.

           It has been shown that certain organic molecules can enhance the
superconducting transition temperature of a thin metal film, while other
organic molecules depress this transition temperature. 9 Experiments to
obtain still higher enhancements are in progress.


Reference Publications and Presentations:

           1.        A. V. Merkl, R. C. Hughes, L. J. Berliner, and H. M. McConnell,
                         "Pressure-Induced Phase Transitions in Triplet-Exciton
                         Crystals," J. Chem. Phys. 43 (3), 953-57 (Aug. 1965).
           2.        M.-A. Marechal and H. M. McConnell, "Triplet Excitons in Morph-
                               linium TCNQ," J. Chem. Phys. 43 (2), 497-98 (July 1965).
           3.        R. C. Hughes, A. W. Merkl, and H. M. McConnell, "The Pressure-
                               Induced Phase Transition in Wurster's Blue Perchlorate,"
                               J. Chem Phys. (submitted).
           4.        Y. Marechal and H. M. McConnell, "X-ray Scattering by triplet
                         Excitons," J. Chem. Phys. (submitted).

           5.        T. D. Buckman, 0. H. Griffith, and H. M. McConnell, "Isotope Ef-
                         fect on Triplet Exciton Magnetic Resonance," J. Chum. Phys.
                               43, 2907-08 (Oct. 1965).
           6.        Z. G. Soos, "Theory of the Linear Heisenberg Antiferromagnet:
                         Application to Paramagnetic Excitations in Organic Crystals,"
                         J. Chem. Phys. 43. 1121- 40 (Aug. 1965).

                                                                  -43-




  . r•-°spr.^^w....-..-_...^..;.^. ^ e    .«fir-- ^-:...
                                                    •
                                                      -"-. __-._-. -.-:..._.^-..   _. _ . __ ._^,   . ww.^ •   -,-.,^;. -
                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                ^ . ^   ^ J   ^+ ^j
7.    Z. G. Soos and H. M. McConnell, "Motion of Lo,_alized Triplet
          Excitons," J. Chem. Phys. (submitted).
8.    H. M. McConnell, B. M. Hoffman and R. M. Metzger, "Charge-Transfer
          in Molecular Crystals," Proc. Nat'l. Acad. Sci. U.S. 53, 46
          (Jan. 1965).
9.    B. M. Hoffman, D. D. Thomas, F. R. Gamble, and H. M. McConnell,
          "Chemical Enhancement of Superconductivity," Proc. :Nat'l. Acad.
          Sci . U.S, 54, 371-74 (Au ,4. 1965) .
10.   J. I. Krugler, C. G. M ­Aitgomery, and H. M. McConnell, "Collective
          Electronic States in Molecular Crystals," J. Chem. Phys. 41,
          2421 (Oct. 1964).
11.   G. Liebling and H. M. McConnell, "A Study of Mol.eculai Orbital
          Degeneracy in C 5 H 5 ," J. Cheri. Phys. 42, 3931 (June 1965).
12.   S. Ohnishi and H. M. McConnell, "Interaction of the Radical Ion
             Chlorpromazine with DNA ; " J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 2293
          (May 1965).
13.   H. M. McConnell, "Magnetic Excitations in Molecular Crystals,"
          Molecular Biophysics, edited by B. Pullman (Academic Press
          Inc., New York, 1965).
14.   H. J. Silverstone, D, E. Wood, and H. M. McConnell, "A Study of
          Molecular Orbital Degeneracy in C 7 H 7 ," J. Chem. Phys. 4 1,
          2311 (Oct. 1964).
15.   D. Halford and H. M, McConnell, "Pressure Effect on Excitor.
          Magnetic Resonance," J. Chem. Phys. 41, 898 (Aug. 1964).
16.   0. H. Griffith, "ESR and Molecular Motion of the RCH,CHOOR'
          Radical in X-irradiated Ester-Urea Inclusion Compounds,"
          J. Chem. Phys. 41, 1093 (Aug. 1964).
17.   0. H. Griffith and A. L. Kwiram, "An ESR Study of X-irradiated
          Fumaric Acid-Urea Crystals," J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86, 3937
          (Oct. 1964).
18.   0. H. Griffith, "ESR of RCHCOR' Radicals in X-irradiated Ketone-
          Ur:a Inclusion Compounds," J. Chem. Phys. 42, 2644 (Apr. 1965).
19.   0. H. Griffith, "ESR and Electronic Structure of the RCHOR' Ether
          Radicals," J. Chem. Phys. 42. 2651 (Apr. 19x5).
20.   0. H. Griffith, 'Magnetic Resonance of the Triplet State of
          Oriented Py ne Molecules," J. Phys. Chem. 69, 1429 (May 1965).




                               -44-
      I
                                                                                    t-

                                                                                    1




14. RELATION BETWEEN CRYSTALLINE IMPERFECTIONS AND THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
     OF CRYSTA'S


     W. D. Nix, Assistant Professor, Materials Science


     Graduate Students:

            E.   V.   Benton          E.   L.   MacKenna
            W.   A.   Coghlan         B.   L.   Mattes
            M.   E.   Gulden          A.   A.   Solomon
            F.   H.   Hammad          J.   H.   Wood
            W.   R.   Johnson


     Agency Support:

            NSF GK386
            ARPA SD-E7


     Research Report:

     (1) Influence of Structural Inhomogeneities on the Magnetic Properties
         of High Purity Nickel

            Graduate Students: J. H. Wood
                               W. R. Johnson

            In order to study the effect of structural inhomogeneities including
     dislocations, cells and grain boundaries on the initial permeability and
     coercive force of high purity nickel, simultaneous measurements have been
     made of magnetic properties (initial permeability and coercive force) and
     structural parameters (grain size measured with optical microscopy and
     cell size and RMS strain measured with the X-ray peal; broadening technique)
     in polycrystalline samples of high purity Nickel.
            The initial permeability increases and the coercive force decreases
     with increasing grain size., Special hez.t treatments have indicated a true
     grain size effect and not simply an annealing effect. Equipment has been
     built to study magnetic permeability at low fields (< 10 milligauss).
     The effect of grain size on low field permeability is now being investi-
     gated in fine grain size samples.



                                    -45-
                                                                     r




.v
            A study has been made of the Warren-Averbach X-ray peak broadening;

     technique for determining RMS strain and cell size in cold worked metals.

     Computer programs have been written which will automatically make all
     necessary corrections on experimental X-ray peaks and which will yield
     Fcurier coefficients for the peak shapes. Computer programs have been
     developed which will calculate RMS strain and cell size from the Fourier
     coefficients. A goniometer device has been designed ar] is being built
     which will allow reflections of several types to be obtained even in
     heavily textured sheet. Mechanical working and heat treating techniques
     have been designed to eliminate the effect of texture and to allow an
     unambiguous correlation between RMS strain. and cell size and the magnetic
     properti.es. I X-ray work will continue and magnetic measurements will be
     performed in the next report period.
            A model for irreversible magnetization processes, which is analogous
     to the Johnson-Gilman dislocation dynamical theory of plasticity in crystals,

     is being developed. Preliminary theoretical work indicates that many of the
                                                                  2,3
     properties of soft ferromagnetic materials can be predicted.     The effects

     of static transverse magnetic fields on the hysteresis loop are being
     studied both theoretically and experimentally.




     (2) Behavior of Dislocations During High Temperature Deformation

            Graduate Students: W. A. Coghlan
                                F. 11. Hammad
                               A. Solomon

            In order to study the geometrical arrangements and mobilities of

     dislocations in crystals at high temperatures and to relate these obser-
     vations to the at r ndant mechanical properties, direct observations are
     being made of dislocation configurations with transmission, electron
     microscopy. Stress relaxation and other mechanical techniques are used
     to isolate fundamental dislocation processes at h:gh temperatures.
            Work softening yield points have been studied in polycrystalline
     high purity aluminum frorn room temperature to 550°C. Two distinct
     mechanisms of softening have been isolated. At high temperatures




                                     -46-




t-
                                                                                          • I,




L_   1    -.
                 1
               -9 4    .s.   --k AP   -_




         (above 0.5 T m ) the process of work softening involves the long-range

         motion of dislocations and subgrain growth. At low temperatures (below

         0.5 T m ) the kinetics for work softening exhibit a very low activation
         energy (0.4 eV) and are thought to be a result of jog migration along
         dislocations. When samples are prestrained at room temperature and
         subsequently strained above 0.5 T m , the work softening exhibits

         characteristics of both the high temperature and low temperature
         mechanisms. This work is essentially complete and several internal
         reports have been prepared .4-b
                      A model for steady sate creep of crystals has been developed and
         has been compared with the stress and temperature dependence of creep
         in Fe-3%Si. 6,7 Using the model and measured dislocation densities, it
         is possible to predict the creep rate of Fe-3/'Si to within a factor
         of 10. The stress and temperature dependence of the model are in
         excellent agreement with the data. 8 Further refinements in the theory
         are underway.
                      A kinematical calculation of the electron diffraction contrast
         from dislocations in networks has been carried out with the use of the
         IBM 7090 computer. The calculations show that the contrast width of
         dislocations is smaller when dislocations are contained within networks.
         Analysis of networks obtained in crept high purity aluminum indi,:ates
         that during high temperature deformation, dislocations tear out of
         networks and glide across cells. Applications of the kinematical theory
         to the contrast from high angle subgrain boundaries is being investigated
         both theoretically and experimentally.
                      The Barrett-Nix theory for high temperature deformation requires
         that the temperature dependence and part of the stress dependence for
         creep comes from the dislocation velocity term in the Taylor equation.
         Experiments have been initiated to measure dislocation velocities at high
         temperatures in Fe-3 % Si with etch pit and stress relaxation techniques.
         It is expected that the experiments will be extended to single crystals of
         zinc and LiF in the next report period. The work initiated in this program
         under A.RPA support is now being partially supported by NSF Grant GK-386.




                                              —47—

                                                                                          I
                                                                                         1       of
t^                                                            '




     (3) The Structure and Kinetics of the Cubic-Tetragonal Phase Transition

         in BaTiO,,
              ------t
            Graduate Student: B. L. r!attes


             In order to study the mechanism of the cubic to tetragonal phase

     transformation in BaTiO 4 in an electric field, a temperature gradient
     and under uniaxial stress, single crystals are placed in a temperature
     gradient to establish a single phase boundary within the sample. The
     transformation is studied by watching the non--uniform motion of the
     phase boundary with transmission optical microscopy.
             Preliminary experiments indicate that the motion of a single

     phase boundary in BaT104 can be easily studied. Equipment is being
     built with which stress, temperature and electric field may be controlled
     and measured. The bulk of the experimental work will be done in the next

     report period.




     (4) Dislocation Sources in Crystals

             Graduate Student: M. E. Gulden

             This study of the mechanisms by which dislocations are formed in
     crystals included efforts to determine if the p rank-Read source operates
     in aluminum alloys as has been reported, We have used transmission
     electron microscopy to study dislocation loops produced by quenching
     aluminum-copper-silicon alloys and diffraction techniques to determine
     the character of dislocation loops.
             Concentric dislocation loops are observed near each Si particle
     in the alloy. The loops are identical with the loops which have previously
     been termed Frank-RQad sources. It has been demonstrated that the second
     phase particles and not Frank-Read sources are responsible for most of
     the dislocations in this alloy.9




                                    -48-
                                                       --c —   —                 e




(5) Empirical Binding; Potentials For Metals

       Graduate Student: W. A. Coghlan

       An empirical function for the binding potential of a metal crystal
and a calculation of the atomic configuration about vacancies and the
energy of motion of vacancies should allow prediction of such
parameters as lattice parameter, sublimation energy and elastic constants.
An empirical potential satisfying the function can then be used to make
point defect calculations.

       Unsuccessful attempts have been made to develop a modified Morse
potential with which two elastic constants, the sublimation energy and
the lattice parameter can be accurately computed. However, *.he Morse

potential has been used to calculate the motion energy for vacancies
in several metals using a rigid lattice approximation. 11




(6) The Interaction of Highly Ionizing Charged Particles with Polymers

       Graduate Student: E. V. Benton

       In this program we plan to study the characteristics of charged
particle tracks in polymers and the engineering aspects of particle track
identification in polymers. Suitable polymeric materials will be
                                          252
irradiated with fission fragments from Cf     and Am241. Tracks will
be observed and monitored with a chemical etching and decoration tech-
niques, and in addition, with optical, X-ray, and electron microscopy.
       Equipment has been built at the U. S. Naval Radiological Defense
Laboratory to study the sensitivity of polymers as particle detectors.
Experiments will continue for at least two years.




                                        a


                              ..49-
                                                                             i
                                                             ti




(7) Observation of Dislocations and Stacking; Faults in Single Crystals
    of Melt Grown Silicon

          Graduate Student: E. MacKenna

          Lang X-ray topographic technique, diffraction contrast, and
stereo techniques will be used to study the origin of certain large.
stacking fault tetrahedra formed in melt grown silicon crystals, and
to develop a complete physical picture of the defect crystal.
          Several stacking fault tetrahedra have been intensively studied
with etch pitting and X-ray topographic techniques. It is known that
second phase particles which are included in the growing crystal at the
liquid-solid interface are the ultimate cause of the stacking fault
tetrahedra.



Reverence Publications and Presentations:

     1.    W. D. Nix and W. R. Johnson, "Technical Properties of Soft
           Magnetic Materials", Magnetic Materials Digest (In press).

     2.     W. D. Nix and K. A. Huggins, "Coercive Force of Iron Resulting
            from the Interaction of Domain Boundaries with Large Nonmagnetic
            Inclusions", Phys. Rev. 135, A401 (Oct. 1964).

     3.     W. D. Nix and R. A. Huggins, "Technique for the Determination of
            the Magnetic History of Local Regions in Cubic Ferroiragnets",
            J. Appl. Phys. 35, 3057 (July 1964).

     4.     F. H. Hammad and W. D. Nix, "Dislocation Configurations Developed
            in Alum;.num During, High Temperature Deformation", SU-DMS Report
            No. 65-20 (Apr. 1965).

     5.     F. H. Hammad, "Yield Point Phenomena in Polycrystalline Aluminum",
            SU-DMS Report No. 65-6 (Feb. 1965).

     b. C. R. Barrett and W. D. Nix, "A Model for Steady State Creep
         Based on the Motion of Jo;ged Screw Dislocations", SU-DMS Report
         No. 64-21 (Sept. 1964). Also presented at AIME *Meeting in
         Philadelphia (Oct. 1 ,0,64) .




                                  -50-
-          -.-.,,.. . W   .   ,..   _.__.     - -
                                                                                     Ask




                                                                                 I




                                                                                 1
                                                                                 t

     7.   J. Ardell, 11. Reiss, and W. D. Nix, "Stati-tics of Jogs on
          Dislocations at Equilibrium", J. Appl. Phys. 36, 1727 (May    1965).
    8.    C. R. Barrett, W. D. Nix, and 0. D. Sherby, "The Influence of
          Strain and Grain Size on the Creep ,substructure of Fe-3.0% Si",
          SU-DMS Report No. 65-25 (June 1965) .

     9.   M. E. Gulden, "Observations of Dislocation Sources in an
          Aluminum-Copper-Silicon Alloy", SU-DMS Master's Report
          No. 65-2 (Aug. 1965).

    10.   J. C. Shyne and W. D. Nix, "Dislocations in Martensite Inherited
          from Austenite", Acta Met. 13, 869 (1965).

    11.   W. A. Coghlan, "Empirical Binding Potentials for Metals",
          SU-DMS Master's Report No. 65-9 (Oct. 1965).




                                            -51-
    i
                                                                             i          V




1



        15. PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY OF OXIDE SURFACES

            G. A. Parks, Associate Professor, Mineral Engineering


            Graduate Students:
                    S. Akhtar                 R. W. Luce
                    J. H. Anderson, Jr.       J. N. Roco
                    G. K. Korpi


            Agency Support:
                    AEC AT(04-3)326 PA3
                    NSF GP 172
                    ARPA SD-87


             Research Report:

             (1) Oxide Surfaces

                    Graduate Students: J. H. Anderson, Jr.
                                        G. K. Korpi
                                        R. W. Luce
                                        J. N. Roco

            Technical Objective:
                    1Jnderstandin:; of the properties of solid/gas and solid/liquid
             interfaces, particularly (a) the mechanism by which electrical change
             is developed at the solid/aqueous solution interface and (b) by which
             charge is transferred along and across solid/water vapor interfaces.


            Approach:
                    a. Direct observation of surface charge via electrophoresis,
            measurement of solubility and rates of approach to equilibrium, IR
             inspection of solid surfaces to detect species present and their binding
             energy.    b. Observation of the amount and mechanism of gas -tdsorption
            via IR spectrophotometry and correlated measurement of changes in
             electrical surface conductivity or solid,/solid contact electrification.




                                            -52-
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                      -#4
                                                                                                      .w




.,_.^-.._,_..,.L   .^^^_ - . tea:,..► .,_.. - - -- -- -   _^_ _.




                                                                                                 I^



              a,b. Scrutiny of physical models for suspected charging and charge
               transfer processes by comparison of predictions with experiment.


              Re::earch Report:

                         "Infrared absorption spectroscopy in the 1-3 micron region has
              been employed to investigate the behavior of surface hydroxyl groups
              and adsorbed water molecules during hydration and dehydration of silica
              gel. Interpretation of the infrared spectra has provided a general
              description of the adsorption process and a qualitative picture of the
              important hydrogen-containing species involved.
                         "The presence of (1) non-hydrogen-bonded surface hydroxyl groups,
               (2) hydroxyl groups hydrogen-bonded to water molecules, (3) monomeric
              water hydrogen-bonded to surface hydroxyl groups, and (4) clusters of
              water molecules forming a hydrogen-bonded network has been inferred.
              The hydrogen bond between surface hydroxyls and water molecules is
              estimated to be of similar strength to hydrogen bonds in hydrargillite
               (YAl(OH) 3 ). The bonding in the network water appears from the spectra
              to be similar to that in liquid water.
                         "Use u^ infrared absorption spectroscopy to aid in the interpretation
                                                                                  1
              of data obtained by other experimental techniques is discussed."


                          The infrared-absorption spectrum of the mineral boehmite has been
              interpreted in terms of the nortaal. modes of a linear zigzag chain of OH
              groups. The results of deuteration experiments confirming this inter-
              pretation have been described. hydrogen bond lengths, determined from
              the infrared spectrum, were used to evaluate available x-ray m--asurements.
              Boad angles, calculated on the basis of the zig zag chain model, are in
              general agreement with x-ray results. the extreme sensitivity of the
              infrared spectrum of this compound to small changes in hydrogen bond
              length, as might be caused by compositional variations, has been discussed. 2)3


                        "Extensive lists of isoelectric points of solid oxide materials
               (IEPS's) and of metal hydroxo complex systems (IEP's) have been compiled.
              The IEPS reflects the chemical composition of the solid and the electrolyte



                                                              -53-
r


                                                                       'a




    in which it is immersed. Structural or adsorbed anionic impurities shift

    the IEPS to more acid values, cationic impurities to more basic values

    or toward the IEPS characteristic of the impurity oxide. Oxidation and
    reduction resulting i.n nonstoichiometry may be expected to shift the IEPS
    toward that characteristic of the oxidation state produced. Hydration
    increases the IEPS; dehydration and increased structural perfection
    decrease the IEPS. The IEPS's of pure oxide materials can be quantita-
    tively accounted for in most cases by an electrostatic model involving
    the charge to radius ratio and the coordination number with crystal

    field and hydration corrections.
           "The IEPS and IEP are definitely related ar,d are equal for many
    hydrous materials; however, for a significant number of materials there
    are other EP's which more closely approximate the IEPS. There appear
                                       +
    to be several mechanisms by which H , 0H_, and all hydroxo complexes
    present determine the surface charge on immersed oxide materials. Further
    work is needed to clarify the factors deciding which mechanism predominates

    in a given case, but it appears that for some materials adsorption of OH

    and M Z+ (OH) Z-1 + can be eistinguished from amphoteric dissociation of
    bound MOH groups. "4
           Work will continue on both of the objectives of this program during

    the next report period.




    (2) Simple Paramagnetic Oxide Materials

           Graduate Student: S. Akhtar

           We have selected natural and synthetic mineral systems providing

    the desired oxygen coordination symmetry to study the relationships among
    susceptibility, composition, structure, and defect structure in para-

    magnetic compounds, es p ecially Mn(II)TiO 3 and silicates. The program
    was specifically aimed at understanding the effect of coordination
    symmetry on effective ionic moments of the transition metals of the iron

    group. The synthetic mineralschosen were A100H and Al 2 0 3 with low level




                                     -54-
Cr +3 and Fe+3 doping.
          Equipment and techniques have been asst-rrbled for work with
synthetic materials; Cr doped A100d has been p--epared. The work with
synthetic materials will be pursued a,:Lively in the mcnths to come.
A literature survey of ciatural mineral data has revealed that signif-
icant variatijn in the effective moment of Fe(II) can be expected in
response to small changes in structural symmetry. A paper is in
preparation documenting and interpreting this observation.




Reference Publicanions and PresentaLions:

     1. J. H. Anderson, Jr. and K. A. Wickersheim, "Near Infrared
         Characterization of Water and Hydroxyl Groups on 6ilica
         Surfaces", Surface Science 2, 252-260 (1964).

     ?. K. A. Wickerwheim and G. K. Korpi, "Interpretation of the
         Infrared Spectrum of Boehmite", J. Chem. Phys. 42, 579-83
         (Jan. 1965).

     3.    G. A. Parks, "The Composition and Reaction Capability of
           Oxide Surfaces", An invited paper presented at it.he Inter-
           National Minerals and Chemical Corporation (IMC) Mineral
           Processing Conference, Bartow, Florida, March 1965.

     4.    G. A. Parks, "The Isoelectric Points of Solid Oxides, Solid
           Hydroxides, and Aqueous Hydroxo Complex Systems", Chem. Rev.
           65, 177-98, (Apr. 165).




                                         -55-




                          ^,.r     u -mow--
                                 _—.^   _ ____-_-_.   .. _ _.. _-._..^ ^ _. _-•:,^-   -
                                 •                                            r           J
16. THERMODYNAMICS AND KINETICS OF GAS-METAL REACTIONS


    N. A. D. Parlee, Professor, Mineral Engineering


    Graduate Students:

           R. N. Andeccnn,
           E. M. Sacris
           H. Seibel
           I. D. Shah
           N1. Speer
           C. Zoellner


    Agency Support:

           NSF GP3209
           ARPA SD-87


    Technical Objective:

           To study the equilibria and the rates of important simple gas-
    metal reactions and interactions in order to elucidate the thermo-
    dynamics and the kinetic mechanisms involved.


    Approach:
           Determination of thermodynamic and kinetic relations from
    equilibrated and dynamic systems of gases and liquid metals. The gases
    include low boiling metal species such as calcium and magnesium.




    Research Report:

     (1)   Graduate Students I. D. Shah and H. Seibel


           A oas-liquid metal diffusion cell was used to measure rates of
    absorption of gases by liquid m tals at constant pressure and temperature.

    It has been confirmed that the general method is a sound one for testing
    whether or not the mechanism is diffusion controlled, and confirmed that




                                   -56-
in the cases where the rate is diffusion controlled, for example,

oxygen in silver and hydrogen in iron. the chemical diffusion co-

efficients of oxygen and hydrogen and corresponding Arrhenius

equations for diffusion can be derived with satisfactory accuracy.
This is important because practically no values of the diffusion
for gas atoms in liquid metals are found in the literature. Values
of oxygen diffusion in silver and silver alloys 1 and of hydrogen in
iron and iron alloys are being successfully measured. Work on the
diffusion of hydrogen in nickel has started during this period.



(2)   Graduate Student C. Zeollner

        A modified Sieverts apparatus was used to measure rates of
absorption of oxygen by induction stirred liquid silver at constant
pressure and temperature. The observed rate behavior has been described
using a model involving rate control by the diffusion of gas through
a thin stagnant surface boundary layer. The activation energy for the
whole process was calculated at 6000 calories, which is close to the
activation energy for diffusion of oxygen in silver ( 7/000 cal.), The
effective boundary layer thickness was calculated and was described in
the Master's Thesis prepared by C. Zoellner, "Kinetics of Absorption
of Oxygen in Induction-Stirred Liquid Silver".




(3)   Graduate Student E. M. Sacris

       A Sieverts apparatus was used to measure the solubility of oxygen
in liquid Ag-Cu alloys (0.1 to 0.5% Cu) and the precipitation of the
copper-oxide phases in these alloys. The interaction coefficients for
the effect of copper on the activity of oxygen in this system have been
measured and the thermodynamics of the precipitation of the copper-

oxide phase has been elucidated. Aside from industrial interest, this

work provided data necessary for the work on diffusion of oxygen in

silver alloys described as Part 1 of this research report.2




                               -57-
        (4) Graduate Student R. N. Anderson

               This portion of the program was just started during the report
        period and involved the use of a modified Sieverts apparatus to detect
        the point of precipitation of nitride or hydride phases in liquid
        alloys. Isoactivity line plots and X-rays will be used to check or
        illucidate the stoichLometry and thus develop the thermodynamics. A
        new technique is under development for studying the precipitation of
        uranium hydrides and nitrides in liquid uroniam alloys.




        (5) Graduate Student M. Speer

               A technique For studying the s(;lubility of low boiling metals in
        high boiling metals was developed by the principal investigator and
        colleagues at Purdue. That work will be used as a ` o asis for this study
        on the solubility of calcium and magnesium in liquid iron .alloys. Vapors
                              . produced at a known tem p erature in one cone of
        of calcium or magnesium

        a furnace will be transported over a liquid iron specimen at a known
        temperature in another zone and equilibrated. It is hoped that Lhermo

        dynamic data obtained from the quenched iron-carbon alloy specimens
        will provide information on nodular iron formations.



        Reference Publications and Presentations:


             1.   N. A. D. Parlee and H. Seibel, "The Kinetics of Absorption and
                  Diffusion of Oxygen by Stagnant Liquid Silver", (Abstract)
                  J. Metals, 17 (1) 112 (Jan. 1965). Also presented at the
                  Annual Meeting of AIMS Chicago, Jan. 1965. (Submitted to
                  AIMS Trans.)

             2.   N. A. D. Parlee and E. M. Sacris, "Oxygen-Oxide Equilibria in
                  Liquid Ag-C:! Alloys", submitted to AIME Trans. Aug. 1965.

             3.   N. A. D. Parlee, T. P. Papazoglou, and W. C. Phelps, Jr.,
                  "A Technique for the Solubility of Low Boiling Metals in High
         •        Boiling Metals", Trans. AIME (1-let. Soc.) 233, 1436-7 (Jul. 1965).




                                        - 38-
k   ^
4.   N. A. D. Parlee, T. P. Papazoglou, and W. C. Phelps, "Design
     for Molybdenum Wire Wound Furnace", Trans. AIMS (diet. Soc.)
     233, 1643-4 (Aug. 1965) .

5.   N. A. D. Parlee, I. D. Shah, and W. C. Phelps, "The Effect
     of Oxygen on the Solubility of Sulfur in Gamma Iron at 1324°C",
     Trans. AIME (Met. Soc.) 233, 1428-9 (Jul. 1965).




                          -59-
17. ELECTRICAL, OPTICAL AND riETALLURGICAL PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTING MATERIALS

     G. L. Pearson, Professor, Electrical Engineering

     Professional Associate:
               J^ W. Allen

     Graduate Students:
              M. G. Buehler
              Y. S. Chen
              D. J. Dumin
               T. Koike
               D. Landis
               D. 11. Loescher
               H. R. Potts
              K. K. Shih
              M. Shyam

     Agency Su-pport:
               NASA NsG- 555
              ARO(D)-155
              Nonr 225(83)
               ARPA SD87

     Technical Objective:

           To prepare new semiconducting materials, measure their pertinent
     properties, and construct novel devices therefrom.


     Research Report:


     (1) The Electrical and Me t allurgica l P roperties of Defects in Compound
          Semiconductors,
              Graduate Students: M. G. Buehler
                                  D. Landis
                                  H. R. Potts


           "Electron microprobe study of lattice-point defects in semiconductor
     single crystals." Experiments were performed which indicate the nature of
     defects in quenched and annealed crystals of gallium arsen'de. A Kossel
     line technique was used to detect an expansion in lattice constant due to
     quenching and a contraction during subsequent anneal. It was shown that

     the enthalpy of formation of vacancies on the arsenic sub-lattice is 2.0 eV
     and that the activation energy of arsenic vacancy diffusion is 1.0 eV. 1,2

                                        -60-
                                                                                                                                          .

460...,.-..I^I^........c^.r ,i..E!llTl _.3.. -•^.aM.,^rR...... - -..-_._a   - ..             --------^--
                                                                                                           -^......^^.^. --.. -,..-w...




                                   "Resistivity and Hall Effect in Thin Conducting Sheets with Point
          Sources." The current and potential distributions due to point sources in

          a sheet conductor lying perpendicular to an applied magnetic field have
          been solved theoretically. The resistivity and Hall correction factors
          have been derived and verified experimentally for a simple geometry con-
          sisting of a square array of points on a circular ;,ample. 3,4


                                   "The Effects of Gamma Radiation on Silicon Semiconductor Devices."
          A method of measuring resistivity as a function of radiation dose has been

          developed to evaluate radiation-induced trap levels.                            Special transistor
          assemblies are being bombarded to correlate trapping level properties with
          transistor characteristics.


           (2) The Electrical, Optical and Metallurgical Properties of GaAs, GaP, and
          their Solid Solution Alloys.

                                  Graduate Students: Y. S. Chen
                                                      T. Koike
                                                      D. H. Loescher

                                  "Lattice Vibration Spectra of GaAs x P 1-x Single Crystals." Single
          crystals of GaAs      were successfully grown in an epitaxial vapor growth
                          xP1-x
          system. Reflectivity and absorption spectra were taken in the spectral
          region of 1-00 to 800 cm -1 . A superposition of the two-phonon bands cbarac-
          teristic of GaAs and GaP was observed in the alloys. A virtual crystal
          model in which parabolic potentials are given to the three specie.- of atoms
          in the lattice is used to explain the experimental results. 5,6


                                  "Ternary Phase Diagrams for the Ga-P-Zn and a-As-Zn Systems with
          Applications to Diffusion Problems." This study considers the ternary
          diagrams of these two systems and draws practical conclusions regarding
          the experimental parameters for diffusion conditions.


                                   "Co as a Deep Level Impurity in GaP." Electrical measurements show
           that Co is a deep-level acceptor in GaP with an activation energy of approxi-

          mately 0.4 eV. Analysis of optical transmission measurements in GaP into

          which Co has been diffused show that the Co atoms have substituted for Ga
                                          7
          in the crystal and retain the 3d eleccronic configuration.


                                                                                   -61-


                                                                                                                                          1
(3)   Effect of Temperature on Some Properties of Gallium Arsenide

              Graduate Students: D. J. Dumin
                                  K. K. S h i h

          ''Low Temperature Properties of GaAs Di-odes.'' Current-voltage
characteristics of zinc-diffused GaAs diodes have been measured between
4.2 0 and '000°K. It is shown that in the reverse direction the current

is GDminated by tunneling at all temperatures and doping densities.

In the forward direction the current is due to tunneling at low tempera-
tares and high carrier concentrations, whereas it arises from thermal

processes at higher temperatures and lower carrier concentrations.8


          "D`_ffusion of Impurities in Compound Semiconductors under
Partial Pressure of One Constituent."       Zinc diffusion prof,.les   in GaAs
with excess arsenic at 900° and 1050°C have been obtained by using a
radiotracer technique. The results can be explained in terms of the
ternary please diagram and data from pressure experiments. Solubility,
conductivity, and diffusion coefficient for zinc in GaAs as a function
of arsenic pressure are in goon agreement with theoretical predict,'ons
of the substitutional-interstitial   model.



(4)   Microwave Oscillations in Compcund Semiconductors

              Graduate Student: M. Shyara

          "Effect of Variation of Energy M'_nima Separation on Gunn
Oscillators." Threshold field as a function of composition of
GaAsx       alloys and as a function of uniaxial pressure in GaAs
      P1-x
has been determined. Our results confirm the satellite valle y model
and prove that the satellite minima in Gams are along < 100 > axes.
Quantitative values of deformation potential are determined. 9,10




                                     -62-
Reference Publications and Presentations:

      1.   G. L. Pearson, H. R. Potts and V. G. Macres, "Defect Structures
               in Quenched and Annealed GaAs Crystals," Proceedings of the
               International Conference on Radiation Damage in Semicon-
               ductors, Dunod, Paris, p. 197 (1964).

      2.   11. R. Potts and G. L. Pearson, "Annealing and Arsenic Over-
               pres:.,ure Experiments on Defects in Gallium Arsenide,"
               J. Appl. Phys. (accepted for publication April 1966).

      3.   M. G. Buehler, W. Shockley and G. L. Pearson, "Hall Measure-
               ments Using Corbino-like Current Sources in Thin Circular
               Disks," Appl. Phys. Let. 5, 228 (Dec. 1964) .

      4.   M. G. Buehler and G. L. Pearson, "Magnetoconductive Correction
               Factors for an Isotropic Hall Plate with Point Sources,"
               Solid-State Electronics (accepted for publication).

      5.   Y. S. Chem and G. L. Pearson, "Lattice Absorption in GaAs xPI-x
               Single Crystals," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 10, 369 (M^ i. 1965) .

      6.   Y. S. Chen and G. L, Pez.rson, "Lattice Vibration Spectra of
               GaAs F    Single Crystals," Phys. Rcv. (in preparation).
                   x 1-x
      7.   J. W. Allen and G. L. Pearson, "Ga-P-Zn arL3 Ja-A3-Zn Phase
               Diagrams and their R(^lovance to Diffusion Problems,"
               Lull. Am. Phys. Soc. 10, 363 (Mar. 1965).

      8.   D. J. D ,-imin and G. L. Pearson, "Properties of Gallium Arsenide
               Diodes between 4.2 0 and 300 0 K," J. Appl. Phys. 36, 3418
               (Nov. 1965).

      9.   j. W. Allen, M. Shyam, H. S. Chen and G,, L. Pearscn, "Microwave
               Oscillations in GaAs P.    Alloys," Appl. Phys. Letters 7,
                                   x `-x
               78 (Aug. 1965) .

     10.   M. Sh yam, J. W. Allen and G. L. Pearson, "Effect of Variatior.
               of Energy Minima Separation on Gunn Oscillations," IEEE
               Trans. PTGED, accepted for publication (Jan. 1966).

     11_ H. C. Casey, Jr. and G. L. Pearson, "Rare Earths in Covalent
              Semiconductors: the Thulium-Gallium Arsenide System,"
              J. Appl. Phys. 35, 3401-07 (Nov. 1964).




                                    -63-




                                                                               ^ Y
1



    18. SCATTERING OF RADIATION BY LIQUIDS AND POLYMERS


        R. Pecora, Assistant Professor, Chemistry



        Professional Associate:

               W. A. Steele


        Technical Objective:
                To formulate t'eories of the scattering of radiation from liquids

        and polymer systems in relation to their structure and thermal motions




        Approach:
                Theories of the radiation scattering in terms of the relevant
        correlation functions are to be formulated. Models of the correlation
         functions for the appropriate liquids and polymer systems will be

        constructed.


        Research Report:
                This program was initiated at Stanford University during the
        report period. General theories for the scattering of light, x-rays,
        and neutrons from fluids of nonspherical molecules were formulated in
         terms of the fluid generalized correlation functions. 1,2
                A model calculation and suggestions for experiments were made
         for the Doppler-boardened light scattering spectrum of flexible

        polymers.3
                Attempts are now being made to constrict time-dependent correlation
        functions for fluids of nonspherical molecules in the hydrodynamic approx-
        imations. More sophisticated models of polymer chain motions and their
        relation to the spectrum of scattered light are also being explored.


J




                                       -64-
                                                                                 --.^.^..-^• ^`^'-'-'^
.   f, ^.. r te ...._     sar. _   _. _^_    _    .^    .^            _




                                                                                                     E



     Reference Publications:

                 1.     W. A. Steele and R. Pecora, "Scattering from Fluids of Non-
                        spherical Molecules I. X-Rays and Neutrons", J. Chem. Phys.
                        42, 1863 (Sept. 1965).

                 2.     R. Pecora and W. A. Steele, "Scattering from Fluids of Non-
                        spherical Molecules II. Light", J. Chem. Phys. 42, 1872
                        (Sept. 1965).

                 3.     R. Pecora, "Doppler-Shifts in Light Scattering. II. Flexible
                        Polymer Molecules", J. Chem. Phys. 43, 1562 (Sept. 1965).




                                                 -65-


                                                                                                         J
19. SOLID STATE OSCILLATION

    C. F. Quate, Professor, Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics

    Professional Associates:

              K. Blc tek jaer
              D. K. Winslow

    Graduate Students:
              D. E. Caddes
              W. H. Haydl
              C. D. Wilkinson


    Agency Support:

              NONR 225(48)
              AF 33(657)11042


    Research Report:


    (1) Current Oscillation in Piezoelectric Semiconductors

              Graduate Student: W. H. Hayd1

              In order to study the origin of the oscillation that is observed
    in the current which passes through piezoelectric semiconductors when sub-
    jected to an intense electric field, we have measured the field along a rec-
    tanular bar as a function of time, and the resulting frequency spectrum of
    the current in the external leads. This is to be correlated with the gain

    of an acoustic signal which is transmitted through the crystal.
              From this study we have learned that the effective field becomes
    inhomogeneous along the length of the sample and forms a high field domain
    which travels through the sample at the velocity of sound. In addition,
    we observe that energy at microwave frequencies is radiated from the sample
    during the time in which the high field domain is moving. The origin of
    this instability stems from the amplification of acoustic flux, which is,
    known to occur when the electron drift velocity exceeds that of sound.I




                                      -66-
                                                                               C
(2) Generation of Ultrasonic Waves with Optical Laser Beams
          Graduate Students: D. E. Caddes
                              C. D. Wilkinson

          The objective of this program is to generate acoustic energy in

the body of a transparent crystal by means of the non-linear interaction

between two crossed laser beams which differ in frequency by Aw . The ap-

proach has been to utilize the phenomenon of stimulated Brillouin scattering

to obtain a light beam that is shifted in frequency as compared with the

incident beam by a frequency which can be in the range of 1-10 Gc. We plan
to recover this difference in frequency In the form of a coherent acoustic
wave by crossing the light beams in a suitable crystal.
          We have studied the coupling between electromagnetic waves at
optical frequencies and acoustic waves at microwave frequencies in various
crystals. The coupling via the photoelastic constants is strongest in the
crystal ADP. We are now in the process of evaluating the nonlinear mixing
process and of measuring the effect in crystals which will carry acoustic

energy in the microwave region.2


Reference Publications and Presentations:
      1. W. llo Haydl and C. F. Quate, "Microwave Emission from n-Type
             Cadmium Sulphide," Appl. Phys. Let. 7 (2), 45-47 (July 1965).

      2. C. F. Quate, C. D. W. Wilkinson, and D. K. Winslow, "Interaction
             of Light and Microwave Sound," Proc. IEEE 53 (10), 1604-23
              (Oct. 1965).
      3. W. llo Haydl, "Determination of the Relative Acoustic Gain in Semi-
             conductors," Rev. Sci. Instr. 36 (5), 681-2 (May 1965).

      4. W. H. Haydl, K. Blotekjaer, and C. F. Quate, "Coupling to Hyper-
             sonic Waves," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 36 (9), 1670-77 (Sept. 1964).

      5. S. M. Puri and T. H. Geballe, "Phonon Drag in n-Type InSb,"
             Phys. Rev. 136 (6A), A1767-74 (Dec. 1964).




                                   -67-
20. INTERNAL FRICTION STUDIES OF CEMENT AND CONCRETE


     C. W. Richards, Associate Professor, Civil Engineering


     Graduate Student:

                 F. Radjy


     Agency Support:

                 ARPA - SD87

     Technical Objective:
                 To investi;ate the internal struc i:.ure and micromechanisms of
     deformation of hardened portland cement paste and concrete.

     Approach:
                 Measurements of mechanical loss spectra by means of dynamic
     experiments on small, homoeneous specimens, with variable frequency,

     temperature, moisture content, etc. Theoretical correlation with diffusion,

     creep, etc.


     Research Report:


           Preliminary studies were made by Professor Richards di,ring a visit to

     the Swedish Cement and Concrete Research Institute in Stockholm in the
     course of which the first recorded mechanical loss spectrum for cement
     mortar was obtained, and experimental techniques were established. During
     the report period experimental apparatus was set up, speciments were pre-
     pared, and the first of a series of spectra for cement paste was obtained.
     Results of these first experiments, includin; theoretical analysis, are the

     basis for a paper in preparation.




                                           -68-
                                                                                      i^



21. SPECTROSCOPY AND QUANTUM ELECTRONICS

    A. L. SchawJ_ow, Professor, Physics

    Professional Associates:
                 H.    G.   Freie
                 R,.   M.   Macfarlane
                 P.    L.   Scott
                 W.    M.   Yen

    Graduate Students:
                 J. L. Emmett
                 R. L. Greene
                 G. F. Imbusch
                 S. Johnson
                 G. Klauminzer
                 L. Mollenauer
                 E. Nelson
                 J. L. Rapier
                 W. C. Scott
                 D. D. Sell
                 S. E. Stokowski
                 W. B. Tiffany
                 J. Wong

    Agency Support:
                 DA 31- 124-ARO -D- 208
                 Nonr 22'J(48) and (78)
                 NASA - NsG 331
                 ARPA SD-87

    Technical Objective:
                  i study the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and
    matter, to extend the range of coherent light techniques, to apply coherent
    and conventional light to elucidate problems in the physics of solid

    materials.

    Approach:
                 High-resolution spectroscopy and fast-pulse electro-optical

    systems, using lasers where appropriate.


    Research Report:


    (1) Optical Transition Probabilities
                 Graduate Students: G. F. Imbusch
                                     S. E. Stokowski


                                             -69-



                                                                                       _A►
                                ^.•^ _ - _                 _.a...
                                                               --ass ^            -
                                                                      n




          A study of optical transition probabilities between electronic
Levels of ions in crystals, and of the ways in which they are modified by
the crystalline surroundings, lattice vibrations and applied electric fields.

An attempt to detect an electric field effect on the spectrum of Mg0:Cr3+
has not yet been successful, but it is being, continued.lI


(2) Far Infrared Spectra of Crystals

          Graduate Student: J. Wong

          A far infrared spectrometer, constructed under NASA NsG 331 will
be applied to studies of spectra of crystals in the wavelength region from
60 mirrors to 1:'00 microns.


(3) Optical Maser Research

          Graduate Students: S. Johnson
                             D. J. Sell

          Attention is directed to the search for strong, sharp lines in

crystal for wavelength standards, and to the factors controlling line widths.
A study of line widths and positions in LaF 3 :Nc'. J+ is nearly complete.
Equipment for measuring widths of very narrow lines is being tested.


(^) Energy Transfer in Solids

          Graduate Students: J. L. Emmett
                              R. L o Greene
                              G. Klauminzer

          The purpose is to study methods oL' exciting solid materials for
visible, and possibly Oltraviolet, maser action, and to investigate energy
transfer processes between energy Levels and between ions. Energy through
                     3+
its effect on the Pr    and Nd 3+ ions in LaF 3 has been stiidied through
                     3+
its effect on the Fr    line width. Upward infrared absorption has been

measured from the metastable 2 E level to the 2 T,) level in ruby. A study
has been made of the effects of ultraviolet light on the pumping of a ruby
laser. Related spectrosc.epic studies of energy transfer are continuic;3',3,4




                                    - 70-
                                                                                i^




(5) Spectroscopic Studies in Infrared and Optical Quantum Electronics
           Graduate Students: J. L. Emmett
                               L. F. Mollenauer
                               E. D. Nelson
                               J. L. Rapier
                               W. C. Scott
                               D. D. Sell
                               W. B. Tiffany

           The purpose is to use lasers as tools for basic sstudies of the
interaction of light and matter. It is also desired to use spectroscopic
and other studies of the interaction between light and matter. Particular
empha6is is given to understanding    the properties of solid state laser
materials, and the requirements for exciting them. 6-9


Reference Publications and Presentations:
      1.    G. F. Imbusch, W. M. Yen, and A. L. Schawlow, "Isotope Shift in
                the R Lines of Chromium in Ruby and MgO," Phys. Rev. 136,
                481 (Oct. 1964).
                                                              3+
      2.    A. L. Schawlow, "Vibrational Sidebands in MgO:Cr Bull. Am.
                Phys. Soc. 10, 107 (Jan. 1965). Also presented at the
                Am. Phys. Soc. New York Meeting (Jan. 1965) .

      3. G. K. Klduminzer, H. W. Moos and  ^^ P. L. Scott, " 2E` 2T
              Absorption Spectrum of Ruby, Full. Am. Phys. Soc. 2
              9 9 706 (Dec. 1964). Also presented at Am. Phys. Soc.
                Berkeley Meetin., (Dec. 1964).

      4.    W. C. Scott, R. L. Greene and W. M. Yen, "Optical Linewidth
                Studies of Energy-Transfer Mechanisms in Rare-Earth Ions,"
                Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 706 (Dec. 1964). Also presented
                at Am. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting (Dec. 1964).

      5.    W. M. Yen, R. L. Greene, W. C. Scott and D. L. Huber, "Optical.
                Linewidth and Lineshape Studies of Energy Transfer Mechanisms
                in Rare-Earth Ions," presented at tha Physics of Quantum
                Electronics Conference, San Juan, Puerto Rico (June 1965).
                To be published in the proc.edings of this conference.

      6.    A. L. Schawlow, "Exchange-Coupled Ion Pairs in Ruby," Bull. Am.
                Phys. Soc. 9, 715 (Dec. 1964). Presented at Am. Phys. Soc.
                Berkeley Meeting (Dec. 1964).

      7.    W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott and M. White, "Temperature Dependence
                of the Optical Spectra of Ordered Materials: MnF 2 ," Bull.
                Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 715 (Dec. 1964). Presented at Berkeley
                Meeting, Am. Phys. Soc. (Dec. 1964).


                                     -71-
8.    W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott, aiid A. L. Schowlow, "Phonon.- Induced
          Relaxation in lxcireO Optical States of Trivalent Praseo-
          dymium in LaF 2 ," 11iN s. Rev. 136, A271 (Oct. 1964).

9.    W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott, and P. L. Scott, "Correlation of
          the Orbach Relaxaticn Coeff --cient with Optical Linewidtlhs:
          LaF 3 : Era+ if    I:ov. 13/ , A1109 (1965) .

10.   R. A. Soref and 11. W. Moos, "Optical Second-Harmonic
          Generation in 7nS -CdS and CdS-CdSe Alloys," J. Appl. Phys.
          3510
              2152-53 (July 1964).




                            -72-
                                                                                           _W I




- ---, - ..--_ ..__..1..._ –__..c. ln^_ ,tea -0- __ _ - _ •—




                                                                                                     I*

          ?.    MICROWAVE-OPTICAL DOUBLE RESONANCES IN SOLIDS

                Peter L. Scott, Assistant Professor, Physics

                Graduate Student:
                                 M. Berggren

                Agency Support:
                                 ARPA - SD-87

                Technical Objective:
                                 To study the detailed nature of the spectra of paramagnetic ions
                in crvstals, with particular attention to the nature of exchange inter-
                actions between ions.

                Approach:
                                 Involves the use of both optical and microwave phocons, either
                separately or simultaneously in order to probe the detailed energy level
                schemes of particular ionic systems.


                Research Report:

                                 A sensitive and highly versatile microwave spectrometer operating
                at 35 Gc/sec has been built and is presently being used to study the ground
                state energy level schemes of chromium ion pairs in concentrated (0.3 per-
                cent) ruby. Particular attention is beingpaid to ion pair systems
                possessing large exchange couplings, as would be characteristic of the
                first, second, third, and fourth neare,t neighoor schemes. Preliminary
                data indicate the existence of s wQ41 such systems, although their identi-
                fication is as yet uncertain. The :p ork appears promising, however, and
                hopefully our data will cor-,^oborate other, purely optical, work done in
                this laboratory.
                                 Our future plane include various detailed investigations of
                optically excited states of paramagnetic ions in crystals, such as, for
                example, the optically excited state of a chromium ion pair in ruby or MgO.




                                                               -73-
23. INTERACTIONS OF ELECTROMAGNET I1 AND ACOUSTIC RADIATION WITh SOLIDS

H. J. Shaw, Senior Research Associate, Hansen Laboratories

Professional Associates:

                             M. Chodorow
                             B. J. Elliot
                             K. J. Harker
                             A. Karp
Graduate Students:
                             W.   F.   Egan
                             J.   C.   Lawrence
                             E.   C.   H. Lean
                             R.   M.   Ma lbon
                             W.   R.   Smith, Jr.
                             M.   T.   Wauk

Agency Support:
                             AF 30(602) -3595
                             AF 19(628)-4788
                             AF 49(638)-1429
                             DA 28-043
                             AMC-00397(E)


(1) Thin Film Transducers for the Generation of Microwave Acoustic Waves

Technical Oojective:
            To stu.:y the use of thin films of piezoelectric and magneto-

strictive materials for the generation of coherent acoustic waves in solids
at microwave frequencies.

Approach:
            Vacuum evaporation techniques are used to produce multiple film
sandwiches of active and passive films. The active films are oriented
piezoelectric CdS films or magnetostrictive nickel films, both of which

lead to linear surface excitation of acoustic waves when properly located
in microwave electromagnetic circuits. The passive films are diele^tri-c
and metal films, which we find very important for securing high conversion
efficiency from electromagnetic to acoustic energy. These films are de-
signed to function as acoustic impedance transformers between the active
films and the output crystalline rod on which the entire array is mounted
and through which the useful acoustic wave output is extracted. Passive
films are also used between multiple active films to achieve constructive


                                         -74-
interference between the acoustic waves generated by the individual active
films. Improvement of the active film properties through refinements in

vacuum deposition techniques has also been found important in increasing
conversion efficiency. Proper mounting of the films in the coupled micro-
wave circuit is also found to be critical for high conversion efficiency,
and these details are receiving careful attention. Conversion efficiencies
are measured by pulse echo methods. The theory of phonon generation in

arbitrary arrays of active and passive films has been developed. Computer
curves of theoretical conversion efficiency over the frequency range from
0.4 to 10.0 GHz are used to compare with measured characteristics of all
experimental film structures tested.


Research Report:

          The work on multiple film transducers using CdS active films has
produced the highest conversion efficiency reported to date. In the gener-
ation of longitudinal waves, average conversion loss of 10 db over an octave
frequency range, and conversion loss of 7 db over a 10% frequency range,
have been achieved. Magnetostrictive -ransducers using two active filrrs
with a passive spacer film for the generation of shear waves have achieved
20 db conversion loss at 9 GHz.

          Improved electromagnetic circuit designs are under way. Measure-
ments of the rf impedance of the films will be undertaken. Improved vacuum
deposition apparatus is being added. New t ►:acerials will be investigated.
Attempts will be made to deposit 7n0 piezoelectric films. The arrangement
of films in the multi-layer structure is a problem in acoustic network syn-
thesis, for which new solutions are being sought.
          There are many potentially useful devices and processes which
would use microwave acoustic waves for signal propagation and delay, ampli-
fication, information storage, optical beam deflection and modulation, and
for many studies of the properties and basic physics of materials. 'The im-
portance of the present multiple film transducer work stems from the fact
that the usefulness of these properties depends heavily on the ability to

efficiently excite and extract acoustic waves.
          Portions of this work were presented at the conference on

electron device research, University of Illinois, June 1965.


                                    -75-
'^.i.''^
           .: ;s . ,,...   ,.          .._ ., . - --.......w..   _.   _... ..-r.w^w+.^.xn.,,o.._. ,....M..^-:.V1...r..   -^-"-^--^—'TP^^...._.   - °:aM..i•...iYY/.f.,




                                                                                                                                                                         ,. ­




                            (2) Microwave Generation in Pulsed Ferrites
                                         Graduate Student: J. Lawrence

                           Technical Objective:

                                         It was previously demonstrated in this laboratory that a small
                           ferrite sample subjected only to a rapidly rising pulsed magnetic field can
                           generate a coherent microwave signal. The objective of the present project

                           has been to determine whether microwave signals of high power and very
                           narrow pulse width can be generated by this means.

                           Approach:

                                         A pulsed magnetic field applied to a magnetically saturated
                           ferrite sample is capable of initiating a coherent precession and of trans-
                            latin'r upward both the frequency and the energy associated with this pre-
                           cession. A coupled circuit resonance can then extract energy from the
                           system at a desired frequency. For large precession amplitude, the rise of
                           the pulsed magnetic field up to the bias field level must be nonadiabatic.
                           The digital computer is used to study the precession buildup characteristics.
                           To avoid Limiting effects of spin wave buildup, the total rise time of the
                           pulsed mzbnetic field must be less than a threshold value which depends on
                           the precession angle. Computer calculations are also used to study the
                            transir . nt growth of spin ,naves and to determine the magnitude of the
                           threshold. Operation w'-thin this time allows the precession to exceed ap-
                           preciably the usual steady state precession threshold set by spin wave
                           instabilities. This precession threshold has restricted the microwave de-
                           vice application of tow-loss ferrites to either low-level devices or
                            limiters. The present device has promise of being the first practical
                            large signal device using low-loss single-crystal ferrites.


                           Research Report:
                                         In experiments performed with YIG spheres mounted in an integral
                           circuit element containing a tunable X-band slot resonator and it pulsed
                           field coil, providing pulsed magnetic fields rising beyond 3 kG in approxi-
                           mately 1 nsec, energy in the range of hundreds of W-nsecs has been generated
                           over the X-band frequency range, with pulse widths of the order of 1 nsec.




                                                                                              -76-
The rf output pulses have giod interpulse phase coherence and are studied
in detail, using a sampling oscilloscope to observe the instantaneous rf
waveforms. This result clearly demonstrates the capability of this process
for generating high-power microwave signals. The experimentally determined
precession angle in the ferrite exceeds oy an order of magnitude the maxi-
mum angle possible in a steady state device, and the energy stored in the
ferrite exceeds by two orders of magnitude that which is possible in a

steady state device. Agreement between theory and practice in the present
experiment is very good. This investigation indicates that the rf energy
is at present limited by a parabolic rounding of the initial portion of the
leading edge of the pulsed field waveform. Based on these results, a new
procedure for applying the pulsed magnetic field has been. devised that is
expected to lead to substantial increase in the rf energy developed.


(3) Brillouin Scattering by Transverse Acoustic Waves
          Graduate Student: E. Lean

Technical Objective: To study the properties of diffraction of laser light
by coherent shear waves in solids at microwave frequencies.

Approach: Coherent shear waves are excited in single-crystal samples using
shear wave transducers designed for microwave frequencies. The intensities,
spatial distributions, and polarization of laser beams diffracted by the
acoustic waves are measured and compared with theoretical calculations.
Photoelastic theory predicts that the polarization of the light should
undergo a 90° rotation in the scattering process, and this characteristic

is of particular interest.


Research Report:
          Using shear waves at 3 GHz, diffraction has been obtained in
rutile tetragonal crystals. The characteristl s are consistent with the
theory, except that no polarization rotation is observed. A new optical
apparatus has been procured to allow further study of Lilis problem with
better measurement accuracy. Work is under way on YIG cubic crystals,
and will be extended to other materials.




                                   -77-
(4) Electromagnetic Propagation on Periodic Arrays of Ferrite Samples

             Graduate Student: W. Egan

Technical Objective: To study the propagation of electromagnetic waves at
microwave frequencies along linear arrays of ferrite samples which are
mutually coupled by overlap of their dipolar rf magnetic fields. Theoreti-
cal analysis predicts that the phase and group velocities of electromagnetic

waves propagating on a periodic array of ferrite samples can be controlled
by varying an applied do magnetic field. This property is of particular

interest, as , , .re possibilities for parametrically amplifying the propagating;
waves by means of an applied rf magnetic field.

Approach:    Measurements on the normal modes of the array, when operated as

a resonant structure, are used to obtain discrete points on the dispersion
curve for the array, to compare with the theoretical dispersion properties.

Transmission measurements of nonresonant traveling waves on this structure
are made by designing waveguide couplers for use at each end of the

structure.

Research Report:
             Propagation along an array of five single-crystal YIG spheres has

been demonstrated at frequencies in the vicinity of 4 Gliz. Measurements on
the normal modes of the array operated as a resonant structure agree with

the theoretically predicted dispersion curves.
             Careful selection of the YIG samples for uniformity in their
ferromagnetic properties, careful polishing of the spherical samples, and
care in mounting to obtain a uniform linear array are found necessary in
order to obtain these resultq.
             This work indicates that Cie system may be very useful in pro-
ducing electronically variable signal delays in the range of 100 nsec and

less., which is both a very important range for some applications and a very
difficult range to obtain by other approaches.
             Parametric amplification of the signals Propagating on this
structure will be attempted, using a nondegenerate rf magnetic pumping
field oriented parallel to the axis of the structure.




                                     -78-
                   up 10




24. CATHODIC PROTECTION AND HYDROGEN EMBRITTLEMENT OF STEEL

    0. Cutler Shepard, Professor, Materials Science


    Graduate Student: L. Bainer


    Agency Suppert:

                           NSF - High School Teacher Research Participation Program


    Technical Objective:

                To find whether steel subjected to aqueous corrosion or protected
    from corrosion by sacrificial magnesium is subject to hydrogen embrittlement.


    Approach:

                "C"-shaped sections of AISI 4130 steel were heat treated, sub-
    jected to a tensile stress on the outside by slight elastic bending and
    subjected to various environments.


   Research Report:

                The work was carried on for an eight-week period during the summer
    of 1964. It was found that hardened 4130 steel will fail under low stress
   due to hydroger produced by slight aqueous corrosion. Cathodic protection
   with magnesium increases the hydrogen damage.

                It is planned to try to find the mechaL!ism responsible for the
   difference in the way hydrogen affects soft steel as compared with hardened
    steel.




                                         -79-




                                                                                      -i
i




    25. MECHANICAL BEHAVIOR OF SOLIDS

        0. D. Sherby, Professor, Materials Science

        Graduate Students:
                    C.   R.    Barrett
                    R.   M.    Bonesteel
                    F.   W.    Clinard
                    3.   L,.   Joseph
                    W.   H.    McCarthy
                    M.   D.    Merz
                    J.   S.    Perrin

        Agency Support:
                    NONR 225(60)
                    AF 33 (616)6789
                    AEC AT (04- 3)- 326-PA2
                    ARPA SD87


        Research Report:

         (1) Role of Diffusion in Creep and Stress-Rupture in Solids

                    Graduate Students: C. R. Barrett
                                        R. M. Bonesteel
                                        W. H. McCarthy

        Technical Objective:
                    To understand the mechanical behavior of materials at elevated
         temperature, with special emphasis on the influence of grain boundaries on
        creep, and on the influence of a stable second phase on the strength of
         polycrystalline solids.

        Approach:
                    Develop techniques for the preparation of composite materials by
        powder metallurgy methods. Study the mechanical behavior of solids by

        means of constant stress tension and compression creep tests. Evaluate
        elastic modulus of composiLe materials by dynamic resonance methods.

        Research Report:
                    Grain boundaries may influence high temperature strength in many
        ways: as barriers to dislocation motion, as sources or sinks of vacancies

        and dislocations, and by grain boundary shearing. In all of these




                                              -80-
... _ -            . -Nl,&. nrr--W . _. _i,
          I - __




considerations, the type of boundary (angle) must be taken into account.
Studies have been initiated on polycrystalline copper, wherein various
grain sizes have been prepared keeping the grain boundary misorientarion
constant. Studies are also under way on the influence of grain size on
creep of aluminum containing 0.05% Fe. Results to date suggest that grain
size effects on the steady state creep rate are negligible for pure metals,
but car, be very important in the case of impure metals.
                        "Zinc containing zinc oxide, amorphous carbon, tungsten, or alpha

alumina all exhibit substantially higher strength: than pure zinc at ele-
vated temperature (0.9 Tm). The creep activation energy is ai.,7ays sig-
nificantly higher and the stress dependency substantially greater in the

composite samples than in the single-phase materials. The higher the con-
tent of the second hard phase, the greater the creep resistance at 0.9 'gym.
Plate-like dispersed particles are more effective strengtheners than
spherical particles. A continuous network of Zn0 in zinc leads to a
material with fair creep resistance above the melting point of zinc.
Further studies are continu no on the mechanical behavior of these com-
posites at low concentrations of the second hard phase.


(2) Elastic and Plastic Properties of Crystalline Solids at Elevated

             Temperature

Technical Objective:
                        To investigate the influence of elastic properties of polycrystal-
line solids at elevate4 temperature and to determine the influence of
elastic strength of solids on the corresponding plastic properties, with
special reference to creep and dislocation climb processes.

Approach:
                        Elastic properties of a number of solids were measured by means of
dynamic resonance techniques at temperatures up to 1200°C.

Research Report:
                        This program was essentially completed in September 1964; conse-

quently, little work was clone during the report period. However, four

publications were completed and are abstracted below.



                                                  -81-
                "Data are presented for Young's modulus of (110)[001] oriented
    Fe-3.1% Si up to 2100% for various angles to the rolling direction. These
►   data exhibit a strong decrease in Young's modulus with increasing tempera-
    ture during the ferromagnetic transformation so that the Young's modulus of
    the paramagnetic state is lower than for the ferromagnetic state. This ef-
    fect also exists for Ni and Co, and is attributed to a decrease in inter-
    atomic forces accompanying the decrease of the exchange interaction between
    3d electrons. This ferromagnetic modulus relaxation leads to a new specific

    heat term     which represents the energy absorbed in decreasing the mean
              CDe
    frequency of the vibrational spectrum. The value of C.6 , calculated from
    Young's modulus data, remains appreciable above the Curie temperature, thus
    accounting for the apparent excess specific heat of the ferromagnetic metals
    above that temperature. Separation of the total electronic specific heat
    suggests that three-fourths of the Low-temperature electronic specific heat
    of ?e, Ni, and Co is of magnetic origin and that the magnetic specific heat
    C m increases linearly with temperature up to 0.7 T and then increases
    rapidly to a peak at T , the Curie temperature. Well Above T , a residual
                             c                                          c
    electronic term of nonmagnetic origin is found. The calculated values of
    magnetic entropy and energy derived from C m for Fe, Ni, and Co are in
    reasonable agreement with Heisenberg theory using s      = 2 ..,2
                "The steady-state creep characteristics of pure polycrystalline
    copper were studied in the temperature range 400° to 950°C and in the stress
    range 400 to 7000 psi. Tests were conducted in dry deoxidized hydrogen and
    all specimens exhibited high ductility before fracture. Two activation
    energies for creep were established as a function of temperature. Above

    about T/T m = 0.65, the activation energy for creep was 48,000 cal per mole
    whereas between 0.5 and 0.65 T     it was 28,000 cal per mole. The observed

    temperature dependence of the activation energy for creep follows the same
    trend as exhibited by the self-diffusion coefficient of copper in copper
    single crystals and silver in silver single crystals. It is therefore be-
    lieved that the rate-contrDlling mechanism in creep of copper in the stress
    and temperature range studied is diffusion-dependent and is probably associ-

    aced with a dislocation- climb prod         The low activation-energy region is

    attributed to enhanced volume diffusion from the presence of dislocations

    which act as short-circuit paths for diffusion." 3

                                         -82-
             "(1) The steady-state creep behaviour of F(-,-Co above  can be ex-
                                                                  T
    plained by a dislocation climb mechanism similar to thac proposed for pure

    metals. The activation energy corrected for the temperature variation of E
    is 70 kcal/mole.

•            (2) Below T there is a continual decrease in
                             c
                                           d In Y
                                           d(l/T)
    corresponding to increasing long-range order.
             (3) Dynamic elastic modulus E(T) and internal friction Q -1 measure-
    ments at frequencies of 1-3 kc/s indicate that:
                                           -1
             (a) E(T) decreases and Q           rises rapidly as T   is approached,
                   corresponding to a loss of long-range order.
                                                                                      9
             (b)   Above T
                             r Q -1 remains very high.
             (c) E(T) shows a second large relaxation between 775 and 850°C
                   which is ascribed to a loss of ferromagnetism, most likely
                   modified by either a grain boundary or a Zener relaxation.
             (d) E(T) rises above about 850°C indicating a gradual transfor-
                   mation from a- to •^.
             (e) There is no evidence for an a^' + Y phase field below 650°C as
                   proposed in the literature.
             (4) A comparison of the creep resistance of the partially ordered
    and disordered states of the Fe-Co alloy with Armco iron indicates that in
    both states the Fe-Co alloy creeps several orders of magnitude more slowly
    than iron. This can be explained by postulating that the atomic mobility
    in Fe-Co is strongly influenced by the degree of long-range and/or short-
    range order as well as by its ferromagnetic state."4

             "The determination of dynamic Young's modulus and internal friction

    utilizing transverse free-free vibration in vacuum at temperatures from 25°C
    to 1200°C is described. High temperatures are achieved with a highly ef-
    ficient elliptical radiation furnace whose design and construction are
    A escribed in detail. The two wires used for driving and sensing are also

    the two legs of a thermocouple circuit which are ; :tached to opposite ends
    of metallic specimens; the specimen itself completes the thermocouple

    circuit. The electronic components which allow determination of both decay




                                            -83-
time and resonant frequency using a frequency counter are presented, along
with a description of the method of operation. The accuracy of the measure-
ment is discussed and typical experimental results for an Fe-Si acid Fe-Al

alloy, as well as for nickel, are presented .,,5


(3) Influence of Point Defects on the Mechanical Behavior of Solids
            Graduate Students: F. W, Clinard
                                B. L. Joseph
                               M. D. Merz
                                J. S. Perrin
Technical Objective:
            To study the possible influence of point defects on the mechanical

behavior of solids and to evaluate the vacancy generation during plastic

deformation at elevated temperature.

Approach:
            Constant stress creep tests, constant strain rate tests, and

chemical diffusion methods were used to stud y the possible importance of
non-equilibrium point defects on mechanical behavior of materials.

Research Report:
            The influence of concurrent phase transformations on the strength
cif iron and on the rate of atomic mcbility in iron has been studie(i. It
has been shown that the strength of iron is extremely low during please
transformation and this has been attributed to the creation of excess point
defects as a result of the difference iii specific volume of alpha aria -amnia
iron. Concurrent phase transformation can also enhance the mobility of
atoms. It has been shown that a diffusion enhancement by a factor of two
results, when diffusion data from the transforming side of a thermally
cycled sample (iron, iron-cobalt couple) are compared with predicted inter-
diffusion coefficients based on isothermal data. In contrast to the

mechanical property studies, it is believed that the increase in atomic

mobility by concurrent phase tranF.f •)rmation, in the samples studied, is
caused by short circuiting from moving grain boundaries.
            Work is under way on studies of strain-enhanced diffusion in metals,

especially as assessed by elevated temperature creep experiments. It is
suggested that certa;u creep effects can be explained by an enhancement of
atomic mobility with plastic straining, namely, strain softening of metals


                                     -84-
in certain temperature and strain rate ranges, and breakdown of the power
law for steady state creep at high stresses. Theoretical analysis of
published data on strain-enhanced diffusion in iron suggest that subgrain
boundary short-circuiting is the primary contributor to the enhanced dif-
fusion observed, whereas dislocation short-circuiting appears unimportant.
From creep experiments it is deduced that deformatiern-induced vacancies
become significant onl y when the strain rate exceed 10 9Du, where Du is the
static diffusion coefficient. 6-7


Reference Publications and Presentations:
      1.   C. R. Barrett and 0. D. Sherby, "Influence of Stacking Fault
               Energy on High Temperature Creep of Pure Metals," Trans.
               AIMS 233, 11.16-19 (June 1965).
      2.   J. L. Lytton, "Influence of Ferromagnetic Elastic Modulus
               Relaxation on the Determination of Magnetic Specific Heat of
               Fe, Ni, and Co," J. Appl. Plays. 35, 2397-2406 (Aug. 1964).
      3.   C. R. Barrett and 0. D. Sherby, "Steady Stare Creep Character-
               istics of Polycrystalline Copper in the Temperature Range
               400 0 to 950 0 C," Trans. AD-1E, 230, 1322-27 (Oct. 1964).
      4.   J. A. Hren and 0. D. Sherby, "The Influence of Lon;-Range Order
               on Some Mechanical Properties of an Iron-Cobalt Alloy,"
               Appl. Mat. Res. 4, 41-46 (Jan. 1965).
      5.   J. L. Lytton, J. A. Hren, K. Kamber and 0. D. Sherby, "Apparatus
               for the Determination of Dynamic Young's Modulus and Internal
               Friction in Vacuum at Temperatures from 25°C to 1200°C,"
               British J. Appl. Phys . 15, 1573-83 (Aug. 1964) .
      6.   F. W. Clinard and 0. D. Sherby," Strength of Iron During Allo-
               tropic Transformation," Acta Met. 12, 911-19 (Dec. 1964).
      7.   0. D. Sherby invited speaker on subject, "Influence of Concurrent
               strain on Diffusion and Diffusion-Controlled Processes" at
               following places:
           a.   Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, New 'Mexico, Metallurgy and
                Chemistry Colloquium, July 29, 1964.
           b.   Lockheed Research Laboratory Seminar, Palo Alto, California
                (Sept. 1964).
           ce Lawrence Radiation Laboratory Seminar, Chemistry Division,
               Livermore, California (December 1961+).
           d.   Institute of Metals Division, AIMS, Los Angeles Chapter
                (March 1965) .
           e.   General Atomic Metallurgy Seminar, San Diego, California
                (April 1965).



                                     -85-




                                                                                k
      q




              26. KINETICS OF SOME SOLID STATE REACTIONS

                  J. C. Shyne, Associate Professor, Materials Science

                 Graduate Students
                              T. D. Gulden
                              G. A. Hayes
                              K. R. Kinsman
                              Fa F. -M. Lee
                              D. 0. Nason
                              R. 1). Nelson
                              G. W. Roust

                  Agency Support:
                              NSF G-22577
                              DA - ARO(D)31-124-G68
                              ARPA SD-87


                  Research Report:


                  (1) Phase Transformations in Metal and Alloys
                              Graduate Students: K. R. Kinsman
                                                  D. 0. Nason
                                                  R. D, Nelson
                                                  G. W. Roust

                  Technical Objective:
                              A study of the kinetic, crystallographic, and morphological
                  features of phase transformation to elucidate the transformation mechanisms.

                  Approach:
                              Observation of fTio time and temperature dependence of the progress
                  of transformations, predominantly by electrical resistivity measurements,
                  measurement of the crystallographic relationships between parent and pro-
                  duct phases, i-nfluence of superimposed conditions on the ki.notics and the
                  morphology and crystallography of transformation products.

                  Research Report:
                              A theoretical model has been developed for uhe therinal stabili-
                  zation of austenite. Critical experiments have been performed and the work
                  is nearing completion. Some important implications relative to martensite
                  nucleation have been examined.




                                                         -86-




          t
"''
            An analysis of our previously obtained data on bainite morphology

and crystallography has been made. The data have revealed an apparent non-
martensitic bainite transformation and are being analyzed.
            Work on low-temperature transformzti.ons in plutonium indicated

a definite martensitic transformation mechanism. This work has been de-
scribed in the Ph.D. thesis by R. D. Nelson. The work was completed at

Battelle-Northwest Laboratories under AEC sponsorship.
            Apparatus is being conducted for high-speed isothermal transfor-
mation kinetic studies on iron alloys with interest focused on the massive

transformation.


(2) Internal Friction of Materials

            Graduate Students: T. D. Gulden
                                F. F.-M. Lee

Technical Objective:

            To study mechanical damping characteristics of alkali metals and
alloys; to study internal friction of composite materials; and to study
elevated temperature dislocation damping; in metals.

Approach:
            The decay in mechanical free vibration amplitude is measured over

a range of temperatures. An electromagnetic drive and pickup is used for

frequencies in the kil-ocycle range, while a torsion pendulum is used at

lower frequencies.


Research Report:
            Work involving the alkali metals was completed during this period.
Zener damping; in K-Rb was studied in detail. An unusual damping effect
associated with dissolved oxygen in the heavier alkali metals was dis-

covered. A Ph.D. thesis, "Internal Friction of Alkali Metals and Alloys,"

by T. D. Gulden describes these results.
            Largc grain boundary damping; beaks occurring at unusually low

temperatures were observed in composites of A1-Al 2 0 3 . This work, nearly
complete, is pertinent to the structure and mechanical properties of such

composites. 1
            Future plans incluue measurement of high-temperature dislocation

damping in Al and Au, and zener damping in In-Pb alloys.

                                    -87-
    (3) Influence of Acoustical Radiation on Kinetics of Solid State Processes

                Graduate Student: G. A. Hayes


    Technical Objective:
                To observe and explain the influence of ultrasonic mechanical

    vibrations on the rates of some solid state reactions.

    Approach:
                High amplitude standing waves are developed in specimen materials

    using a 20 kc transducer. The rates of reaction are then observed as a
    function of reaction temperature and acoustical intensity.


    Research Report:

                A small acceleration of the precipitation hardening process has
    been observed in beryllium-copper, and a large (-50x) increase in the rate

    of recrystallization of pure Cu has been observed. These rate increases
    have been related to the absorption of acoustic energy during the process.
                Current activities involve a study of grain growth, kinetics, and

    interdiffusion.


    Reference Publicat i ons and Presentations:

                1. G. Schoeck, E. Bisogni, and J. Shyne, "The Activation Energy
                       for High Temperature Internal Friction," Acta Met. 12,
                       1466 ( 1 .964) .

                2.   J. C. Shyne and W. D. Nix, "Dislocations in Martensite
                        Inherited from Austenite," Acta Met. 13 (7) 869 (1965).




t




                                          -88-
27. OPTICAL PHENOMENA IN SOLIDS

    A. E. Siegman, Professor, Electrical Engineering

    Professional Associate:
                H. Hayami

    Graduate Students:
                J. E. Bjorkholm
                G. E. Francois
                J. A. iellefsen
    Agency Support:
                AF 04(695)-536
                AFOSR 49(638)-1525
                AF 33(657)- 11144
                AFOS'1 323-63
    RPsearr, h Report:


    (1) Measurements of Nonlinear Optical Effects in Solids Using CW Gas Laser
        Beams
                Graduate Students: J. E. Bjorkholm
                                    G. E. Francois


                In order to make accurate measurements of important nonlinear
    optical parameters in crystals, we have used weak but accurately known CW
    gas laser beams and ultrasensitive detection equipment, together with pains-
    taking calibration procedures.
                The weak nonlinear optical effects, such as optical second-
    harmonic generation, which occur in crystals are most commonly measured
    using powerful pulsed lasers. Although precise comparisons between differ-
    ent crystals are possible in this way, accurate absolute measurements are
    not possible because of the multi-mode, multi-frequency nature of pulsed
    laser beams. By using careful techniques, such accurate measurements can
    be made, at least on strongly nonlinear crystals, by using weak but accu-
    rately known CW gas laser beams. To this end, four successful projects of
    this type nave been carried out using the experimental apparatus we have
    constructed:




                                        -89-
^- -^w ^1w.+rn^.M.K+Wi^'-          ^.       _^   ^.._._"'-- " —     ---:"-.w^ai-..rY.cR,=' -svcaFQlw. -'^:'—_ _   - -•— w   -'IEa..s.u, ...        3.w...w.pe.::.+^s=




  r




  I



                            a. One strongly nonlinear crystal often used as a relative standard

               for nonlinear optical effects is ammonium dihydrogon phosphate (ADP).                                                          We
               have measured the significant nonlinear tensor coefficient d 36 in this

               material to an accuracy of ±10% (to be compared with the best previous accu-
               racy of ±50%) . L

                            b. In the process of making these measurements, the sensitivity of

               the apparatus permitted us to observe a small but significant difference
               between the experimental dependence of output on crystal orientation and
               the dependence predicted by the usual plane-wcive theory. This variation
               was explained in detail as due to the gaussian beam profile and consequent
               gaussian angular distribution of the laser beam. 2 These results and other
               minor results were included in Dr. Francois' Ph.D. dissertation, "The
               measurement of nonlinear dielectric constants at optical frequencies under
               near-ideal phase-velocity matching conditions," Department of Electrical
               Engineering, 1965.

                            c. The effects of focusing the fundamental light beam inside the
               crystal have been explored in detail both theoretically and experimentally.

               It is found that there are four distinct regions in which the second har-
               Tnonic varies differently with focusing strength, and that there is an
               optimum degree of focusing for maximum second-harmonic output. Theory and
               detailed experimental results are in excellent agreement.3

                            d. Crystals with a center of symmetry, such as calcite, do not
               show optical second-harmonic generation unless the symmetry is broken down,
               e.g. by application of a strong do electric field. Although this effect is
               very much weaker than the usual harmonic generation in ADP, Bjorkholm has
               now observed and accurately measured this effect in calcite on a CW basis
               with our apparatus. These results are now being compared with the Kerr ef-
               fect in calcite, which we have also measured. These results together with
               item c. will comprise Mr. Bjorkholm's dissertation (in Applied Physics),
               which should be completed shortly.




                                                             _90-
                                                                                                                 h



                                                                                                                 i
-   f.>__    _y   rb!!   .^. ­ LiW-IP.+Gr.
                                             . -..Mw
                                                       -..__^w........s.   r+_.+^   . wr.r...-^..^^_ _^.. _ ^y




            (2) Free-Carrier Optical Absorption Effects in Semiconductors
                         Graduate Student: J. A. Tellefsen

                         Generation of free carriers in semiconductors (such as silicon) by
            incident high-voltage electron beams (10-30 kv) has been used to accomplish
            modulation and image detection of infrared (IR) laser signals and to study
            free-carrier IR absorption iii semiconductors.
                         A new configuration for this type of device has been conceived
            which should minimize optical losses and maximize interaction between the
            IR beam and the free electrons. A literature survey of free-carrier ab-
            sorption effects in semiconductors has been carried out and prepared as a
            memorandum. An initial model of our experimental device has demonstrated
            the partial modulation of an IR beam using free carriers generated in sili-
            con by an incident 15 kv electron beam. This result so far caly repeats a
            similar experiment done by others a decade earlier, and in the process
            serves to ac ,, uaint us with some of the experimental and technical diffi-
            culties.
                         We are now in the process of constructing an improved experimental
            version according to our new configuration, with the expectation that we
            shall be able to demonstrate an image tube action useful for studying other-
            wise invisible IR laser beam patterns, as well as free-electron absorption
            effects.

            Reference Publicaticis and Presentations:
                   1.     G. E. Francois, "CW Measurement of the Optical Nonlinearity of
                              Ammoi ► ium Dihydrogen Phosphate," Phys. Rev. (accepted for
                              publication).
                   2.     G. E. Francois and A. E. Siegman, "The Effect of Gaussian Beam
                              Spread on Phase Velocity Matching in C4 Optical Second Har-
                              monic Generation," Phys. Rev. 139, A4 (July 1965).
                   3.     J. E. Bjorkholm, "Optical Second Harmonic Generation Using a
                              Focused Gaussian Laser Beam," Phys. Rev. (submitted for publi-
                              cation).
                   4.     S. E. Harris and A. E. Siegman, "A Technique for Optical Frequency
                              Translation Utilizing the Quadratic Electrooptic Effect in
                              Cuts is Crystals," Appl . Optics 3, 1089-90 (Sept. 1964) .
                   5.     V. Evtuhov and A. E. Siegman, "A 'Twisted-Mode' Technique for Ob-
                              taining Axially Uniform Energy Density in a Laser Cavity,"
                              Appl. Optics 4, 142-3 (Jan. 1965).


                                                       _91-
"-I




      28. THEORETICAL SOLID STATE PHYSICS

          M. S. Sparks, Associate Professor, Applied Physics and Electrical Engineering;

          Professional Associates:
                A. Quattropani
                R. M. White
          Graduate Students:

                I. B. Ortenburger
                J. H. Marburger
                K. Nordvedt

          Agency Support:

                ARPA SD8 7
                NSF GP-1556
                NASA Nsg- 331

          Technical Objective:
                           To stidy various broad areas of theoretical solid state
          physics, including magnetism, many-body theory, low temperature phenomena,
          ionic energy levels in crystals, and transport theory.

          Approach:
                           Theoretical

          Research Report:
                      A new collective magnetic mode of ferromagnetics systems, having
          very important possibilities for low loss devices, has been discovered.
          Two of the most important current problems in theoretical solid state
          physics have recently been solved by the theoretical solid state and state
          space physics group. The first is the lack of a superconductivity isotope
          effect in some transition elements, and the second is the elimination of

          the "T 3/2 term" in the Green-function treatment of the saturation magneti-
          zation of a Heisenberg ferromagnet. 1 These are discussed below.
                      Specific interest in the theory of ma g netism includes ferromagnetic
          relaxation, nonlinear processes in ferromagnetic insulators, and effects of

          impurities on magnetic properties of materials. New techniques in many-body
          calculations have been investigated; applications of existing and new




                                                -92-
                 44 O^
1WWWftWAW_____




                         quantum-mechanical many-body techniques to problems in solid state are
                         under consideration. These include the study of electrical and thermal
                         conductivity in magnetic materials and temperature dependence of ferro-
                         magnetic saturation magnetization, and aDplication of normal ordering
                                                              2,3
                         techniques to problems in magnetism.
                                    In the field of low-temperature phenomena, we have completed the
                         explanation of the attractive electron-electron interaction that gives rise
                         to superconductivity in materials that show no isotope effEct. The most
                         interesting outcome of a general study of the electron-phonon interaztion
                         was the explanation of this attractive electron-electroa interaction, still
                         in terms of the electron-phonon interaction. The interaction also gives
                         rise to a modified isotopic dependence of the phonon d.i - spersion relation,
                         however, and this latter is responsible for the modified superconductivity
                         isotope effect.
                                    In the area of transport theory, electrical conductivity associated
                         with the interactions of electrons with ferromagnetic and with antiferro-
                         ma,,netic degrees of freedom of magnetic materials is being investigated.
                         In addition, the thermal conductivity of a system of bosons, including
                                                                4
                         magnons and phonons, is being studied.    Models involving various discreLe
                         discontinuities are under investigation. A study from first field theo-
                         retical principles of the amplification of acoustic waves by electron-
                         phonon interaction has also been made.
                                    Two problems of more general interest have been considered. A new,
                         vory simple method of quantizin-_ ,; fields has been developed, and a method of
                         determining b ,%7 inspection what general boundary conditions are necessary and
                         sufficient to specify solutions of partial and ordinary differential
                         equations has been found.

                         Reference PubUcations and Presentations:
                               1.    1. Ortenburger, "Low-Temperature Magnetization of the S
                                                                                                   2
                                         Heisenberg Ferro-Magnet," Phys. Rev. 136 (:)A), A1374-5
                                         (Nov. 1964).
                               2.    P. E. Seiden and M. Sparks, "Frequency Dependence of the Two-
                                         Magnon Ferrimagnetic Resonance Linewidth," Phys. Rev. A137,
                                         1278-81 (Feb. 1965).




                                                             _93-
3.   M. Sparks, "Ferromagnetic Resonance Porosity Linewidth Theory in
         Polycrystalline Insulators," J. Appl. Phys. 3-5,
                                                      w 1570 (April
         1965).
4.   R. M. White, M. Sparks, and I. Ortenhurger, "Diagenalization of
         the Antiferromagnetic Mag,non-Phonon Interaction," Phys. Rev.
         139 (2A), A450-54 (July 1965).




                              -94-
--- -- - --^a --   -...." _, .. ... -.. ►.._n . .-. — —




              29. PHOTOEMISSION AND ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE OF SOLIDS

                      W. E. Spicer, Professor, Electrical Engineering and Materials Science

                      Graduate Students:
                                          A. J. Blodgett, Jr.
                                          R. Co Eden
                                          N. B. Ki_ndig
                                          R. Y. Koyama
                                          W. F. Krolikowski
                                          R. J. Powell
                                          B, H. Sachs
                                          B. H. Sc.hechtman
                                          J. L. Shay
                                          A. Y. -C. Yu

                      Agency Support:                                                                       i
                                          NONR 225(83)
                                          NS? GPIO33 and GK149
                                          NASA NGR 05-020-066
                                          ARPA SD87

                       Technical Objective:
                                          To study the electronic structure of solids using photoemission

                       and optical absorption techniques. It is hoped that contributions can be
                      made to understanding such diverse phenomena as ferromagnetism and the co-
                      hesive energy of solids through a better understanding of the electronic
                       states in solids. Another objective is the optimum coupling of the basic

                       results to practical. utilization by government agencies.

                       Approach:
                                          Measurement of the spectral distribution of the photoemission
                       quantum yield and the energy distribution of the emitted photoelectrons
                       usi.nS visible, near- and vacuum-ultraviolet spectra. Measurements are also
                       made of the optical properties of the solids when this is not available

                       from the literature. The coupling effort is through presentations at and
                       other communications- with industrial and government laboratories concerned

                       with the subjects covered.




                                                                   -95-
     tr




          (1) Band Structure of II-VI Compounds

                   "Band Structure of Cadmium Sulphide"
                          Graduate Student: N. B. Kindia,
                   Determination of the density of states in the conduction or
          valence bands using photoemission techniques has been the objective of this
          program. Optical selection rules have also been considered. Apparatus for
          cleaving and testing specimens in high vacuum was completed in a prior
          period; data accumulated in the current period has been analyzed and publi-

          cacion have been prepared as noted below.
                   Two conduction-band maxima were found at about 6.7 and 8.2 eV above
          the top of the valence band and two valence-band maxima were found at about
          1.2 and 9.4 eV above the top of the valence band. Optical conductivity
It
          calculated from the density of states agrees with experimental values. The
          energy distribution curve was found to be a sensitive tool for studying

          surface conditions from measurements made on surfaces prepared in several
          environments. 1-4
                                                                                           0

                   "Band Structure of CdSe, CdTe, and Other II-VI Compounds"

                          Graduate Student: J. L. Shay
                   Ph otoemission measurements have been made on single crystals of
          CdSe cleaved at pressures of less than 10 -9 torr and at pressures of 10-5

          torr. 5 The only important effect of the presence of gas in the latter ex-
          periments is shown to be a lowering of the electron affinity exposing more
          of the conduction band. Stron- structure has been observed in the energy
          distributions of photoemitted electrons for photon energies of 7.4 eV and
          8.8 eV in agreement with the structure in the reflectivity data of Cardona.
          Direct as well as nondirect transitions have been observed to high densities
          of states at 5.7 eV and 7.2 eV above the top of the valence band. High

          densities of states are located -1.7 eV and -3.4 eV below the top of the
          valence band. The shape of the band structure required to explain the energy
          distributions is in good general agreement with the band structure near k = 0
          proposed by Phillips. If this identification is made, the high density of

          states points are associated with I' 5c'                    6V , respectively.
                                                     r 6C' F5V' and i
          The predicted energy difference
                                            F6F6         = 10.6 eV is thus in agreement

          with the prediction of 10.5 eV by Kleinman and Phillips.



                                             -96-
                                                                                     Aft




           Preliminary wort: has been -omP leted on CdTe. Cthcr materials will   -
be studied.


(2) Electronic Structure of Noble and Transition. Metals

          The Principal object of this study is to determine the density of
states of the noble and transition metals and to relate t'_iese results to
the understanding of ferromagnetism in metals.

           "Structure of Cu and Ag

                 Graduate Student: C. N. Berglund

          Photcemission :studies were used to determine in detail many of the

electronic properties of the metals copper and silver over an energy range
from the bottom of tho d-band ( — 6 eV below the Fermi level) to 11.5 eV

above the Fermi. level. Measurements of the spectral distribution of the
quantum yield clnd of the energy distribution of photoemitted electrons from
copper and silver under monochromatic radiation were described and in-
terpreted in terms of the ener gy band structure of the metals and the
inelastic scattering mechanisms for energetic electrons.

          The `ffects on the photoemission measurements of direct and non-
direct optical transitions, electron--electron scattering, lifetime
broadening, and the Auger process are described. These processes are
identified in the experimental data, and are used to obtain information on
the density of states, the effect of matrix elEments, the optical selection
rules, the mean free paths for scattering of energetic electrons, and the

energy loss per scattering event i.n both copper and silver. In addition,

information is gained on the effect of the plasma frequency in silver at
hug = 3.85 eV. 6-1-0


          "Electronic Structure of Ni, Fe and C-1"

                 Graduate Student: A. J. BlodF,et., Jr.

          Photoemission studies have been made to determine major features
of the band structure in nickel, iron, and gadolinium. Such experimental

information is necessary because of the conflicting theories of ferromagnet-
ism found in the lit.-rature--this plethora of theories is largely due to
the lack of detailed knowledge of the band structure in ferromagnetic metals,
particularly in regions away from the Fermi surf-,ce.

                                     -97-
             In these studies, the spectral distribution of the quantum yield
    and energy distributions of photoemitted electrons have been measured at

    room temperature as functions of r,ionochromatic radiation to a maximum

    photon energy of 11.6 eV. Some data were also obtained on nickel above its

    Curie temperature (358°C) and on gadolinium below its Curie temperature
    (16 0 C). The experimental results indicate that conservation of wave vector
    k is not an important selection rule for the optical transitions which are
    dominant in these metals. This result allows direct determination of the
    densities of states.
             It is found that the density of states in nickel is relatively
    high between the Fermi level E   and 6 eV below the Fermi level. A strong
    high density peak occurs at 4.6 eV below E F , and weaker, broad peaks are
    observed at 0.3 and 2.2 eV below E F e Attempts to lower the work function
    of nickel by use of a cesium monolaver failed due to the formation of a
    Bickel-cesium alloy; however, it was possible to determine the density of
    states in the region between the Fermi level and the vacuum level by using
    the optical conductivity in conjunction with the photoemission results.
    The density of states of nickel is approximately constant between 0.5

    ( E - E F ) < 11 eV, and a relatively high density occurs within 0.5 eV of EF
    --these states are undoubtedly due to empty d-like states.
             The density of states in iron is quite similar to that in nickel
    in the region -3 < (E - E F ) < 0 eV with peaks occurring at0.35 and 2.4 eV

    below E F . A broad peak is observed in iron 5.5 eV below EF,; this peak is
    not as strong as the corresponding peak in nickel--probably because iron
    has fewer electrons than has nickel. The photoemission data indicate that

    the density of states in iron is approximately constant between 5 < (E - EF)
    < 11 eV. The work function of some iron :amples was reduced to 1.6 eV by

    depositing approximately a monolayer of cesium on their surfaces. The re-

    sults on both nickel and iron are shown to be in agreement with available
                  11-13
    optical data.
             In general, the densities of states of nickel and iron are markedly
    different from those of copper and silver--in particular, the d-Like bands
    extend over an energy range about twice as large in the former metals as in


f



                                       -a8-
                                                                .'r'w►     ^...^.+w^w--.   .ter-.—...^^^ ^^
                            '7111Ii► ^7r^At-




the latter. It s shown that the density of states of neither nickel nor
iron as cAetermined by this work can be rela*         to that of copper via the

ri;;id-Land model for any choice of exchange splitting (i.e., the energy
shut between the spin-up and spin-down bands).
         A high density of electrons is Found at the Fermi level in gado-

linium, ana much weaker peaks are observed at 2.6 and 5.8 eV below EF.

These data indicate that the free electron model is nit appropriate for

the rare earth metals. 14


         "Electronic Structure of Pd, Co, Gd, and Pt"

                  Graduate Student: A. Y.-C. Yu

         Cobalt is of interest because it is ferromagnetic and lies between

Fe and Ni in the periodic chart. Its density of states appears to be quite

similar to that of Fe and Ni. It also exhibits a density of states peak at
about 5 eV below the Fermi energy, which has not been explained in terms of
conventional band LLneory but which appears to be due to localized or col-

lective states.

         Palladium and Pt are of interest because they Have the same number
of approximate configuration of outer electrons as Ni; however, the y are
not ferromagnetic. Preliminary results indicate that the band structure is
closely related to that of Cu and Ag, and is reasonably well described in
terms of conventional band theory. No measurements have been made to date

on Pt. Additional reflectivity measurements have been made on Gd.15



(3) Studies of Cuprous Halides and Alkali Halides
         Graduate Student: W. F. Krolikowski

         The cuprous halides provide an important group with regard to

understanding the electronic structure of solids, for several reasons:
(a) They have the same basic crystal symmetry (diamond) as Ge, Si, and the
III-V compounds; however, they are more ionic than Ge, Si, and the III-V's.
Whet is the effect of the increased ionicity on their electronic structure?




                                                                                                              3



                                               _99-
1




    (b) What is the role of the Cu d-levels in determining the electronic
    structure of the cuprous halides? In the copper atom, the 3d-level.s lie at
    approximately the same energy as the halogen p-levels. The halogen p-levels

    would be expected to form the valence band in the cuprous halides, but what
    is the role of the d-levels?

             It is the purpose of this research to answer these questions
    experimentally throu gh the use of photoemission and optical techniques.

    Since the valence bands in alkali halides are made up principally from tine
    p-levels of the halogens, and since the alkali halides are highly ionic,
    they provide a good system with which to corpar.e the results from the
    cuprous halides. The alkali halides will be studied in this work.

             The effective density of states in the conduction and valence
    bands of the cuprous halides CuBr, CuI, and Cull have been determined,
    using photoemission and optical techniques over a ran g e of photon energies

    from 5 to 14 eV. A density of states model based upon nondirect tran-
    sitions is found to explain the majority of the photoemission and optical
    data.. However, direct transitions are also found to be important in these

    materials. Experiments on copper and on certain of the alkali halides sug-
    gest that the valence band of the cuprous halides is composed of distinct
    contributions from the copper ions due to the Cu d-electrons and the
    halide ions, attributed principally to the halogen p-electrons.16


    (4) Studies of the Transition Metal Oxides
             Graduate Student: R. J. Powell

             It is the object of this program to probe the electronic structure
    of the transition metal oxides in order to make a choice between the various

    models suggested in the literature to explain the electrical transport of
    these materials, and to give an improved overall picture of the electronic
    structure of these materials.
             Preliminary data have been obtained on NiO formed by cleaving
    single crystals of NiO in high vacuum and by oxidizing Ni. Techniques
    are being developed for forming samples of appropriate vanaGium oxides
    by oxidation.




                                       -100-
       ...     • ,. "iI'^.^o---   _ems . ; .w.-.. .....,........._.^.r   •   ^.   ` T.
                                                                                             3




                                                                                         1


(5)   Photou.missive and Optical Studies of Or,,anic and Related Materials
             Graduate Student: B. 11. Schechtman

             The objective of this project is to study the electronic states of
organic semiconductors and related materials with photoemission and optical
techniques.        Quantum yield and energy-distribution photoemission studies
will be made from the threshold cf response to approximately 11.8 eV. When
appropriate, other optical studies will be used to reinforce the photo-
emission work. It is hoped that the positions and widths of the electroniu
levels will be determined and that this information may be used to gain in-

sight into the conduction mechanisms and related phenomena in these materials.
             An ultra-high-vacuum pumping system to he used in the photoemission
studies is being designed and constructed.

             Photoemission data have been obtained curing the past quarter from
the nonmetallic pnthalocyanine anu copper phthalocyanine photodiodes.
These data are presently being analyzed and will be reported in more detail.
at a future date.


(6)   Study of the Lead Salts

             Graduate Student: B. H. Sachs

             The lead salts PbS, PbSe, and PbTe are of considerable practical

interest because of their use as photoconductive detectors and because of
their potential use in other applications. Because of this practical
interest, a considerable effort, both experimental and theoretical, had
been pl-iced on the determination of the band structure of these materials,

but there was clearly a need for more definitive work on the determination
of the band structure away fro-ii the band extrema. A photoemission study
has been undertaken to provide this.
             Experimental work en PbTe was completed in the summer of 1963, and
analysis of the data and writing of a technical article were completed
                                           17
d'iring the period covered by this report.    Work on PbS was completed in
the suriner of 1964 and the results were reported at a Physical Society

Meeting. 18 Additional analysis will be performed on the PbS results and

will appear in a future publication.




                                                         -101-
l^




     7                                                                                     r




         (7)   Quantum Efficiency and Radiative Lifetime in p-type GaAs
'                   Graduate Student: Juri Vilms

                    A new method for studying radiative recombination in uniformly doped

         semiconductors has been developed and applied to p-type GaAs. The bulk quantum

         efficiency is obtained by measuring photoluminescence as a function of the pene-
         trat-ion length of the exciting radiation. Using an estimated electron mobility,
         the total recombination lifetime of electrons (minority carriers) is found from
         this photoluminescence measurement, ind also independently by measuring surface
         photovoltage. The radiative lifetime is determined from the bulk quantum ef-
         ficiency and the total electron lifetime. The model on which these measurements

         are based accounts for the principal factors affecting the intensity of photo-
         luminescence, i.e., bulk quantum efficiency, surface recombination, and refraction
         and reflection of luminescence at the sample surface. The model is consistent

         with the experimental data for the p-type GaAs samples studied.
                    The bulk quantum-efficiency values obtained here are 8% at 300°K and
         28% at 80'K for two higher-efficiency samples, and six times lower for a third
         sample. The radiative lifetime of electrons is found to be ^-2 x 10 -8 sec at

         300°K, and 3 x 10 -10 sec at 80°K. The total lifetime of electrons (minority
         carriers) is found to be    1.5 x 10 -9 sec at 300°K and 10 -10 sec at 80'K for

         the two higher-efficiency samples, and 10 -10 sec at both temperatures for the
         third sample. 19


         (8)   Application of Results of Basic Materials Research

                    Working in conjunction with Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Missiles and
         Space Division, a study was made of the basic physics involved in the ultra-
         violet damage to the thermal control surfaces of space vehicles. An invited

         paper covering this work was presented at the 2nd Symposium on Protection
         Against Radiation in Space, sponsored by NASA, the Air Force, and the AEC. 20
                    Atte,.,pts are being made to relate the results of our basic photo-
         emission investigations to the practical problems ncountered by government
         agencies in their use of practical photoemission devices. An invited paper
         on this subject was given at the Conference on Photoelectric and Secondary

         Electron Emission at the University of Minnesota, August 9-10, 1965, sponsored

         by the IEEE and the Air Force, Army, and Navy. A presentation was made at the
         NASA Round Table on Optical Detectors in Space held at the Jet Propulsion

         Laboratory, Pasadena, California, April 27, 1964.



                                             -102-
Reference Publications and Presentations:
      1. * N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "d-Band of Cadmium in Cadmium
               S011fide--Photoemission Studies," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 631
               (Oct. 1964). Also presented at Am. Phys. Soc. Chicago Meeting.
      2.   W. E. Spicer, "Plietoemissive Studies of Band Structure--Recent
               Results," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 620 (Oct. 1964). Also pre-
               sented at Am. Phys. Soc. Chicago Meeting.
      3.   N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of CdS--Photo-
               emission Studies," Phys. Rev. 138, A561 (Apr. 1965).
      4.   N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "Vacuum System Cleaving Mechanism
               for Photoemission Measurements of CdS Single Crystal in the
               Vacuum Ultraviolet," Rev. Sci. Instr. 36, 759 (June 1965)•
      5.   J.. L. Shay and W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of CdSe," Bull. Am.
               Phys. Soc. 9, 735 (Dec. 1964). Also presented at Am. Phys.
               Soc. Berkeley Meeting.
      6. t C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Auger Transition in Photoemission
               from Ag," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 619 (Oct. 1964). Also pre-
               sented at Am. Phys. Soc. Chicago Meeting.
     7.    W. E. Spicer, C. N. Berglund, and A. Y.-C. Y,_, "Non.direct Optical
               Transitions in ru," Bull. Am. Phys. S)c. 10, 375 (Mar. 1965).
               Also presented at Am. Phys. Soc. Kaasas City Meeting.
     8.    C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Photoemission Studies of Cu and
               Ag: Theory," Phys. Rev. 136, A1030 (Nov. 1964).
     9.    C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Photoemission Studies of Ca and
               Ag: Experiment," Phys. Rev. 136, A1044 (Nov. 1964).
    10.    W. E. Spicer and C. N. Berglund, "Measurements of Photoemitted
               Electron Energy Distributions by an AC Method," Rev. Sci.
               Instr. 35, 1665 (Dec. 1964).
     11.A. J. Blodgett, Jr. and W. E. Spicer, "Experimental Determination
               of the Den--ity of States in Ni and Fe," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc.
               9, 734 (Dec. 1964). Also presented at Am. Phys. Soc.
               Eerkeley Meeting.
     12.   W. E. Spicer and A. J. Blodgett, Jr., "Ferromagnetism and the
               Density of States in Ni and Fe," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 734
                (Dec. 1964). Also presented at Am. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting.
     13.   A. J. Blodgett, Jr. and W. E. Spicer, "The Density of States in
               Nickel," Phvs. Rev. Let. 15, 29 (July 1965).
     14.   A. J. Blodgett, W. E. Spicer, and A. Y.-C. Yu, "The Band Structure
               of Gd--Photoemission and Optical Studies," International Col-
               loquium on the Optical Properties and Electronic Structure of
               Metals and Alleys, Paris, Sept. 1965 (to be published).
     15.   W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of Noble and Transition Metals--
               Photoemission," International Colloquium on the Optical
               Properties and Electronic Structure of Metals and Alloys,
               Paris, Sept. 1965 (to be published) .


                                    -103-
- -w




            16.        W. F. Krolikowski and W. E. Spicer, "Energy Band Structure of
                           CuBr," bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 9, 735 (Dec. 1964). Also pre-
                           sented at Am. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting.
            17.        W. E. Spicer and G. Jo Lape.yre, "Photoe,,iission Investigation of
                           the Band Structure of PbTe," Phys. Rev. 139, A565 (July 1965).
            18.        B. H. Sachs and W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of FbS--Photo-
                           emission Studi es," Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 10, 598 (June 1965).
                           Also presented at Am. Phys. Sac. New York Meeting.
                  t,
            19.        J. Vilms and W. E. Spicer, "Quantum Efficiency and Radiative Life-
                           time in p-Type Gallium Arsenide," J. Appl. Phys. 9, 2815
                           (Sept. 1965).
            20. W. E. Spicer, "Radiation Effects in Optical Materials," Proc.
                     2nd Svrinosium on Protection Against Radiation in Space,
                     NASA SP- 71, Washington, 1965.




              Dr. Kindig is now on the faculty at the University of Colorado.

             t Dr. Berglund is now a member of the staff of Bell Telephone Labora-
       tories, Murray Hill, New Jersey.
             ^'Dr. Blodgett is now employed by IBM Components Development, East
       Fishkill Facility, Hopewell Junction, New York.

             A Dr. Vilms is presently in the Signal Corps, U.S. Army Electronics
       Laboratories, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.




                                              -104-
                                                                _A.




30. THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES AND DEFECT STRUCTURE OF SOLIDS                         L

    D. A. Stevenson, Associate Professor, Materials Science

    Graduate Students:
                R. A. Burmeister
                T. L. Larsen
                R . A. Reynolds
                G. B. Stringfellow
                R. R. Zupp

    Agency Support:
                AT (04-3)283
                DA - AR0(,-,)31-124-G102
                ARPA SD87


    Research Report:


    (1) Thermodynamic Properties and Defect Structure of Intermetallic Compounds
                Graduate Students: R. A. Burmeister
                                    T. L. Larsen
                                    R. A. Reynolds
                                    G. B. Stringfellow

    Technical Objective:
                To investigate tLe relationship between defect structure and
    properties in wide band gap semiconducting compounds.

    Approach:
                Defect structural control is achieved by cc.itrolled crystal
    growth techniques and by annealing single crystals in partial pressures
    of the component vapor. Techniques for structural characterization include
    optical transmission microscopy and optical absorption spectroscopy.

    Research Report:
                Techniques for crystal growth and structural characterization for
    the compounds zinc telluride and cadmium selenide have been developed. The
    influence of crystalline imperfections on the electrical transport proper-
    ties of cadmium selenide was studied. Measurements were made of the Hall
    coefficient, electrical resistivity, and magnetoresistance from 4.2°K to
    room temperature on crystals of differing defect structure, and the results




                                           -105-
were correlated with the defect structure. In zinc telluride, the self-

diffusion of zinc and tellurium was studied as a function of zinc and
tellurium partial pressures, and the results were interpreted in terms of
the dominant intrinsic defect equilibri-a.


(2) The Influence of Alloying Elements on the Carbon Activity in Austenite
            Graduate Student: R. R. Zupp

Technical Objective:

            To determine rile influence of alloying elements on the carbon
activity in steel.

Approach:
            A selective carbon transfer medium was developed in which carbon

in a binary iron-carbon steel is selectively equilibrated with caYb on in a
ternary steel alloy. Referring to the well-established daLa for the binary

steel, the activity in the ternary may be determined.


Research Report:

            The influence of vanadium on the activity of carbon in austenite
has been experimentally determined for vanadium contents of 0.25, 0.5, 1,

1.5, and 2W/o. The experimental data were analyzed with existing solution
theories and a new semi-empirical theory was developed which describes the
activity of carbon in the ternary alloy in terms of composition and an inter-

action parameter characteristic of the alloying element. It was shown that
this theory adequately describes the behavior of other ternary steels which
have been studied to date.




                                    -106-
31 . FLMA- ENTAL ASPECTS OF REACTIVITY IN INORGANIC SYSTEMS

    Henry Taube, Professor, Chemistry

    Professional Associates:
              M. Anbar
              H. Diebler
              P. Dodel
              R. Robson
              A. M. Sargeson

    Graduate S t • ' is :

              L. E. Bennett
              W. H. Breckenridge
              E. A. Deutsch
              J. E. French
              A. B. Hoffman
              J. K. Hurst
              R. B. Jordan
              D. J. LaFollette
              D. A. Loeliger
              T. J. Meyer
              F. R. Nordmeye r
              H. J. Price
              J. A. Stritar
              D. D. Thus ius
              P. B. Tjok
              E. Weissberger

    Technical Objective:
              The objective of the work is to re.ich a fundamental understanding
    of how one of the two general classes of chemical reactions takes place,
    namely the class of oxidation-reduction reactions. Most of our current con-
    cern is with homogeneous reactions in solution; this choice of area is
    dictated by the fact that the basic principles governing the riechanisms of
    reaction have still to be developed, and are more easily traceable in homo-
    geneous systems. One goal of the research is to understand heterogeneous

    reactions in the same depth, and the program will eventually embrace re-
    actions in which metals are deposited from solutions of their salts, or are
    converted from the elementary state to salts in solution, whether the
    changes are brought about by chemical agents or by electrolytic means.
    A connection between "electron transfer" in the systems we are studying and    e

    In solid semiconductors is developing, and the two fields have in common

    a concern with the mechanism of electron transfer.



                                        -107-
Approach:

            Any systems chosen for particular study are selected as they
qualify in affording opportunities to answer some general question on the
mechanism of oxidation reduction reactions. The experiments often call for
the preparation of new substances, but the most generally i ►ntportant experi-
mental e,idence concerns the identification of intermediate and final
products, and the measurement of reaction rates. Modern physicochemical
methods such as mass, infrared, nmr, and esr spectroscopy are essential

to the progress of the work.

Rcscarch Report:

            The themes we are pursuing in our current work are suggested by

the following questions:
      a. Howe are the rates and mechanisms of various oxidation-reduction
reactions dependent on the electronic structures of the components?
Specifically, we are developing a comparison between complexes of Co(III)
and of Ru(III) as oxidizing agents. Complexes of Co(III) accept electrons

into orbitals of e   symmetry, while those of Ru(III) accept electrons in
                   g
orbitals of t2 n symmetry. This difference in electron structure leads to
               0
profound differences in behavior w1iich can now be understood in a general
way, and as they are further investigated will provide a basis for under-
standing the observations in related systems not as amenable as these to
straightforward elucidation of mechanism.

      b. How are the rates and mechanisms affected by the properties of the
ligands? Of special interest here are systems in which a particular group
serves as a bridge to conduct the electron from the reducing agent to the
                                                                    2+
oxidizing agent. (Thus, it can be shown that in the reaction of Cr     with

                                                      2+


                            (NH 3 ) coo 2 CO C^
                                   5
                                                  H


the reducing agent attacks at the oxygen remot2 from the Co(III) center.)

Experiments are under way to learn whether the brid",ing groups function by
being converted to a radical ion, or as facilitating resonance transfer of
the electron, and if the latter, whether the mechanism of transfer is by

"super exchange" or by "double exchange."

                                    -108-
                                                                                         i`
                                                                                         i


      c. What dislocations in the coordination spheres accompany electron                E
transfer? The differences in geometry of the first coordination spheres

for adjacent oxidation states of the same element are often quite great.
                                                                2+
Thus it seems likely that in the reduction of Co(NH 3 ) 5 C1         with certain
reducing agents, Co(NH 3 )2+ is formed as an intermediate product. Experi-
ments are in progress searching for this and similar intermediates, as well
as isotopic fractionation experiments designed to detect the extent of bond
breaking in various coordination positions on electron transfer.


Reference Publications and Presentations:
      1.   Bo A. Zabin and H. Taube, "Reactions of ?Metal Oxides with Aquated
               Chromium(II) Ion," Inorg. Chem. 3, 963 (June 1964).
      2.   J. B. Hunt and 11. Taube, "Hydrogen Tracer Studies on the Reactions
               of Uranium Hydride with Aqueous Oxidizing Agents," Inorg.
               Chem. 3, 1431 (July 1964).
      3.   R. B. Jordan and H. Taube, "Kinetic and Tracer Studies on the
               Alkaline Hydrolysis of Co(NH 3 ) 5 0 2 CCF3 2 ," J. Am. Chem. Soc.
               86, 1686 (1964).

      4.   H. Taube, "How Do Redox Reactions Take Place?", Chemistry 38 (3),
               18 (1965).
      5.   J. F. Endicott and fl. Taube, "Studies on Oxidation-Reduction
               Reactions of Ruthenium Ammines," Inorg. Chc ra. 4, 43 , (1965).
      6.   J. H. Espenson and H. Taube, "Tracer Experiments p ith Ozone as
               Oxidizing Agent in Aqueous Solution," Inorg. Ci.nm. 4, 704
               (1965).
      7.   T. E. Rogers, J. H. Swinehard, and H. Taube, "The Exchange of
               Methanol Between Solvated Cations and Solvent. II," J. Phys.
               Chem. 69, 134 (Dec. 1964).
      8.   J. A. Jackson and H. Taube, "Chemical Shifts in the NMR Absorption
               for Oxygen-17 in Oxy-Ions," J. Phys. Chem. 69, 1844 (1965).
      9.   P. Dodel and H. Taube, "Die Kinetik des Elektronenubergangs von
               Vanadin (II) zu Koba 1 t (III)," Z. f. Phys i.k . Chem. (Neue Fo l ge )
               44, 92 (1965).
     10.   H. Taube, "Bridging Groups in Electron Transfer Reactions,"
               Mechan ism f of Inorganic Reactions, Advances in Chem. Series 49,
               .'ACS, Washington, D.C. 1965, p. 107. Also presented at the ACS
               Symposium on Mochanisms of Inorganic Reactions, University of
               Kansas, June 1964.
     11.   H. Diebler and H. Taube, "Kinetics of the Reduction of Halopenta-
               amminecoba1t(III) Complexes by Iron(II) and Vanadium(II),
               Inorg. Chem. 4, 1029 (July 1965).
     12.   D. A. Lieliger and H. Taube, "Configuration Changes in the Re-
               actions of Diazidobisethylenediammine Co(III), Inorg. Chem. 4,
               1032 (July 1965) .

                                     -109-
13.   11. Green, K. Schug, and H. Taube, "Isotopic Fractionation in
          Electron-Transfer R,::ctions," Inorg. Cheri. 1=, 1181; (Aug. 1565).
14.   D. I1 Huchitai and H. Taube, "The Monodentatc Fovin of the rIalo-
          natocrromium(III) Complex," Tnorg. Chem. 4, 16)0 (Nov. 1555).
15.   D. H. Huchital. and H. Talibe, "Ester Hydrolysis in the Reaction of
          1.ethyl and Ethylmalo riatopenta-anrinecobalt (III) Complexes
          with Chromous Ion," J. Ar,i. Chem. Soc. 87, 5371 (Dec. 1565).
16.   H. Taabe, ''Mechanisms of Cxidation with Oxygen," J Cnn. Physiol.
          49, 29 (Sept. 1965). Also presented at the Symposium on
          O,cygen sponsored by the New York Hart Association, Dec. 1964.




                               -11 0-
                                                                                             a




                                                                                     A




32. STRAIN ILA DENING AND FRACTURE OF ALLOYS AND COMPOSITE MATERIALS                     ►

    A. S. Tetelman, associate Professor, liatorials Science and
                           Engineering Mechanics

     Graduate Students:
                D.   M.   Barnett
                F.   A.   I. Darwish
                D.   E.   Hodgson
                C.   A.   Rau, Jr.
                R.   A.   Wullaert

    Agency Support:
                NASA Nsg-622
                DA- 31-124 -ARO (D) 251
                ARPA SD87


    Research Report:

     (1) Fracture of Composite Materials
                Graduate Students:        D. M. Barnett
                                          F. A. I. Darwish
                                          D. E. Hodgson
                                          C. A. Rau, Jr.

     Technical Objective:
                To determine microscopic and macroscopic means of improving
     toughness of composites.

    Approach:
                Drilling small holes in tensile and . act specimens, analyzing
     the effect of second phase on ductile-brittle transition of matrix, calcu-
     lating theoretically the dislocation distribution near a notch in a two-
     phase system, determining the relation between microcrack density and micro-
     strain in a cermet material.

    Research Report:
                We have determined that small drilled holes lower ductility of un-
     notched tensile specimens of Fe-Si but increase toughness and low transition
     temperature in low- and hi,;h-strength steels. We have also determined that
     particle shape, as well as particle content, affect the ductility and tran-
     sition temperature of hypo-cutectoid steels. The dislocation distribution
     near a notch in a two-phase system has been studied and we have begun
     preparation of cermet materials.

                                              -111-
t^




     (2) Strain Hardening and Fractu-Le of iron-Base Alloys
                 Graduate Student: R. A. Wullaert

     Technical Objective:

                 To determine the effecc of alloying elements and plastic strain
     on the ductility and toughness of steels, and to determine whether flaws
     can he removed by thermomechanical    treatments.

     Approach:

                 Measurement of the Charpy V-nocch toughness of iron-nickel low-
     carbon steels as a function of grain size; measurement of the density of
     microcracks observed by optical microscopy and the strain distribution

     around them after high-temperature annealing treatments.


     Research Report:

                 Heat treatments were carried out to determine variations in

     ferrite grain size in various nickel alloys. impact studies showed con-
     clusively that the primary effect of Ni additions to low-carbon steels is

     the refinement of ferrite grain size after normalizing. The intrinsic ef-
     fect of Ni on fracture transition temperature is no more than 10°C/1% Ni.




                                        -112-
.u.^"^^. __      ^-^II^..1C-        -^.ti.^^     ^^+-r•. rr^.'^^r^arr ^•!'r-ten-w   - .^^^--.. ..




                                                                                                    I




     33. APPLICATIONS OF DISLOCATION THEORY TO THE DEFORMATION OF OLIVINE, (Mg,Fe)2SiO4

              G. A. Thompson, Professor, Geophysics

              Graduate Student: Chapman Young

              Agency Support:       ARPA SD87


              Technical Objective:
                          To determine the role of dislocations in the deformation of

              olivine (and other ultra-mafic silicates) under conditions of high pressure
              and temperature.

              Approach:
                          Development of techniques for decorating and etching dislocations
              in olivine. Measurement of stress and strain rate as a function of dislo-
              cation densities and velocities. Development of simplified models for

              integrating observed dislocation behavior into the gross behavior of massive
              (essentially infinite) bodies of olivine with emphasis on the origin of
              deep earthquakes.

              Research Report:

                          Techniques for directly observing dislocations in olivine were
              developed during the previous period.
                          Apparatus for experimentally deforming single and polycrystal
              samples under conditions of high confining pressure (up to 10 kilobars)
              and high temperature (up to 1.'200°C) was designed and constructed. Data
              on olivine deformed in this equipment show that the naturally low dislo-
              cation densities and the ease with which new dislocations may become pinned
              in the ionic lattice could cause both a strain and a. strain-rate-dependent
              deformation behavior in olivine, and probably in other ultra-mafic silicates.

              Analysis of this behavior with a mathematical model on a digital computer
              indicates that the observed dislocation phenomena probably play a controlling

              role in the development and dynamic propagation of deep faults.




                                                   -113-
1




        34. CRYSTALLOGENICS

            W. A. Tiller, Professor, Materials Science

            Professional Associates:

                         H. Muir
                         S. O'Hara

            Graduate Students:

                         G.   Geering
                         R.   Hiskes
                         B.   Jindal
                         G.   Kotler
                         T.   Takahashi
                         L.   Tarshis

            Agency Support:
                         AF-AFOSR-731-65

            Technical Objective:
                         To gain a complete and quantitative understanding of th-- freezing
             process by controlling the state of chemical and physical perfection of
             crystals through control of the freezing process. The ultimate aim is the
             optimization and control of certain material properties.

            Approach:
                         Theoretical and experimental investigations of all the important
            elements of the freezing process: nucleation, interface attachment
             kinetics, solute transport, fluid motion, interface morphology, physical
             imper`ectiorts, and phase equilibria. The experiments are being carried out
             on a road range of materials to elucidate the essential physics of the
             problems.

            Research Report:
                         1. Partial staffing with competent research associates
    A                    2. Broad thesis topics outlined for six Ph.D. students

                         3. Special laboratory equipment purchased.




r

r

                                                 -114-
                                                                                     f


35. FUNDAMENTAL STUDIES OF MAGNETIC MATERIALS

    R. L. White, Associate Professor, Electrical Engineering and

                    Materials Science

    Professional Associate:
                T. G. Phillips

    Graduate Students:

                J. W. Allen
                T. F. Beaulieu
                R. Bene
                Y. Satoda

    Agency Support::

                ONR -225 (24)
                NSF GK-202
                ARPA SD-87

    Technical Objective:
                To understand the macroscopic properties of magnetic materials

    in terms of the atomic properties of the constituents.

    Approach:
                Spectroscopic studies, principally electron paramagnetic resonance

    and optical absorption, are conducted on the relevant magnetic ions, and
    the results of these studies are correlated with the macroscopic magnetic
    properties of solids built of these atoms.

    Research Report:
                Ferromagnetic Sulfides - Effort on this project during this period

    was concentrated primarily on attempts to synthesize the ferromagnetic
    sulfides. Hydrothermal techniques are required and relevant apparatus is

    being constructed.
             Spectroscopic and Fundamental Studies of Ma g netic Materials -
                                                                       3+
    Electron Paramagnetic Resonance studies have been conducted on Fe     and

    Gd 3+ in the orthoferrite family and upon Ce 3+ in the rare F=irth garnets.
    Information on Cie exchange interactions and upon the electric crystalline

    fields in these m:.cerials has been obtained. Theoretical and experimental

    studies of the magnetic exchange in Cr 2 0 3 are also under way. The intensi-
     ty, line width, and polarization characteristics of the exchange-split

    optical absorption lines are being studied.


                                        -115-
                                   SECTION D


                                 PUBLICATIONS



 1.   A. Abe and P. J. Flory, "The Thermodynamic Properties of Mixtures of Small,
           Non-Polar Molecules", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 1838-46 (Mar. 1965).

2.    R. Addison, B. A. Auld, H. J. Shaw, and D. K. Winslow, "Acoustic Beam in
           YIG by a Magnetic Field", Appl. Phys. Let. 6 (10) 196-8 (May 1965).

 3.   J. W. Allen and G. L. Pearson, "Ga-P-Zn and Ga-As-7,n Phase Diagrams and
           Their Relevance to Diffusion Problems", Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 10,
           363 (Mar. 1965).

4.    J. H. Anderson, Jr. and K. A. Wickersheim, "Near Infrared Characterization
           of Water and Hydroxyl Groups on Silica Surfaces", Surface Science 2,
           252-260 (1964).
                           Hi
5.    W. W. Anderson, "Tb     as a Recombination Center in ZnS", Phys. Rev. 136,
           A556 (Oct. 1964) .

6.    W. W. Anderson and T. C. Lee, "Edge Emission Involving Manganese Impurities
           in GaAs at 4.2 0 I", Solid State Communications 2 1 265 (1964).

 7.   J. Ardell, H. Reiss, and W. D. Nix, "Statist.ics of Jogs on Dislocations
           at Equilibrium", J. Appl. Phys. 36, 1727 (May 1965).

8.    T. W. Barbee, Jr. and R. A. Huggins, "Dislocation Structures in Deformed
           and Recovered Tantalum", J. Less Com. Met. 8, 306 (1965).

 9.   C. R. Barrett and 0. D. Sherby, "Influence of Stacking Fault Energy on High-
           Temperature Creep of Pure Metals", Trans. AIMS 233, 1116-19 (June
           1965).

10.   C. R. Barrett and U. D. Sherby, "Steady State Creep Characteristics of
           Polycrystalline Copper in the Temperature Range 400 0 to 950°C",
           Trans. AIMS, 230, 1:322-27 (Oct. 1964).

11.   C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spice-, "Auger Transition in Photoemission from
           Ag", Bull. Amer. Phys. Su,:. 9, 619 (Oct. 1964). Also presented at
           Amer. Phys. Soc. Chicago Meeting.

12.   C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Photoemission Studies of Cu and Ag:
           Theory", Phys. Rev. 136, A1030 (Nov. 1964).

13.   C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Photoemission Studies of Cu and Ag:
           Experiment", Phys. Rev. 136, A1044 (Nov. 1964).




                                      -116-
                                                                                         I




14.   A. J. l)lodgett, Jr. and W. H. Spicer, "Experimental Determination of the      L

           Density of States in Ni and Fe", Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 9, 734
            (Dec. 1964). Also presented at Amer. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting.

15.   M. Bol and W. M. Fairbank, "Measurement of the London Moment", Proceedings
           of the IX International Conference on Low Tempezature Physics, Plenum
           Press, N. Y., p. 471 (1964).

16.   A. Brant and P. J. Flory, "The Role of Dipole Interactions in Determining
           Folypeptide Configurations", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 663-4 (Feb. 1965).

17.   J. L. Brimhall and R. A. Huggins, "Electron Microscopic Observations of
           Deformed Internally Oxidized Alloys", Trans. AIME 233, 1076 (1965).

18.   R. H. Bube and F. Cardon, "Determination of Capture Cross Sections by
           Optical Quenching of Photoconductivity", J. Appl. Phys. 35, 2712
           (Sept. 1964) .                                          r

19.   R. H. Bube, "Comparison of Methods for Determining Electron Trap Distribu-
           tion", J. Appl. Phys. 35, 3067 (Oct. 1964).

20.   M. G. Buehler, W. Shockley, and G. L. Pearson, "Hall Measurements Using
           Corbino-Like Current Sources in Thin Circular Disks", Appl. Phys.
           Let. 5, (11) 228 (Dec. 1964).

21.   F. Cardon and R. H. Bube, "Theor y of Superlinear Photoconductivity in CdS
           and Related Materials", J. Appl. Phys. 35, 3344 (Nov. 1964).

22.   H. C. Casey, Jr., and G. L. Pearson, "Rare Earths in C-)valent Semicon-
           ductors: The Thulium-Gallium Arsenide System", J. Appl. Phys. 35
            (11) , 3407-07 (Nov. 1964) .

23.   I. C. Chang and W. W. Anderson, "Paramagnetic Resonance of Er b in
           Calcium and Strontium Oxide", Phys. Let. 1-3 (2) (Nov. 1964).

24.   Y. S. Chen and G. L. Pearson, "Lattic Absorption in GaAs P     Single
           Crystals", Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 10, 369 (Mar. 1965)x. 1-x

25.   F. W. Clinard and 0. D. Sherby, "Strength of Iron During Allotropic
           Transformation", Acta Met. 12, 911-19 (Dec. 1964).

26.   P. Dodel and H. Taub. ; "Die Kinetik des Elektronenubergangs von Vanadin(II)
           zu Kobalt (III)", Z. f. Physik. Chem. (Neue Folge) , 44, 92 (1965) .

27.   J. L. Emmett, A. L. Schawlow, and E. 1i. Weinberg, "Direct Measurement of
           Zenon Flashtube Opacity", J. Appl. Phy q . 35 (9) 2601-4 (Sept. 1964).

28.   J. F. Endicott and H. Taube, "Studies on Oxidation-Red ,iction Reactions
           of Ruthenium Ammines", Inorg. Chem. 4, 437 (1965).




                                     -117-
.. s.^-,^ *, . '^M ^            ,..^.^.^.-,...-.-...+w.... .^-   ._^w.-+.rn'`.^y,'^`."..r".,,.'-.'Y-:o;^ii.   jam►   .. _`   r-.




         I




                       29.   J. H. Espenson and H. Taube, "Tracer Experiments with Ozone as Oxidizing
                                  Agent in Aqueous Solution", Inorg. Chem. 4, 704 (1965).

                       30.   V. Evtuhov and A. E. Siegman, "A ''twisted-Mode' Technique for Obtaining
                                  Axially Uniform Energy Density in a Laser Cavity", Appl. Opt. 4 (1)
                                   (Jan. 1965).

                       31.   P. J. Flory, "Statistical Thermodynamics of Liquid Mixtures", J. Am.
                                  Chem. Soc. 87, 1833 - 38 (May 1965).

                       32.   P. J. Flory and A. Abe, "'thermodynamic Properties of Nonpolar Mixtures
                                  of Small Molecules", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86, 3563-65 (Sept. 1964).

                       33.   P. J. Flory and R. L. Jernigan, "Second and Fourth Moments of Chain
                                  Molecules", J. Chem. Phys. 42, 3509-19 (May 1965).

                       34.   P. J. Flory and W. J. Leonard, Jr., "Thermodynamic Properties of Solutions
                                  of Helical Polypeptides", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 2102-08 (May 1965).

                       35.   P. J. Flory, R. A. Orwo11., and A. Vrij, "Statistical Thermodynamics of
                                  Chain Molecule Liquids. I. An Equation of State for Normal Paraffin
                                  Hydrocarbons. II. Liquid Mixtures of Normal Paraffin Hydrocarbons",
                                   J. Am. Che. . Soc. 86, 3507 - 20 (Sept. 1964).

                       36.   A. M. Goldman and W. M. Fairbank, "Persistent Currents and Flux Quantiza-
                                  tion in Superconducting Rings Interrupted by Josephson Junctions",
                                  Proceedings of the IX International Conference on Low Temperature
                                  Physics, Plenum Press, N. Y., p. 421 (1964).

                       37.   0. H. Griffith, "ESR and Electronic Structure of the RCHOR' Ether Radicals",
                                  J. Chem. Phys. 42, 2651 (Apr. 1965).

                       38.   0. H. Griffith, A. L. Kwiram, and H. M. McConnell, "An ESR Study of X-
                                  irradiated Fumeric Acid-Urea Crystals", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86, 3937
                                    (Oct. 1964).

                       39.   0. H. Griffith and H. M. McConnell, "ESR of RCHCOR' Radicals in X-
                                    irradiated Ketone - Urea Inclusion Compounds", J. Chem. Phys. 42
                                    2644 (Apr. 1965) .

                       40.   0. H. Griffith and H. M. McConnell, "Magnetic Resonance of the Triplet
                                  State of * Oriented Pyrene Molecules", J. Phys. Chem. 69, 1429
                                    (May 1965).

                       41.   0. H. Griffith and H. M. McConnell, "ESR and Molecular Motl_on of the
                                  RCH2CHOOR' Radical in X-irradiated Ester-Urea Inclusion Compounds",
                                  J. Chem. Phys. 41, 1093 (Aug. 1964).

                       42.   D. Halford and H. M. McConnell, "Pressure Effect on Exciton Magnetic
                                  Resonance", J. Chem. Phys. 41, 898 (Aug. 1964).

             r



                                                                                         -118-
                                                                                       Jr,
                                                                                        'do




43.   W. H. Haydl, "Determi.nation of the Relative Acoustic Gain in Semiconduc-
           tors", Rev. Sci . Instr. .37 (5) 681-2 (May 1965) .

44.   W. H. Haydl, K. B16tekjaer, and C. F. Quate, "Coupling to Hypersonic
           Waves", J. Acoustical. Soc. of Am. 36 (9) 1670-77 (Sept. 1964).

45.   S. E. Harris, "Demodulation of Phase-Modulated Light Using BirefrinBent
           Crystals", Proc . IEEEI 52 (7) (July 1964) .

46.   S. E. Harris, E. 0. Ammann, and I. C. Chang, "Optical Network Synthesis
           Using Birefringent Cr y stals. I. Synthesis of Lossless Networks of
           Equal-Length Crystals", J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 54 (10) pp. 1267-79
           (Oct. 1964).

47.   S. E. Harris and A. E. Siegman, "A Technique for Optical Frequency
           Translation Utilizing the Quadratic Electrooptic Effect in Cubic
           Crystals", Appl. Opt. 3 (9) (Sept. 1964).

48.   S. E. Harris and R. Targ, "FM Oscillation of the He-Ne Laser", Appl.
           Phys. Let. 5 (10) 202-4 (Nov. 1964) .

49.   C. B. Hess and W. M. Fairbank, "Angular Momentum of Helium II in a
           Rotating Cylinder", Proceedings of the IX International Conference
           on Low Temperature Physics, Plenum Press, N. Y., p. 188 (1964).

50.   B. M. Hoffman, R. M. Metzger, and H. M. McConnc i .l, "Charge-Transfer in
           Molecular Crystals", Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 53, 46 (Jan. 1965).

51.   J. A. Hren and 0. D. Sherby, "The Influence of Long-Range Order on Some
           Mechanical Properties of an Iron-Cobalt Alloy", Appl. Mat. Res. 4,
           41-46 (Jan. 1965).

52.   J. B. Hunt and H. Taube, "Hydrogen Tracer Studies on the Reactions of
           Uranium Hydride with Aqueous Oxidizing Agents", Inorg. Chem. 3,
           1431 (July 1964) .

53.   G. F. Imbusch, W. M. Yen, and A. L. Schawlow, "Isotope Shift in the R
           Lines of Chromium in Ruby and Mg0", Phys. Rev. 136, 481 (1964).

54.   J. A. Jackson and H. Taube, "Chemical Shifts in the NMR Absorption for
           Oxygen-17 in Oxy-Ions", J. Phys. Chem. 69, 1844 (1965).

55.   R. B. Jordan and H. Taube, "Kine^ ;c and 'Tracer Studies on the Alkaline
           Hydrolysis oL Co(NG.,) 5 0 2 CCF""3 ", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86, 1686 (1964).

56.   N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of CdS -- Photoemission
           Studies", Phys. Rev. 138, A561 (Apr. 1965).




                                     -119-
t




    57.   N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "Vacuum System Cleavin,; Mechanism for
               Y►:otoemission Measurements of CdS Single Crystal in the Vacuum
               Ultraviolet", Rev. Sci. Instr. 36, 759 (June 1965).

    58.   N. B. Kindig and W. E. Spicer, "d-Band of Cadmium in Cadmium Sulfide--
               Photoemission Studies", Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 9, 631 (Oct. 1964).
               Also presented at Amer. Phys. Soc. Chica g o Meeting.

    59.   G. K. Klauminzer, H. W. Moos, and P. L. Scutt, "2 - y 2   Absorption
               Spectrum of Ruby", Bull Am. Phys. Soc. 9 (2) E (Dec.2 1964). Also
               presented at Am. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting (Dec. 1964).

    60.   W. F. Krolikowski and W. E. Spicer, "Energy Band Structure of CuBr",
               Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 9, 735 (Dec. 1964). Also presented at
               Amer. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting.

    61.   J. I. Krugler, C. G. Montgomery, and H. M. McConnell, "Collective
               Electronic States in Molecular Crystals", J. Chem. Phys. 41, 2421
               (Oct. 1964).

    62.   A. L. Kwiram, B. S. Deaver, Jr., and W. M. Fairbank, "Quantized Flux in
               Superconducting Cylinders", Proceedin_.;s of the IX International
               Conference on Low Temperature Physics, Plenum Press, N. Y. p. 451
                (1964).
    63.   T. C. Lee and W. W. Anderson, "Edge Emission Involving Manganese Irnpur-
               ities in GaAs at 4.2°K", Solid State Communications 2, 265-8 (1964).

    64.   G. Liebling and H. M. McConnell, "A Study of Molecular Orbital Degeneracy
               in C 5 H 5 ", J. Chem. Phys. 42, 3931C (June 1965).

    65.   W. A. Little, "Superconductivity at Room Temperature", Sci. Amer. 212
               (2), 21-28 (Feb. 1965).

    66.   W. A. Little, "Supraleitung in organischen Makromolekulen bei Raumtemper-
               atur", LTMSCHAU, Heft. 7, 197-8 (1965).

    67.   J. L. Lytton, "Influence of Ferromagnetic Elastic Modulus Relaxation on
               the Determination of Magnetic Specific Heat of Fe, Ni, and Co",
               J. Appl. Phys. 35, 2397-2406 (Aug. 1964).

    68.   J. L. Lytton, J. A. Hren, K. Kamber, and 0. D. Sherby, "Apparatus for the
               Determination of Dynamic Young's Modulus and Internal Friction in
               Vacuum at Temperatures from 25% to 1200°C", British J. Appl. Phys.
               15, 1573-83 (Aug. 1964).

    69.   J. E. Mark and P. J. Flory, "The Configuration of the Polyoxyethylene
               Chain", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 1415-28 (Apr. 1965).

    70.   J. E. Mark and P. J. Flory, "The Configuration of Vinyl Polymers. Experi-
               mental Results", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 87, 1423-29 (Apr. 1965).




                                        -120-
                                                                                               ^A




                  .a-t .-




                                                                                          It
71.   H. M. McConnell, "Magnetic Excitations in Molecular Crystals", Molecular
          Biophysics, edited by B. Pullman (Academic Press Inc., New York, 1 965).

72.   L. Meyers and W. A. Little, "Apparent Lack of Long Range Order in Super-
           conducting Vanadium", Phys. Rev. Let. li, 325A (Sept. 1964).

73.   W. D. Nix and R. A. Huggins, "Technique for the Determination of the
           Magnetic Histary of Local Regions in Cubic Ferromanets", J. Appl.
           Phys. 35, 3057 (July 1964).

74.   W. D. Nix and R. A. lluggins, "Coercive Force of Iron Resulting from the
           Interaction of Domain Boundaries with Large Nonmagnetic Inclusions",
           Phys. Rev. 135, A401 (Oct. 1964).

75.   T. 0. Ogurtani and R. A. Huggins, "Contribution of Conduction Electron
           Redistribution to Quadrupole Interactions in Plastically Deformed
           Copper", Phys. Rev. 137, A1736 (1965).

76.   S. Ohnishi and It. M. McConnell, "Interaction of the ka ,- 'ical Ion Chlor-
           promazine with DNA", J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97, 2293 (May 1965).

77.   I. Ortenburger, "Low-Temperature Magnetization of the S= Heisenberg
           Ferro-Magnet", Phys. Rev. 136, (5A) x\1374-5 (Nov. 1964).

78.   G. A. Parks, "The Isoelectric Points of Solid Oxides, Solid Hydroxides,
           and Aqueous Hydroxo Complex Systems", Chem. Rev. 65, 177- 198
            (Apr. 1965).

79.   G. L. Pearson, H. R. Potts, and V. G. Macres, "Defect Structures in
           Quenched and Annealed GaAs ;;rystals", Proceedings International
           Conference on Radiation Damage in Semiconductors,
                                                     N        Dunod, Paris,
           p. 197 (L964).

80.   J. M. Pierce, H. A. Schwettman, P. B. Wilson, and W. M. Fairbank, "RF
           Losses in Superconducting Lead and Niobium", Proceedings of the IX
           International Conference on Low TemperaturePhysics, Plenum Press,
           N. Y., p. 396 (1964).

81.   S. M. Puri and T. H. Geba l le , ' : Phonon-Drag in cl — Type InS,b" , Phys. Rev.
            136, (6A) , A1767-74 (Dec. 1964) .

82.   T. E. Rogers, J. El. Swinehard, and H. Taube, "The Exchange of Methanol
           Between Solvated Cations and Solvent. I1", J. Phys. Chem. 69, 134
            (Dec. 1964) .

83.   M. L. Rudee and R. A. Huggins, "Some Aspects of Solute Segregat'_on to
           Stacking Faults", Phil. Ma;;. 11, 531) (19/.5)

84.   A. L. Schawlow, "Exchange-Coupled Ion Pairs in Ruby", Bull. Am. Phys.
           Soc. 9, (2) 715 (Dec. 1964). Also presented at the Am. Phys. Soc.
           Berkeley Meeting (Dec. 1964).



                                        -121-
                                                     3+
85. A. L. Schawlow, "Vibrational Sidebands in MhO:Cr    ", Bull. Am. Phys. Soc.
          10, (2) 107 (Jan. 1965). Also presented at the Am. Phys. Soc. New
          York Meeting (Jan. 1965).

85. G. Schoeck, E. Bisollni, and J. Shyne, "The Activation Energy for Hiati
           Temperature Internal Friction", Acta Met. L 2 ,   1466 (1964).

87.   P E. Seiden and M. Sparks, "Frequency Dependence of the Two-Magnon
           Ferrimagnetic Resonance Linewidth", Phys. Rev. A137, 1276-81
           (Feb. 1965).

88.   J. L. Shay and W. E. Spicer, "Band Structure of CdSe", Bull. Amer. Phys.
           Soc. 9 3 735 (Dec.. 1964). Also presented at Amer. Phys. Soc. Berkeley
           Moe ting.

89.   J. C. Shyne and IV. F). Nix, "Dislocations in Martensite Inherited from
           Austenite", Acta Met. 13, 869 (1965).

90.   11. J. Silverstone, D. E. Wood, and H. M. McConnell, "A Study of Molecular
                                         J. Chem. Phys. 41, 2311 (Oct. 1964).
           Orbital DegenCracy in C 7 H 7 ",

91.   M. Sparks, "Ferro;ra,;netic Resonance Porosity Linewidth Theory in Poly
           Crystalline Insulators", J. Appl. Phys. 36, 1570 (1960.

92.   1d. E. Spicer, "Photoemissive Studies of Band Structure -- Recent Results",
           Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 9, 620 (Oct. 1964). Also presented at Amer.
           Phys. Soc. Chicago Meeting.

93.   W. E. Spicer, "Radiation Effects in Optical Materials", Pry cueding.,;
           Second Symposium on Protectior Against Radiation in Space, NASA
           SP-71, Washington, 1965.

94.   f4. L. Spicer and C. N. Berglund, "Measurements of Photoemitted Electron
           Energv Distributions by an AC Method", Rev. Sci. Instr. 35, 1665
           (Doc. 1964) .

95.   W. F. Spicer, C. N. Berglund, and A. Y-C. Yu, "Norndirc,:t Optical Tran-
           sitions in Cu", Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 10, 375 (Mar. 1955. Also
           presented at Amer. Phys. Soc. Kansas City M-eting.

96.   W. 11. Spicer and A. J. Blodgett, Jr., "Ferromagnetism and t:he Density
           of States in Ni and Fe", Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 9, 734 (Dec. 1964).
           Also presented at Amer. Phys. Soc. Berkeley Meeting.

97.   H. Sonnenberg, H. Heffner, and W. Spicer, "Two-Photon Photoelectric
           Effect in Cs 3 Sb", Al , pl. Phys. Let. 5(5), 95 - 6 (Sept. 1964).

98.   R. A. Soref and It. W. ^loos, "Optical Second-Harmo^rnic Generation in ZnS-
           CdS and CdS-CdSe Alleys", J. Appl. Phys. 35 (7) 2152 - 8 (July 1964).




                                      -122-
 99.   T. G. Stoebe, T. O. Oourtani, and R. A. Huggins, "Influence of Paramagnetic
            Impurities on the Temperature Dependence of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
            Lines" ; Phys. Rev. 138, A239 (1965).

100.   T. B. Swanson and V. W. Laurie, "Electron Magnetic Resonance and Electronic
            Spectra of the Tetrachloroferrate(III) ion in Nonaqueous Solution",
            J. Phys. Chem. 69 (1), 244-50 (Jan. 1965).

101.   H. Taube, "Bridging Groups in Electron Transfer Reactions", Mechanisms of
            Inorganic Reactions, Advances in Chem. Series 49, ACS. Washington, D. C.
            p. 107, 1965. Also presented at the ACS Symposium on Mechanisms of
            Inorganic Reactions, University of Kansas, June, 1964.

102.   H. Taube, "How Do Redox Reactions Take Place?", Chemistry 38, 18 (1965).

103.   J. Trela and W. M. Fairbank, "An Attempt to Observe the Creation of a
            S i n-le Quantized Vortex Ring", Proceedings_ of thu IX International
            Conference on Low Temperature Physics, Plenum Press, N. Y., p. 71
             (1964) .

104.   K. A. Wickersheim and G. K. Korpi, "Interpretation of the Infrared
            Spectrum of Boehmite", J. Chem. Phys. 1+2, 579-583 (Jan. 1965).

105.   F. C. Witteborn, L. V. Knight, and W. M. Fairbank, "ise of Low Temperature
            Techniques to Measure Gravitational Forces on Changed Particles",
            Proceedings of the IX L n ternational Conference on Low Temperature
            Physics, Plenum Press, N. Y., p. 1248 (1964).

106.   W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott, and A. L. Schawlow, "Phonon-Induced Relaxation
            in Excited Optical States of Trivalent Prc.seod j-mium in LaF 2 ",Phys.
            Rev. 136, A271 (1964) .

107.   W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott, and P. L. Scott, "Correlation of the jQach
            Relaxation Coefficient with Optical Linewidths: LaF 3 :Er ", Phys.
            Rev. 137, A1109 (1965).

108.   W. M. Yen, W. C. Scott, and R. M. White, "Temperature Dependence of the
            Optical Spectra of Ordered Materials: MnF 2 ", Bull. Am. Phys. Soc.
            9, 715 (1964). Also presented at the Am. Phys. Soc. Berkeley
            Meeting (Dec. 1964).

109.   B. A. Zabin and Ii. Taube, "Reactions of Metal Oxides with Aquated
            Chromium(II) Ion", Inorg. Chem. 3, 963 (June 1964).




                                                                                       ..


                                      -123-
                                         SECTION E

                                   DOCTORAL DISSERTATIONS



             1.   J. H. Anderson, Jr., "Infra red Spectroscopy and Electrical
                        Conductivity of Silica in the Presence of Adsorbed Water",
                        Materials Science (June 1965)

             2.   A. J. Ardell, "Creep and Atomic Mobility in Polycrystalline
                        Zirconium", Materials Science (Oct. 1964)

             3.   P. H. Bardell, Jr. "Hot-Electro:: Transport in Thin Copper Films",
                        Electrical Engineering (Jan. 1.965)

            4.    C. R. Barrett, "The Influence of Grain Boundaries and Sacking
                        Faults on High Temperature Plastic Deformation", Materials
                        Science (Jan. 1965)

             5.   A. J. Blodgett, Jr. "Band Structure and Ferromagnetism in Nickel,
                        Iron, and Gadolinium: Photoemission Studies", Electrical
                        Engineering (June 1965)

            6.    M. Bol, "The Measurement of the London Moment". Physics (June 1965)

             7.   R. A. Burmeister, "The Influence of Crystalline Imperfections on
                        the Electrical Transport Properties of Cadmium Selenide",
                        Materials Science (Apr. 1.965)

                  I-C. Chang, "Electron Paramagnetic Resonance of Erbium and
                        Dysprosium in Cubic Crystals", Electrical Engineering (Apr. 1965)

             9.   F. W. Clinard, Jr., "Behavior of Iron During Allotropic Transformation",
                        Materials Science (Apr. 1965)

            10.   A. M. Cowle y , "Surface States and Barrier Height in Metal-Semiconductor
                        Surface Barrier Diodes", Electrical Engineering (June 1965)

            11.   R. R. Dils, "Cation Interdiffusion in the Chromia-Alumina System",
                        Materials Science (June 1965)

            12.   D. J. Dumin, "Low-Temperature Properties of Gallium Arsenide Diodes",
                        Electrical Engineering (Jan. 1965)

            13.   A. M. Goldman, "Macroscopic Quantum Effects in Superconducting Rings
                        Interrupted by Insulating Junctions", Physics (June 1965)

            14.   T. D. Gulden, "Internal Friction of Alkali Metals and Alloys",
                        Materials Science (June 1965)




                                           -124-



                                                     .. _....+w».a.. ,...,en,.. w.   .F.w -,# a,.,e,,
olvvp"rl^
                                                                                           s
                                                                               •




15.   F. H. Hammad, "Yield Point Phenomena in Polycrystalline Alur______
            Materials Science (Apr. 1965)

16.   M. L. Hammond, "Metal Diffusion in Pyrolytic Graphite", Materials
            Science (June 1965)

17.   D. H. Huchital, "Methyl--and Ethylmalonates as Bridging Groups in
            Electron Transfer Reactions", Chemistry (Apr. 1965)

18.   G. F. Imbusch, "On Sharp Optical Transitions in Crystals: Effect3 of
            Static and Dynamic Perturbations", Physics (Jan. 1965)

19.   S. S. Jha, "I. Theory of Optical Harmonic Generation at a Metal
            Surface; II. Width of Resonance Lines in a Double Frequency
            RF Field", Physics (Jan. 1965)

20.   N. B. Kindig, "Band Structure and Surface Effects in Cadmium Sulfide
            Photoemission Studies", Electrical Engineering (Oct. 1964)

21.   G. K. Korpi, "Electrokinetic and Ion Exchange of Properties of
            Aluminum Oxide and Hydroxides", Mineral Engi-leering (Apr. 1965)

22. i • C. Lee, "A Study of Optical Spectra Associated with Neodymium and
            Manganese in GaAs", Electrical Engineering (Apr. 1965)

23.   D. A. Loeliger, "The Steric Course of Induced Equation of Some Cobalt
            Complexes", Chemistry (Dec. 1964)

24.   R. R-R. Mehta, "Analytical Study of Zinc Diffusion in Gallium Arsenide
            and the Electrical Properties of the Resulting Diffused Layers",
            Electrical Engineering (Jan. 1965)

25.   L. H. Meyers, "Flux Quantization in Transition Elements", Physics
            (Jan. 1965)

26.   L. F. Mollenauer, "Exchange-Coupled Chromium Ion Pairs in Ruby",
            Physics (June 1965)

27.   R. D. Nelson, "The Low Temperature Allotropic Transformations in
            Plutonium", Materials Science (June 1965)

28.   T. 0. Ogurtani, "The Theory of Nuclear Quadrupole Interactions Related
            to Imperfections in Metals", Materials Science (Jan. 1965)

29.   M. Omori, "Study of Parallel Primping in Microwave Ferrites",
            Electrical Engineering (Apr. 1965)

30.   I. A. B. Ortenburger, "Green's Function Calculation of the Saturation
            Magnetization of the Heisenberg Ferromagnet at Low Temperatures,
            and the Magnetic Contribution to Electrical Resistivity",
            Physics ( June 1965)




                                -125-


                                                                                               t
                                                                                   d^ 'f
    31.   H. R. Potts, "Electron Microprobe Study of Lattice-Point Defects in
                Semiconductor Single Crystals", F.lectricel Engineering (Oct.
                  1964)

    32.   M. L. Rudee, "Some Aspects of the Interaction of Impurities with                  •
                Dislocations in Crystals", Materials Science (Jan. 1965)

    33.   W. T. Sommer, "The Interaction of Free Electrons with Liquid Helium",
                Physics (Jan. 1965)

    34.   T. G. Stoebc, "Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of Difflision in
                Lithium Fluoride", Materials Science (June 1965)

    35.   R. E. Tokheim, "Saturation Phenomena in Zn 2 Y Ferrite at Frequencies
                Below Resonance", Electrical Engineering (Apr. 1965)

    36.   J. Vilms, "Quantum Efficiency and Radiativ , Lifetime in p-Type GaAs",
                  Electrical Engineering, (Jan. i('65)

    37.   R. M. White, "A Theo-etical Investigation of the High Power Behavior
                of Magnetic Insulators", Physics (Jan. 1965)

    38.   F. C. Witteborn, "Free Fall Experiments with Negative Ions and
                Electrons", Physics (June 1965)

    39.   R. C. Woodbury, "Nondestructive Readout and Partial Switching; of the
                Net Magnetisation in Fifty Percent Nickel-Iron", Electrical
                Engineering (June 1965)

    40.    B. Pf. Wu, "A Study of Red Photoluminescence in Gallium Phosphide
                 Crystals", Electrical Engineering (June 1965)




S
                                                          -126-



          SrsE'   ti.,^^^ .....r-.-,......4-+.r^^'^'^!'+ ^^lnR w..ia Ya/t'A ► "_^^ --   ^   „vim
                                 A P P E N D I X


 I. FACULTY MEMBERS PARTICIPATING IN MATERIALS RESEARCH


       Name                    _ Titte                         Department


 W. W. Anderson             Assistant Professor      Electrical Engineering

 M. J. Eoudart              Professor                Chemical Engineering and
                                                       Chemistry
 R. H. Bube                 Professor                Materiels Science and
                                                       Electrical Engineering
 W. M. Fai.rbank            Professor                Physics

* P. J. Flo-.y              Jackson Wood Professor   Chemistry

 H. 0. Fuchs                Professor                Mechanical Engineering
                                                       Design Division
 J. F. Gibbons              Professor                Electrical Engineering

 F. E. Harris               Associate Professor      Chemistry

14 H. Heffner               Professor                Electrical Engineering and
                                                       Applied Physics
 R. Hofstadr_er             Professor                Physics

*11. A. Huggins             Professor                Materials Science

 V. W. Laurie               Assistant Professor      Chemistry

tW. A. Little               Professor                Physics

 V. G. Macres               Assistant Professor      Materials Science

 II. M. McConnell           Professor                Chemistry

tJ. L. Moll                 Professor                Electrical Engineering

 W. D. Nix                  Assistant Professor      Materials Science


* CMR Executive Committee
tOn leave during academic year




                                        -127-
   1



1K -




        G. A. Parks               Associate Professor      Mineral Engineerin;

                                                                                        .
        N. A. Parlee              Professor                Mineral Engineering

       '` G. L. Pearson           Prof.^s;or               Chemistry

        P. L. Pratt               Visiting Professor       Materials Science

        C. F. Quate               Professor                Applied Physics and
                                                             Electrical Engineering,

        C. W. Richards            Associate Professor      Civil Engineering

       *A. L. Schawlow            Professor                Physics

        P. L. Scott               Assistant Professor      Physics

       '`0. C. Shepard            Professor                Materials Science

        0. D. Sherby              Professor                Materials Science

        W. B. Shockley            Alexander M. Poniatoff   Engineerinb and
                                    Professor                Applied Science

        J. C. Shyne               Associate Professor      Materials Science

        A. E. Siegman             Professor                Electrical Engineering

        P. G. Simpson             Assistant Professor      Chemistry

        M. S. Sparks              Associate Professor      Applied Physics and
                                                             Electrical Engineering

        W. E. Spicer              Associate Professor      Electrical Engineering and
                                                             Materials Science

        D. A. Stevenson           Associate Professor      Materials Science

        H. Taube                  Professor                Chemistry

        A. S. Tetel.man           Associate Professor      Materials Science and
                                                             Engineering Mechanics

        W. A. Tiller              Professor                Materials Science

        C. A. Wert                Visiting Professor       Materials Science

        R. L. White               Associate Professor      Electrical Engineering and
                                                             Materials Science


       *CMR Executive Committee




                                               -128-


41
                                                                                                      i
                          - . . . ---- -             ---                       ----------   --^


                                                                                                          C




                                                                                                  L


II. RESEARCH ASSOCIATES AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF


    A. Abe                                     Chemistry
    J. W. Allen                                Electrical Engineering
    M. Anbar                                   Chemistry
    B. A. Auld                                 Microwave
    D. A. Brant                                Chemistry


    M.    J. Buckingham                        Physics
    T. D. Buckman                              Chemistry
     H. Budzikiewicz                           Chemistry
    D. Chauvy                                  Electrical Engineering
    D. W. Cornell                              Chemistry


     B. S. Deaver, Jr.                         Physics
     P. Dode 1                                 Chemistry
     G. Dussel                                 Materials Science
     A. Edelstein                              Physics
    M. Edwards                                 Physics


     B.   J. Elliot                            Microwave
     C. W. F. Everitt                          Physics
     R. S. Feigelson                           Center for Materials Research
     H. G. Freie                               Physics
     0. H. Griffith                            Chemistry


     D. Griffiths                              Physics
     T. K. IT,,'_. tead                        Materials Science
     W. 0. Hamilton                            Physics
     K. J. Harker                              Microwave
     S. H. Hayami                              Electrical Engineering




                                           -129-
          Z




  i
  1



--In



              R. Heckingbottom        Chemical Engineering

      f
              J. P. Hunt              Chemistry

              L. G. Jonasson          Electrical Engineering

              A. Karp                 Microwave
              D. L. Keith             Center for Materials Research



              A.   L. Kwiram          Physics

              W.   J.   Leonard       Chemistry

              G. W. Martin            Center for Materials Research

              A.   Merkl              Chemistry

              W. G. Miller            Chemistry


              R.   J. Morris          Electrical Engineering

              K. Motizuki             Microwave
              H. Muir                 Materials Science
              S. O'Hara               Materials Science
              K.   C.   Pan t         Electrical Engineering



              P. B. P. Phipps         Materials Science

              S. M. Puri              Microwave

              A. Quattropani          Applied Physics

              R. S. Safrata           Physics

              H. A. Schwettman        Physics


              J. A. Semiyen           Chemistry

              H.   J.   Shaw          Microwave

              Z. G.     Soos          Chemistry

              T.   J. Stone           Chemistry

              D.   D. Thomas          Chemistry



              S.   Ihr<<kawa          Materials Science

              R. M. White             Microwave

              D.   K. Wins lcw        Microwave

              W. M. Yen               Physics




                                  -130-



 ti..
                                                                                        I


                                                                                    r
                                                                                            q

III.. GRADUATE STUDENTS PARTICTPATING IN MATERIALS RLiEARCH PROGRAMS                        .^


                                  CHEMISTRY

M.    B. Barrett             R.   C.   Hughes              J.    A. Stritar
L.    E. Bennett             J.   Y.   durst               T.    B. Swanson.
L.    J. Berliner            M.   S.   .tzkowitz           D.    D. Thusius
W.    11. Breckinridge       R.   L.   Jernigan            P.    B. T jok
C.    Coonay                 R.   B.   Jordan              E.    Weissberger
E.    A. Deutsch             D. J. LaFollette              R. Young
G.    E. Dolbear.            D. A. Loeliger
B.    E. Eichinger           M.-A. Marechal
S.    Fisk                   Y. Marechal
J.    E. French              R. M. Metzger
J.    Gambill                T.   J. Meyer
F.    R. Gamble              F.   R. Nordmeyer
A.    B. Hoffman             S.   Ogawa
B.    M. Hoffman             R.   A. Orwo l l
D.    H. Hucbital            H.   J. Price

                           CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
A. W. Aldag, Jr.          W. N. De lge a s         D. E. Mears        A. Vogel.

                          ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
R.    C.   Addison, Jr.     W.    J. Kleinfelder          H.    R. Potts
J.    W.   Allen            T.    Koike                   R.    J. Powell
P.    H.   Baraell, Jr.     R.    Y. Koyama               H.    E. Puthoff
J.    E.   Bjorkholm        W.    F. Krolikowski          S.    Razi
A.    J.   Blodgett         D.    Landis                  ^:.   L. Robinette, Jr.
M.    G.   Buehler          J.    C. Lawrence             J.    G. Ruch
N.    E.   Buholz           E.    C. H. Lean              B.    Sachs
D.    E.   Ca ddes          T.    C. Lee                  Y.    Satoda
D.    S.   Carlson          C.    H. Loescher             B.    H, Schechtman
I.    C.   Chang            R.    M. Malbon               J.    L. Shay
I(.   S.   Chen              J.   Markiewicz              K.    K. Shih
A.    M.   Cowley            0.   P. McDuff               M.    Shyam
C.    Y.   Duh               C.   M. McIntyre             T.    W. Sigmon
D.    J.   Dumin             R.   R.-R. Mehta             H.    Sonnenberg
R.    C^   Eden              C.   B. Norris, Jr.          J.    A. Tellefsen
W.    F.   Egan              J.   O'Brien                  R.    E. Tokheim
A.    H.   E1-Hosh y         M.   Omori                    C.    S. Tsai
G.    E.   Francois          L.   M. Osterink              J.    Uebbing
H.    M.   Gerard            J.   M. Owens                 J.    Vilms
W.    H.   Haydl             P.   W. Pheneger, Jr.         J.    N. Weaver

W.    B. Hemphill                                          R.    Wilson
B.    G. Huth                                              R.    C. Woodbury
S.    Ito                                                  P.    L.-C. Young
W.    S. Johnson                                           A.    Y.-C. Yu
N.    B. Kindig

                                       -131-
1


                              MATER TAT-S SCIENCE


    J.   H.    Anderson        T.    D.    Gulden.       D.   0.   Nason
    A.   J.    Ardell          F.    H.    Hammad        R.   D.   Nelson
    T.   W.    barbee , Jr.    M.    L.    liam^iond     T.   0.   Ogurtani
    D.   11.   Barnett         G.    A.    Haye s        R.   W.   Owen
    C.   R.    Barrett         R.    B.    Heady         J.   S.   Perrin

    E. V. Benton               E.    Heinlein            C. A. Rau, Jr.
    G. Ii. Blount              R.    W. He l lz_we l l   R. A. Reynolds
    R. M. Boresteul            R.    Hiskes              A. L. Robinson
    P. M. Borsenberger         J.    C. Ho               G. Roust
    P. M. Burke                D.    F. Hodgson          M. L. Rudee

    R. A. Burmeister           K.    E.    Horton        J. Saura
    L. D. Clark                B.    1".   Jinda 1       A. A. Sheinker
    F. W. Clinard              W.    R.    Johnson       A. A. Solomon
    W. A. Cogh lan             B.    L.    Joseph        D. R. Stiefbcld
    J. L. Corral               C.    S.    Kang          T. G. Stoebe

    J.   C. Crespi             D. L.       Kendall       G. B. Stringfellow
    P.   N. Dange 1            H.-S.       Kim           T. Takahashi
    D.   DeSante               K. R.       Kinsman       L. A. Tarshis
    R.   R. Di_ is             G. R.       Kotler        T. A. Taylor
    W.   D. Donnelly           T. L.       Larsen        }l. Wagenaar

    E. J. Fisher                F.   F. -M. Lee          J. C. Walling
    D. G. Folgner               P.   F. Lindquist        J. D. W}li t tenberger
    A. M. Gaylord               F.   L. Mac Kenna        J. H. Wood
    G. T. Geering               B.   L. Mattes           R. A. Wullaert
    M. E. Gulden                W.   H. McCarthy         R. R. Zupp

                               M. D. Merz
                               L. D. Ni p 1 ler
                               J. W. Moberly


                              MINERAL ENC-TNEERING


    S. Akhtar                   N.   E1-Tayeb            H.   Seibe 1
    R. N. Anderson              G.   B. Horsley          I.   D. Shah
    K. Aso                      G.   K. Korpi            A.   F. Sklensky
    R. Burns                    J.   N. Roco             M.   C. Speer
    M. N. A. E1-Naggar          E.   It. Sacris          C.   Zoo 1 lne r




                                           -132-
                                 PHYSICS


M, J. Berggren             L. H. Meyers               J. P. Turneaure
M. Bol                     M. R. Moldover             E. Varoquaux
D. Bracken                 L. F. Mollenauer           J. P. Webb
H. D. Cohen                E. D. Nelson               P. B. Wilson
J. L. Emmett               J. M. Pierce               F. C. Witteborn

A.   M.   Goldman          B. Pipes                   J. Y. M. Wong
R.   L.   Greene           J. L. Rapier
A.   F.   Hebard           W. C. Scott
H.   B.   Hess             D. D. Sell
G.   F.   Imbusch          N. C. Shah

S. S. Jha                  W.   T.   Sommer
S. A. Johnson              S.   T.   Spence
G. K. Klauminzer           S.   E.   Stokowski
L. V. Knight               W.   B.   Tiffany
J. McCarthy                W.   J.   Tre la



                    OTHER DEPARTMENTS and DIVISIONS


                            APPLIED PHYSICS

T.   J. Beaulieu            J. Shaw                   J. H. Wilkinson
B.   E. Burke               W. R. Smith, Jr.
R.   L. Kohn                J. Warszawski
K.   Nordvedt               M. T. Wauk
I.   B. Ortenburger         C. D. Wilkinson


                           CIVIL ENGINEERING

                                  F. Rad jy


                                GEOPHYSICS

                                C. Young III




                                     - i33-
                                                                    .WWI



IV. GRADUATE DEGREES CONFERRED




                      Doctor of Philosophy

  J.   H. Anderson, Jr.                 Materials Science
  A.   J. Ardell                        Materials Science
  P.   H. Bardell, Jr.                  Electrical Engineering
  C.   R. Barrett                       Materials Science
  A.   J. Blodgett, Jr.                 Electrical Engineerirg



  M. Bol                                Physics
  R. A. Burmeister                      Materials Science
  I-C. Chang                            Electrical Engineering
  F. W. Clinard, Jr.                    Materials Science
  A. M. Cowley                          Electrical Engineering



  R.   R.   Dils                        Materials Science
  D.   J.   Dumi_n                      Electrical Engineerin,
  A.   M.   Goldman                     Physics
  T.   D.   Gulden                      Materials Science
  F. H. llammad                         Materials Science


  M. L. Hanunond                        Materials Science
  D.   H. Huchital                      Chemistry
  G.   F. Imbusch                       Physics
  S.   S. Jha                           Physics
  N.   B. Kindig                        Electrical Engineering



  G. K. Korpi                           Mineral Engineering
  T-C. Lee                              Electrica^ Engineering
 *D. A. Loeliger                        Chemistry
  R. R-R. Mehta                         Electrical Engineering
  L. H. Meyers                          Physics


  L.   F. Mollenauer                    Physics
  R.   D. Nelson                        Materials Science
  T.   0. Ogurtani                      Materials Sc ience
  M.   Omori                            Electrical Engineering
  I.   A. B. Ortenburger                Physics




 *Completed doctoral program at Stanford University, but received
  degree from University of Chicago.



                                -134-
                                                                                                                                                                           tI^

^+^-.._........^+^.___.Jh-.^!'^^-:.._ -4.l..wr^. -----------^-'+mow'--..^Y'---       ^--^--.   .__        -_____^._••-_•----_.....^--... ^.........n.--^..-..-..^—^




                                                           Doctor of Philosophy                      (continued)                                                      -

                             H.    R.    Potts                                       Electrical_ Engineering
                             M.    L.    Rudee                                       Materials Science
                             W.    T.    Sommer                                      Physics
                             T.    G.    Stoebe                                      Materials Science
                             R.    E.    Tokheim                                     Electrical Engineering


                             J.    Vilms                                             Electrical Engineering
                             R.    M. White                                          Physics
                             F.    C. Witteborn                                      Physics
                             R.    C. Woodbury                                       Electrical Engineering
                             B.    PF Wu                                             Electrical Engineering




                                                                          Engineer

                             J. N. Weaver                                            Electrical Engineering




                                                                    Master of Science

                             J.    W.    Allen                                       Electrical Engineering
                             R.    M.    Bonesteel                                   Materials Science
                             P.    M.    Borsenberger                                Materials Science
                             D.    G.    Carlson                                     Electrical Engineering
                             E.    J.    Fisher                                      Materials Science


                             R.    L. Green                                          Physics
                             M.    E. Gulden                                         Materials         Science
                             E.    Heinlein                                          Materials         Science
                             R.    Hiskes                                            Materials         Science
                             B.    L. Joseph                                         Materials         Science


                             G.    K.    Klauminzer                                  Physic
                             D.    J.    LaFollette                                  Chemistry
                             R.    M.    Malbon                                      Electrical Engineering
                             H.    K.    McCue, Jr.                                  Electrical Engineering
                             C.    M.    McIntyre                                    Electrical Engineering




                                                                             -135-



                                                                                                                                                                          IF
- _ -                                                         ,k..-




                                                          w




                   Master of Science       (coIitinued)

  C. A. Rau, Jr.                  Materials Science
  J. N. Roco                      Mineral Engineering
  A. L. Robinson                  Materials Science
  E. M. Sacris                    Mineral En;;ineerin-
  H. Seibel                       Mineral Engineering



  A. L. Sheinker                  Materials Science
  A. F. Sklensky                  Engineeri nQ Science
  T. A. Taylor                    Materials Science
  H. W. Waoenaar                  Materials Science
  J. D. Whittenberer              Materials Science




                          -136-
                                   NAME INDEX

Abe, A.                       Bainer, L.                     Bjorkholm, J. E.
  C*-21**, 27                   C-79                           C-89,91
  D-116 , 118
                              Barbee, T. W.,Jr.              Blodgett, A. J.,Jr.
Addison, R. C.                  C-33,36                        C-95,103,104
  C-8,10                        D-116                          D-117,122
  D-116                                                        E-124
                              Bardell, P. H.,Jr.
Akhtar, S.                      E-124                        Blotekjaer, K.
  C-52                                                         C-66,67
  Aldag, A. W.                Barnett, D. M.                   D-119
  C-11                          C-111
                                                            Blount, G. H.
Allen, J. W.    (James)       Barrett, C. R.                  C-13
  C-115                         C-50,51,80,85
                                D -116                       Bol, M.
Allen, J. W.    (John)          E-124                         C-18,19
  C-60,63                                                     D-117
  D-116                       Beaulieu, T. F.                 E-124
                                C-115
Ammann, E. 0.                                               Bonesteel, R. M.
  C-30                        Bene, R.                        C-80
  D-119                         C-115
                                                            Boudart, M. J.
Anbar, M.                     Bennett, L. E.                  C-11,12
  C-107                         C-107
                                                            Brant, D. A.
Anderson, J. H. Jr.           Benson, J. E.                   C-27
  C-52,55                       C-11,12                       D-117
  D-116
  E-124                       Benton, E. V.                 Breckinridge, W. H.
                                C-45                          C-107
Anderson, R. N.
  C-56                        Berggren, M. J.               Brimhall, J. L.
                                C-73                          C -33,36
Anderson, W. W.                                               D-117
  D-;16,117,120               Berglund, C. N.
                                C-103,104                   Bube, R. H.
Arde11, A. J.                   D-116,122                     C-13,17
   C-51                                                       D -117
  D-116                       Berliner, L. J.
  E-124                         C-43                        Buckman, T. D.
                                                              C-42,43
Auld, B. A.                   Bisogni, E.
  C-8,10                        C-88                        Buehler, M. G.
  D-116                         D-122                         C-60,63
                                                              D-117

 * Section Numbers                                 C - Programs
** Page Numbers in Sections                        D - Publications
                                                   E - Doctoral Dissertations

                                    -137-
Burmeister, R. A.     Deaver, B. S., Jr.   Espenson, J. 11.
 C-105                 C-18,20               C- 109
 E- 124                D-120                 D- 118

                      de Bel_lis, A. B.    Everitt, C. W. F.
                        C-36                 C-18
Caddes, D. E.
  C- 66               Deutsch, E. A.       Evtuhov, V.
                        C-107                C-91
Care' -)n, F.                                D-118
   C- 1.7             Diebler, H.
                       C-107, 109
Casey, 11. C. , Jr.
  C-63                Dils , R. R.         Fairhank, W. M.
  D-117                C- 33                 C-18,19,20
                        E-124                D- 117,118,119,120,
Chang, 1. C.                                    121,123
 C-4, 30              Dodel, P.
 D-117,119             C-109               Fisk, S.
 E- 124                D -117                C-21

Chen, Y. S.           Dumin , D. J.        Flory, P. J.
 C-60,63               C-60,63               C-21,27
 D- 117                E-1'24                D-1.16,117,118,120
Chodorow, M.          Dussel, G. A.        Francois, G. E.
  C-8, 74              C- 13, 17             C-89,91
Clark, L. D.                               Freie, H. G.
  C-33                                       C-69
                      Eden, R. C.
Clinard, F. W.         C- 95               French, J. L.
  C-80,85                                    C- 107
  D-117               Egan, W. F.
  E-124                 C- 74
Coghlan, W. A.        Ei(hinger, B, E.     Gamble, F. R.
  C-45,51               C-21                 C-42,44
Cohen, H. D.          E1-1loshy, A. H.     Geballe, T. 11.
 C-18                   C-28,29             C-67
                                            D-121
Cowley, A. M.         Llliot, B. J.
 E-124                 C-74                Gecring, G. T.
                                             C-114
                      Emmett, J. L.
                        C-69               Gibbons, J. F.
Dar:aish, F. A. 1.                           C-23,29
 C-111                Endicott:, J. F.
                       C-109               Goldman, A. M.
                       D-117                 C-18,19
                                             D-118
                                             E-124
                                -138-
Green, M.          Haydl, W. H.        Huchital, D. H.
  C-110              C-66,67             C-110
                     D-119               F-125
Greene, R. L.
  C-69,71          Hayes, G. A.        Huggins, R. A.
                     C-86                C-33,36,50
Griffith, 0. H.                          D-116,117,121,123
  C-42,43,44       Hebard, A. F.
  D-118              C-18              Hughes, p . C.
                                         C-42,43
Griffiths, D. J.   Heckingbottom, R.
  C-39               C-11              Hunt, J. B.
                                         C-109
Gulden, M. E.      Heffner, H.           D-119
  C-45,51            C-32
                     D-122             Hurst, J. K.
Gulden, To D.                            C-107
  C-86             Helliwell, R. W.
  E-124              C-33

                   Hemphill, W. B.     Imbusch, G. F.
                     C-4                 C-69,71
Halford, D.                              D-119
  C-44             Hess, G. B.           E-125
  D-118              r-18,19
                     D-119             Itzkowitz, M. S.
Halstead, T. K.                          C-42
  C-33             Hiskes, R.
                     C-114
Hamilton, W. 0.
  C-18             Ho, C.-T.           Jackson, J. A.
                     C-13,17             C-109
Hammad , F. H.                           D-119
   C-45,50         Hodgson, D. E.
   E-125             C-111             Jernigan, R. L.
                                         C-21,27
Hammond, M. L.     Hoffman, A. B.        D-118
  E-125              C-107
                                       Jha, S. S.
Harker, K. J.      Hoffman, B. M.        C-32
  C-74               C-42,44              -125
                     D-119
Ilarkins, C. G.                        J- ndal, B. K.
   C-11            Hren, J. A.           C-114
                     C-85
Harris, :i. E.       D-119,120         Johnson, S. A.
  C-30,31,91                             C-69
  D-119            Huber, D. L.
                     C-71              Johnson, W. R.
Hayami, S. H.                            C-45,50
  C-87

                        -139-
Johnson, W. S.       Kotler, G. R.           Leonard, W. J., Jr.
  C-28                 C-114                   C-27
                                               D-1.18
Jordan, R. B.        Kovama, R. Y.
  C-107,109            C-95                  Lieh 1 i.ng, G.
  D- 119                                        C-44
                     Krolikowski, W. F.         D-120
Joseph, B. L.          C-95,104
  C-80                 D-120                 Lindquist, P. F.
                                               C-13
                     Krugler, J. I.
                       C-44                  Little, W. A.
Kamber, K.             D-120                   C-39,40,41
  C-85                                         D-120,121
  D-120              Kwiram, A. L.
                       C-18,20,44            Loeliger, D. A.
Kang , C. S.           D-118,120               C-107,109
  C- 13,17                                     E-125

Kendall, D. L.                               Loescher, D. H.
  C-33               LaFollette, D. J.         C-60
                       C-107
Kindig, N. B.                                Luce, R. W.
  C-95,103,104       Landis, D.                C-52
  D-119,120            C-60
  E-125                                      Lytton, J. L.
                     Lapeyre, G. J.            C-85
Kinsman, K. R.         C-104                   D-120
  C-86
                     Larsen, T. L.
Klauminzer, G. K.      C- 105
  C- 69, 71                                  MacFarlane, R. i1.
  D- 120             Laurie, V. W.             C-69
                       C-37, 38
Kleinfelder, W. J.     D-123                 MacKenna, E. L.
  C-28                                         C-45
                     Lawrence, J. C.
Knight, L. V.          C-74                  Macres, V. G.
  C-18,19                                      C-63
  D-123              Lean, E. C. H.            D-121
                       C- 74
Kohn, H. W.                                 Malbon, R. M.
  C-12               Lee, F. F.-M.     C-   74
                       C-86
Koike, T.                                    Manchester, K.
  C-60               Lee, T. C.                C-29
                       C-4,7
Korpi, G. K.           D-116,120             Marburger, J. H.
  C-52,5               E-125                   C-92
  D-123
  E-125


                          -140-
Mark, J. E.                                                Montgomery, C. G.               Omori, M.
   C-27                                                           C-44                       E-125
   D-120                                                          D-120
                                                                                           Ogurtani, T. 0.
Marechal, M, A.                                            Moos, H. W.                       C-33,36
   C-42,43                                                        C-71,72                    D-121,123
                                                                  D-120,122                  E-125
Marechal, Y.
 C-42,43                                                   Muir, 11.                       O'Hara., S.
                                                            C-114                            C-1 14
Mattes,       B. L.
 C-45                                                                                      Ohnishi, S.
                                                                                             C-44
Mears, D. E.                                               McCarthy, J.                      D-121
   C-11 31 12                                                     C-39
                                                                                           Ortenburger, I. B.
Mehta, R. R.-R.                                            McCarthy, W. h.                   C-92,93,94
  E-125                                                      C-80                            D-121
                                                                                             E-125
Merkl, A. W.                                              McConnell, Ho M.
  C-42,43                                                   C-42,43,44                     Orwoll, R. A.
                                                                  D-11.8,119,120,121,122     C-21527
Merz, M. D.                                                                                  D-118
 C-80                                                     McIntyre, C. M.
                                                                  C-30
Metzger, R. M.
 C-42,44                                                                                   Papazoglou, T. P.
  D-119                                                                                      C-58,59
                                                          Nason, D. OQ
Meyer, N. I.                                                C -86                          Parks, G. A.
   -29                                                                                       C-52,55
                                                          Nelso ► i, F. D.                   D-121
Meyer, T, J.                                                C-69
  C-107                                                                                    Parlee, N. A. D.
                                                          Nelson, R. D.                      C-56,58,59
Meyers, L. H.                                               C-86
  C-41                                                      E-125                          Pearson, G. L.
  D-121                                                                                      C-60,63
  E-125                                                   Nix, W. D.                         D-116,117,121
                                                                  C-45,50,51,88
Miller, L. D.                                                  D-116,121,122               Pecora, R.
  C-13,17                                                                                    C-64,65
                                                          Nordmeyer, F. R.
Moldover,, M. R.                                            C-107                          Perrin, J. S.
  C-39,40,41                                                                                 C-80
                                                          Nordvedt, K.
Moll, J. L.                                                 C-92                           Phelps, W. C. , Jr.
  C-29                                                                                       C-58,59

Mollenauer, Lo F.                                                                          Phillips, T. G.
  C-69                                                                                       C-115
  E-125
                                                                     -141-




                                                                                                                                     t
                                  ._......^- __ ...., - _ .. _.                                                  --           -mac
          --.---- ---tee .,,,.,
                                                           ^                                                          .dlfj
                        ..                 —   .^^    _   ^
                                                                ^ #^ - ^ .^._ _ «_           ^.n,•^►_.   few

                                                                                                                   L




     Phipps, P. B. P.        Richards, C. W.                  Schechtman,            B. H.
       C-13,17                 C-68                             C-95

     Pierce, J. M.           Robinette, C. L., Jr.            Schoeck, G.                                      I
       C-1-8,19                c-30                             C-88
       D-121                                                    D-122
                             Robinson, A. L.
     Potts, H. R.              C-13,17                        S chin;, K.
       C-60,63                                                   C-110
       D-121                 Robson, R,
       E - 126                 C-107                          Schwettman, II. A.
                                                                C-18,19
     Powell, R. J.           Roco, J. H.                        D-121
       C - 95                  C - 52
                                                              Scott, P. L.
     Price, H. J.            Rogers, T. E.                      C-69,71,72,73
       C - 107                 C-109                            D-120,123
                               D-121
     Puri, S. M.                                              Scott, W. C.
       C-67                  Roust, G. W.                       C-69,71,72
       D-121                   C-86                             D-123

                             Rudee, M. L.                     Seibel, H.
                               C-33 5 36                        C-56,58
     Quate, C. F.              D-121
       C-66,67                 E-126                          Seiden, P. E.
                                                                C-93
     Quattropani, A.                                            D-122
       C-92
                             Sachs, B. H.                     Sell, D. D.
                               C-95,104                         C-69

     Radjy, F.               Sacris, E. M.                    Scmlyen, J. A.
       C-68                    C-56 5 58                        C-21

     Rapier, J. L.           Safrata, R. S.                   Shah, I. D.
       C-69                    C-39                             C-56,59

     Rau, C. A., Jr.         Sargeson, A. M.                  Shah, N. C.
       C- 111                  C-107                            C-39

     Razi, S.                Satoda, Y.                       Shaw, Ii. J.
       C-4,7                   C-115                            C-10,74
                                                                D-116
     Reiss, H.               Saura, J.
       C--51                   C-13,17                        Shay, J. L.
       D-116                                                    C-95,     103
                             Schawlow, A. L.                    D-122
     Reynolds, R. A.           C-69,71,72
       C-105                  D-117,119,121,122,123           Shepard, 0. C.
                                                                C-79



                                  -142-




It
                                                               ^.^...----••----

                                                                                  C




                                                                                  k

Sherby, 0. D.         Sparks, M. S.             Tarshis, L. A.
 C-51,80,85             C-92,93,94                C-114
  D-116,117,119,120     D-122
                                                Taube, H.
Shih, K. K.           Speer, M. C.                C-107,109,110
  C--60                 C-56                      D-117,118,119,121,13

Shockley, W.          Spicer, W. E.             Tellefsen, J. A.
  C-63                  C-32,95,103,104           C-89
  D-117                 D-116,117,119,120,122
                                                Tetelman, A. S.
Shyam, M.             Steele, W. A.               C-111
  C-60,63               C-64,65
                                                Thomas, D. D.
Shyne, J. C.          Stevenson, D. A.            C-42,44
  C-51,86,88            C-105
  D-122                                         Thompson, G. A.
                      Stoebe, T. G.               C-113
Siegman, A. E.          C-33,36
  C-89,91               D-123                   Thusius, D. D.
  D-118 1 119           E-126                     C-107

Sigmon, T. W.         Stokowski, S. E.          Tiffany, W. B.
  C-28                  C-69                      C-69

Silverstone, H. J.    Stone, T. J.              Tiller, W. A.
  C-44                  C-42                      C-114
  D-122
                      Stringfellow, G. B.       Tjok, P. B.
Smith, W. R., Jr.       C-105                     C-107
  C-74
                      Stritar, J. A.            Tokheim, R. E.
Solomon, A. A.          C-107                     C-8
  C-45                                            E-126
                      Swanson, T. E,
Sommer, W. T.           C-37,38                 Trela, W. J.
  E-126                 D-123                     C-18,19
                                                  D-123
Sonnenberg, H.        Swinehard, J. H.
  C-32                  C-109                   Tsai, C. S.
  D-122                 D-121                     C-7,10

Spence, S. T.                                   Turneaure, J. P.
  C-39                                            C-18
                      Takahashi, T.
Soos, Z. G.             C-114
  C-42,,43544
                      Targ, F.                  Vilms, J.
Soref , R. A.           C-31                      C-104
  C-72                  D-119                     E-126
  D-122



                           -143-




                                                                                      J
Vogel, A.             Winslow) D. K.     Zoellner, C.
  C-11                  C-8,10,66,67       C-56
                        D-116
Vogel, F. L.                             Zupp, R. R.
  C-29                Witteborn, F. C.     C- 105
                        C-18,20
Vrij, A.                D-123
  C-27                  E-126
  D-118
                      Wong, J. Y.-M.
                        C-69

Walsh, D. J.          Wood, D. E.
  c-7                   C-44
                        D- 122
Wauk., M. T.
  C- 74               Wood, J. Ii.
                        C-45
Webb, J. P.
  C- 18               Woodbury, R, C.
                        E-126
Weinberg, E. H.
  D-117               Wu, B. P.-F.
                        E-126
Weissberger, E.
  C-107               Wullaert, R. A.
                        C-1.11
White, R. L.
  C-115

White, R. M.          Yen, W. M.
  C-71,92,94            C-69,71,72
  D-123                 D-119,123
  E-126
                      Young, C., III
Wickersheim, K. A.      c-113
  C-55
  D-116,123            Yu, A.Y.-Co
                         C-95,103
Wilkinson, C. D. W.      D-122
  C-66,67

Wilkinson, J. d.
  C-3                  Zabin, B. A.
                         C-109
 Wilson, P. B.           D-123
   C-18,19
   D-121




                             -144-

