---
title: Concept, design, and performance of the MSC Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19680012405
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19680012405
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-14
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 9827dfb89f8c30be131aab8c3a9fb63e62bf6685a56ad91ff3cb78d743c3d4e3
pages: 53
words: 12914
cv_look_pages: 6
---

     By Robert 6. Wren,
James D. JohnBton, Jr. , a
            Named $pac@craftCent
               Houston, Texas

                        I
                                                             Y
                                                         4




                    ABSTRACT

       To obtain the best possible ground-test verifi-
cation of the flight worthiness of the Apollo space-
craft to launch and boost fluctuating pressure
environments, the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
conceived, designed, and constructed the Spacecraft
Acoustic Laboratory, which embodies a unique vi -
bratory simulation technique and capability. Apollo
acoustic levels and spectra were used to develop
acoustic test energy requirements and frequency
considerations in the design of the sources, horns,
and ducts. The test configuration includes 16 horn/
duct channels, each driven by an independently con-
trollable acoustic noise source, which completely
envelop the vehicle and control the propagation of
high-energy acoustic waves downward over the ve -
hicle. Evaluation of the performance characteris -
tics of the facility was oriented toward verification
of acoustic test hardware design and, more impor -
tantly, toward comparison of Apollo vehicle vibra-
tion responses achieved in the ground test with flight
measurements. With minor exceptions (which were
corrected), all acoustic parameters designed into
the hardware have been met o r exceeded. The shell
response of the service module as measured at
eight locations during an Apollo flight has been du-
plicated satisfactorily in the laboratory.




                                         ED.


                         ii
                                            CONTENTS

    Section                                                                             Page
    SUMMARY       ....................................                                    1
    INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1
    FACILITY DESIGNREQUIREMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               3
       Philosophy of Environmental Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
       Sources of Vibration in Spacecraft Vehicles During Flight      ..........          4

       Aerodynamic Pressure Fluctuations Around the Apollo
         Spacecraft Vehicle      .............................                            5
       Simulation of the Pressure Fluctuations Around the
                                 .........................
         Apollo Spacecraft Vehicle                                                        6
    FACILITYDESCRIPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9

       General .....................................                                      9

      ApolloTestConfiguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      10
      Control and Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    12
    FACILITYPERFORMANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            13
      Progressive Wave Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         13
      HornPerformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
      Ductseals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
      Reverberant Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
      VibrationResponse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18

5
    CONCLUDINGREMARKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
    REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47




                                                 iii
                                        TABLE

Table                                                                               Page

  I       CONTROL OF FLUCTUATING PRESSURE PARAMETERS
            INTHESAL       .............................                             20


                                       FIGURES


Figure                                                                              Page
      1   Apollo spacecraft vehicle in launch and boost configuration   ......       21

   2      Sketches of two flow regimes over the Apollo vehicle from
            Marshall Space Flight Center wind-tunnel tests
            (original SLA configuration)  .....................                      21

      3   Comparison of maximum overall aerodynamic pressure fluctuations
            found in previous studies of typical configurations corrected to
            flight dynamic pressure (original SLA configuration)   ........          22
   4      Typical relative pressure spectra downstream of shoulder at
            various Mach numbers     ........................                        22

      5   Typical spectra of pressure fluctuations in 1/3 octaves for
            several positions and several Mach numbers     ............              23

      6   Design curve for random noise spectrum at shoulder of Apollo
            vehicle with an overall level objective of 171 dB  ..........            23

      7   Comparison of flight dynamic pressure fluctuations with facility
            design spectrum for Apollo vehicle      .................                24

      8   Three facility concepts for SAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24

      9   Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25

  10      Arrangement of test article and horn/duct system . . . . . . . . . . .     25

  11      Apollo vehicle in SAL after installation of duct system . . . . . . . .    26

  12      SAL horn assembly with air modulators installed . . . . . . . . . . .      27

  13      Ducts removed showing contact of V-shaped duct supports with
            outer shell of SM vehicle  .......................                       28

  14      Interface of SAL ducts covering SM with ducts covering SLA . . . . .       29


                                           iv
    Figure                                                                                     Page
      15     SAL reverberant flare system installed around Apollo vehicle          ....         30
      16     SAL reverberant flare system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           31

      17     Access to the horn assembly and air modulators of the SAL via
Y              movableplatforms     ..........................                                  3%

      18     SALcontrolsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             33
      19     Measurement locations for Apollo tests in the SAL . . . . . . . . . .              34
      20     Typical spectra in SAL at Apollo shoulder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            35

      21     Spectra obtained at Apollo shoulder in SAL by varying overall power
               input tonoise makers    .........................                                35

      22     Axial variation in SPL for maximum and minimum duct spacing              ,   ..    36
      23     Spectra in ducts for two duct spacings from Apollo  ..........                     37
      24     Typical envelope of SPL variation in SAL for 16-duct operation . , .               38

      25     Axial variation in SPL of initial horn for single frequency
               excitation   ...............................                                     38

      26     Typical horn characteristics
             (a) Initialhorn   .............................                                    39
             (b) Reversehorn    ............................                                    39
             (c) Reverberant flare .........................                                    40

      27     Effect of seal on acoustic performance of a duct
               (taken from a one-third scale model)   ................                          41

      28     Typical noise reduction between adjacent ducts . . . . . . . . . . . .             42

      29     Typical response of boilerplate 1150 CM with and without
               ductsinstalled     ............................                                  42

      30     Difference in airframe SLA response with and without ducts installed
               for six measurement locations ....................                               43

      31     SAL chamber absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             43

      32     Range of sound pressure spectra for SAL reverberant
               flare operation    ............................                                  44
      33     Sound pressure spectra for SAL reverberant flare operation        .....            44


                                                V
Figure                                                                           Page
 34      SLA response characteristics at three locations for two
           acoustic fields  ............................                          45
  35     Space average pressure spectra on Apollo SM . . . . . . . . . . . . .    46

  36     Average vibration response of Apollo SM for flight and SAL
           pressure fields   ............................                         46




                                          vi
                 CONCEPT, DESIGN, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
                    MSC SPACECRAFT ACOUSTIC LABORATORY

                      By Robert J. Wren, Wade D, Dorland,
                 James D. Johnston, Jr., and Kenneth McK. Eldred*
                            Manned Spacecraft Center

                                      SUMMARY

       The random fluctuating pressure (acoustic) excitation of the Apollo spacecraft
during earth launch and boost is not only 8evere but also varies as a function of both
flight mission time and location on the vehicle. To obtain the best possible verifica-
tion of the flight worthiness of the spacecraft, evaluation was required of the vibration
behavior of the Apollo spacecraft under severe acoustic conditions of flight in a ground
test. A review of existing fluctuating-pressure simulation techniques and capabilities
for full-scale spacecraft led to a concept, design, and development program which has
produce$ an unusual simulation technique and capability. The evolution ‘and embodi -
ment of the simulation technique which resulted in the Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory
are described in this paper. Many simulation and facility hardware design problems
were encountered, and both the problems and the solutions are discussed. Actual
laboratory performance data are presented, and comparisons with flight measure -
ments are made.

                                   INTRODUCTION

       The Apollo spacecraft (fig. 1) consists of the command module (CM), the service
module (SM), and the lunar module (LM). During earth launch and boost, a rocket-
propelled launch escape system (LES) is attached to the forward bulkhead of the CM,
and a spacecraft lunar-module adapter (SLA) surrounds and protects the LM and also
serves as the mechanical connection of the SM with the Saturn booster. In addition to
the LES on the CM, many other aerodynamic protuberances, such as the reaction-
control-system housing and nozzles on the SM, are located on the surface. The total
acoustic excitation of the Apollo spacecraft during earth launch and boost reaches
three peaks as a function of flight profile: (1) booster engine noise from the first stage
of the Saturn at lift-off, (2) aerodynamic turbulence at transonic velocities, and
(3) aerodynamic turbulence during maximum dynamic-pressure conditions at super-
sonic velocities.

      *Director of Research, Wyle Laboratories, El Segundo, California.
       The first acoustic peak can be described as a composite of progressive waves
propagating from the base of the Saturn booster forward to the Apollo spacecraft. The
second and third acoustic peaks represent the combined actions of several separate
aerodynamic mechanisms which are either generated o r intensified by the many vehi-
cle protuberances projecting into the airstream and by abrupt changes in the vehicle
mold line, These mechanisms include boundary-layer turbulence, separated flow, wake
turbulence, and oscillating shocks. The varied nature of the acoustic loadings with
respect to magnitude, spectral content, and correlation parameters dictated a ground
test tool which would provide as much control over these parameters a s possible. In
addition, since the flight acoustic loadings a r e characterized by a spatial distribution
of forces over the surface of the vehicle which is of a continuous nature (in lieu of
several point forces, for example), a ground-test technique was required that would
provide spatial continuity of the test forcing function.
      During the concept studies in 1963 (ref. l), the existing state of the a r t for sim-
ulation of launch and boost acoustic loading or other means of inducing flight-like
vibration of spacecraft structures was surveyed and reviewed. The use of electro-
mechanical o r hydromechanical shakers, either singly o r in multiples, was investi-
gated. The potential use of acoustic waves led to the consideration of reverberation
rooms, single-source progressive waves, and multiple-source progressive waves.
A multiple -source, multiple -channel (or multiple -duct) approach was chosen with each
source -channel to be acoustically separated from adjacent channels circumferentially
around the vehicle. The sources were located forward of the vehicle to satisfy spatial
profile requirements of the Apollo acoustic levels. The Apollo acoustic levels and
spectra were used to develop acoustic test energy requirements and frequency con-
siderations in the design of .the sources and channels (horns and ducts). During the
concept study, the selected approach was technically verified for practicality through
the use of scale models.
      The acoustic levels increased aftward on the CM (an uncommon condition since
the acoustic levels decrease aftward on all other portions of the Apollo vehicle) which
presented an unusually challenging acoustic test hardware design problem (ref, 2).
The solution was found in the application of a technique using split horns with one horn
reversed, The initial horn, reverse horn, and duct designs were verified with de-
tailed scale models of the Apollo vehicle and of the acoustic test hardware.
      The resulting test setup consists of 16 horn/duct channels each driven by an in-
dependently controllable acoustic-noise source. Each source is rated at 10 000 watts
output. The channels completely envelop the vehicle and control the propagation of
high-energy acoustic waves downward over the vehicle. The horns are constructed of
fiber glass and steel, and the ducts and duct supports a r e constructed of wood and
steel. Viscoelastic damping compound is used to reduce vibration of steel compo-
nents. The ducts are adjustable inward o r outward 'so that the cross section of the
area through which the progressive waves propagate can be varied. Anechoic wedge
terminators are used at the end of each wave propagation channel. Acoustic energy
is produced by 16 pneumoacoustic sources, o r air modul             ir is supplied to
these devices by a large constant -flow air compressor.              n of air valves in
the devices is both controlled and powered by electrical control equipment located in
a control room adjacent to the test area.




2
      The acoustic hardware was checked out, evaluated, and adjusted during a step-
by-step series of checkout test programs. The objective of each checkout experiment
included simplicity of operations, with rapid feedback of results. The experiments
proceeded in an orderly progression from single horns to multiple horns and.from sin-
gle Apollo modules to multiple modules; this was done for simplicity and to assure iso-
lation of the hardware components and the dynamic parameters under evaluation.
Potential physical interference of the ducts with the vibration response of the shells of
test vehicles was investigated in a series of shaker tests. During these tests, the
characteristic response was first measured at selected points on the bare checkout test
article; then the vehicle response was measured at the same points after the horn/duct
system had been mated with the test article.
      Evaluation of the performance characteristics of the facility was oriented toward
verification of acoustic test hardware design and, of more importance, toward com-
parison of Apollo vehicle vibration responses achieved in the ground test with flight
measurements. With minor exceptions (which were subsequently corrected), all
acoustic parameters designed into the hardware were met o r exceeded.
       Effects on the vehicle shell response of physical contact with the ducts are neg-
ligible, The SM shell-vibration data from the laboratory tests compare quite favorably
with flight data. The shell response of the SLA as measured at three locations on two
separate flights has been duplicated satisfactorily in the laboratory.
       In this paper, the facility design requirements will be discussed first. The dis-
cussion will include the philosophy of environmental simulation, the sources of vibra-
tion in space vehicles during flight, the aerodynamic pressure fluctuations around the
Apollo vehicle, and the simulation of such pressure fluctuations. The next section will
describe the final facility design, including the test configuration and the equipment for
the Apollo vehicle. Finally, the performance of the facility (for the Apollo configura-      I




tion) is reported and analyzed. Comparisons are made between intended and actual
performance.

                         FACILITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

                       Philosophy of Environmental Simulation
      The purpose of the Apollo acoustic tests as established by the NASA Manned
Spacecraft Center (MSC) was to evaluate probable spacecraft vehicle structure and
equipment response, failure, o r malfunction in the flight environment. Therefore, the
criteria applied to the method of laboratory simulation were based on the need to re-
produce probable flight responses.
       To obtain the maximum information from the complete system test, it was
deemed desirable to have the capability for all systems, including the astronauts, to be
fully functioning during testing. To achieve this requirement, the vehicle axis had to
be vertical so that the direction of the gravitational vector during flight would be dupli-
cated for fuel tanks, personnel, et cetera.



                                                                                         3
       Since the purpose of the tests was to produce responses similar to flight re-
sponses, the ideal test would have included (1) external pressure fluctuations with cor-
rect time and spatial relationships, (2) inertial forces (due to body acceleration of
spacecraft/booster vehicles), (3) separation and ignition shocks, (4) engine vibration,
(5) vibrations introduced via structural interfaces into upper stages (spacecraft) from
lower stages (booster) that are associated with low -frzequencybody -bending modes of a
complete spacecraft/booster vehicle, (6) external temperatures with time and spatial
relationships, (7) quasi-static wind loads, and (3) external static pressure loads with    i

time and spatial relationships. This is a most formidable list of environmental con-
siderations; the simultaneous accomplishment, o r even partial accomplishment, of
which far exceeded the existing state of the art in 1963. Further, the concept of com-
bined loadings was only beginning to be explored in the simultaneous application of two
forcing functions. The acoustic laboratory was designed to allow accommodation si -
multaneously of all these loads except external temperatures and static pressures.
      Accomplishment of acceleration and quasi -static loads is generally achieved by
attaching tension members to various hard points on the vehicle (interstage rings,
et cetera). The tension members can then transmit the forces of hydraulic jacks which
may be programed. The facility structure was designed to enable installation of at-
tach points for both vertical and horizontal load applications.

      Accomplishment of shock, engine vibration, and interstage vibration would re -
quire placement of vibration generators at appropriate locations on the test vehicle,
including the base of the stage under test. Exact simulation of structural interface
impedance between stages is beyond the state of the art. However, the interface stiff-
ness between the spacecraft and booster stages can be simulated. The assumption is
made that structural impedances at the interfaces between spacecraft modules under
test are simulated for all frequencies above the basic body resonances of the complete
space craf t/boos ter vehicle.
      As previously implied, a major source of vibratory energy for the upper stages,
including the spacecraft, is the external aerodynamically induced pressure fluctuations.
The responses to these fluctuations depend on the pressure spectrum at a point, on the
size of the area over which the pressures are correlated, and on the natural response
characteristics of the structure. The size of the area is generally related to the scale
of the turbulent phenomena causing the pressure fluctuations. Unfortunately, the area
over which an acoustic wave is correlated, either in time o r space, exceeds that over
which the aerodynamic phenomena are correlated. Consequently, in many cases, the
matching of an aerodynamic pressure spectrum at a point results in a greater gen-
eralized force on the vehicle structure. This effect is usually most apparent at low
frequencies. Relationships between frequency, boundary -layer thickness, correlation,
et cetera, have been obtained for the normal boundary layer, both experimentally and
theoretically.    owever, no information was available which would give the space and
time correlations for separated flow and oscillating shock phenomena.

              Sources of Vibration in Spacecraft Vehicles During Flight
      The four primary sources of spacecraft vibration (at frequencies above the basic
body resonances of a complete spacecraft/booster vehicle) during flight are (1) vibra-
tional energy transmitted from propulsion systems or other onboard machinery;

4
(2) vibration induced by ignition, stage separation, and docking impact transients;
(3) vibration resulting from rocket noise impinging on the spacecraft shell during
launch; and (4) vibration resulting from excitation of the spacecraft shell by aerody-
namically derived external pressure fluctuations.
      Motions associated with low -f requency body -bending modes of a complete
spacecraft/booster vehicle usually are lower in level, and are not considered to be a
primary source of high-level structural vibration, especially at high frequencies
(above the basic body resonances of the complete spacecraft/booster vehicle).
      In general, the vibration of propulsion systems dominates the vibration levels
adjacent to the engines. However, little of the vibrational power is received by for-
ward o r remote areas of the spacecraft vehicle because of the attenuation within the
damped structural path. This is especially. the case for mechanical-borne vibration
reaching the spacecraft from the propulsion engines of the lower booster stages.
      Shock energy created by ignition, stage separation, and docking impact tran-
sients excites the fundamental vehicle vibratory modes and sometimes presents a very
severe environment for structure and equipment mounted close to the source of the
shock. However, little of the shock energy, particularly at the higher frequencies, is
propagated to remote locations,
        For much of a spacecraft vehicle, therefore, external pressure fluctuations,
whether acoustic wave noise o r aerodynamically induced, are responsible for the ma-
j ority of internal vibration, structural fatigue failure, and equipment malfunction.
Generally, the aerodynamic sources are more significant in the forward areas of a
spacecraft vehicle, whereas the rocket -generated acoustic wave noise is dominant on
the aft end. The simulation of fluctuating pressures associated with aerodynamic
sources, or the structural vibration resulting thereof, is less straightforward than
simulation of rocket -generated acoustic wave noise. Therefore, the characteristics
of the aerodynamic environment will be discussed in detail in the next section.

                   Aerodynamic Pressure Fluctuations Around the
                            Apollo Spacecraft Vehicle
       The flow field around the Apollo spacecraft is rather complex (fig. 2) because of
the many abrupt geometrical changes. The wake from the rocket tower of the LES
covers the entire CM conical face during the launch phase. The presence of the wake
makes it impossible for the bow shock, formed during supersonic flight in front of the
blunt forebody (CM), to remain stationary. The abrupt transition at the shoulder of
the CM creates a region of locally separated flow over the surface of the SM, which
results in high-level excitation throughout the atmospheric portion of the flight. In
addition, the entire SM is subjected to a forward-moving shock wave as the vehicle
accelerates through the transonic region. Evidence of separated flow also exists over
the SLA, and another flow separation occurs on the Saturn IVB (S-IVB) shoulder,

      Several measurements of the surface pressure fluctuations have been made on
models of typical spacecraft configurations (ref, 3). Numerous wind-tunnel tests using
various scale models were also performed by North American Aviation, Inc., ( N U )



                                                                                         5
f o r NASA MSC at several wind-tunnel facilities, as noted in figure 3. (The latter data,
although unpublished, were used for the Apollo Program environmental definition. )
The maximum overall pressure-fluctuation levels for several typical stations around
the Apollo vehicle at various      ch numbers are given in figure 3. The effect of the
violent separation aft of the      shoulder is clearly evident. The maximum overall
level at this point, 173 dB (all fluctuating pressure and sound pressure levels are in
decibels, referenced to 2 X loe4 microbar), was obtained by NAA at the Douglas Air-
craft Company, Inc., wind-tunnel facilities on a very small model. More controlled
tests gave values of 166 to 168 dB. The average of all values was 169 dB.
      Typical relative 1/3-octave band spectra in the shoulder area are given in fig-
ure 4. The results show a constant increase of 10 dB per decade from the lowest fre-
quency to the spectral maximum in the vicinity of 80 Hz. This slope is independent of
Mach number; however, the spectral levels above 80 H z are influenced by Mach num-
ber with a considerable increase in the supersonic region. Absolute values of typical
maximum spectra, without regard to Mach number or station, are given in figure 5.
The peak in the vicini of 80 H z is well defined for all subsonic and transonic regions.
The characteristic low-frequency slope of 10 dB per decade is also consistent, as is
the tendency for the high-frequency noise to increase in supersonic flight.
       The clear upper bound of the data in figure 5 and the similarity of the spectra
enabled the selection of the design acoustic performance curve shown in figure 6. The
design curve was selected to have an overall sound pressure level (SPL)of 171 dB at
the shoulder position and to give a margin of 2 dB. The margin allowed for uncertain-
ties (in the capabilities of the yet -to-be-developed noise-source system) and allowed
for the possibility of attaining higher levels, if warranted, for specific test objectives.
      The range of sound pressure spectra required to simulate the aerodynamically
derived pressure spectra is shown in figure 7. The estimated spectrum from rocket
noise at launch is also shown. Note that the aerodynamically derived pressure fluctu-
ations are more severe than the rocket noise. The judgment was that achievement of
the facility design spectra with appropriate levels at the various body stations would
guarantee a test envelope which would be realistically conservative.
      A method was required for simulating the fluctuating pressure field around the
Apollo spacecraft where the test article was a 65-foot-high stack made up of the CM,
SM, and SLA on a support fixture. The test article would be 13 feet in diameter at the
SM and 22 feet in diameter at the base. Since the stack is a large item to test, a sim-
ulation technique would have to include consideration for the practical and economical
methods of exciting such a specimen.

                  Simulation of the ressure Fluctuations Around the
                                pol10 Spacecraft Vehicle
       Note that the use of shakers, either singly with excitation introduced at the base
of the vehicle or in multiples with excitation introduced at several points on the vehicle
surface, was discarded as an approach for simulation of the pressure fluctuations
around the Apollo spacecraft vehicle. With single-input excitation at the base of the
vehicle, the desired vibration field could not be achieved because of response attenua-
tion, especially at higher frequencies, along the structural transmission paths to

6
points forward in the vehicle. A multiple-shaker approach would result in the more
common problems encountered with this form of laboratory excitation tool when used
for vibration testing of large vehicles. Some of these problems are that modifications
would be required to the vehicle structure for attachment of shaker armatures; that
vibration response in the vicinity of the shaker attachments would be excessive, which
is unrealistic; and that control difficulties for a large matrix of shakers with inputs of
random excitation would be formidable. For these reasons, further considerations
emphasized acoustical input methods.

      During the course of the conceptual development of the Spacecraft Acoustic
Laboratory (SAL), three general methods of simulating the external pressure fluctua-
tions by the use of acoustic wave impingement were proposed. These are illustrated
in figure 8 and include (1) the reverberant field, (2) the progressive wave from either
the bottom o r the top of the test specimen, and (3) the multiple-source close-coupled
progressive wave.
       A reverberation-chamber approach offered considerable handling and placement
flexibility for the Apollo and future spacecraft because few, if any, fixtures and ducts
would be required. However, for the 270 000-cu-ft test tower required to enclose an
Apollo vehicle configuration, the acoustic power requirements became rather large.
For example, if the wall absorption coefficient were 0.03, the absorption would be
0.03 times 26 000 sq ft, which is 800 sabins. An input power of 2.5 million acoustic
watts would be required to achieve an SPL of 170 dB in the chamber if the propagation
in air were linear; however, because of macrosonic attenuation, the acoustic power
requirement more probably would be on the order of 5 to 7 million acoustic watts.
This power requirement would have far exceeded the most ambitious of previous facil-
ities, and its .cost would have been prohibitive.
      More important, technically, the high-level sound field would surround the entire
vehicle, including all sections which have much lower maximum flight levels. This
would provide a quite unrealistic simulation, especially for the aerodynamic cases, and
would cause much higher response of equipment and structures than occur in flight.
Consequently, failures and malfunctions which might be experienced during the test
would have a low probability of occurring in flight, thus potentially leading to an ex-
cessive number of structural fixes, overdesign, and overweight.
      While high-level reverberant testing was impractical, it was desirable to be
able to utilize the tower as a reverberation chamber at lower levels. This utilization
would allow for future reverberant tests of large equipment and comparison of the re-
sponses of vehicle structure to two different types of test environment, reverberant
and progressive wave acoustic excitation. For this purpose, the internal tower di-
mensions were selected as 90 feet high, 50 feet deep, and 61 feet wide to optimize the
frequency separation of the acoustic modes in the chamber. In the optimiqation proc-
ess, a height of 90 feet was selected to accommodate the vehicle, and a width of 50 feet
was selected for architectural compatibility and for test- article handling space. The
chamber modes were then calculated for a range of lengths between 54 and 65 feet in
increments of approximately 1 foot. The 61-foot dimension provided the best results
with good frequency response obtained above approximately 3.3 times the fundamental
chamber resonant frequency of 6.2 Hz (approximately 20 Hz). Hence, good diffuse
field characteristics were obtained for the entire frequency range of interest between
20 and 2500 Hz. Because of later additional architectural considerations, the basic


                                                                                         7
tower dimensions were increased to 101 feet high, 56 feet deep, and 68 feet wide, each
dimension being adjusted by the same factor to maintain the optimum dimension ratios.

      Two alternative methods of progressive wave testing using a duct -containment
system were considered and are illustrated in figure 8. Both methods required ap-
proximately 160 000 acoustic watts of power to achieve 171 dB in a 3-inch-wide annular
area around the command and service module (CSM) shoulder. Both concepts allowed
simulation of the SPL gradient aft of the CSM shoulder by a combination of attenuation       6

and increase in area function. Both could be terminated in similar manner, either
alongside the SLA or around a portion of a simulated S-IVB stage.
      A major difference in concept was the provision of multiple-source units. In the
multiple-source configuration which was adopted, 16 sources would be utilized to drive
16 longitudinal ducts in lieu of one o r two sources driving a single duct. Each of the
16 sources could be driven from an independent random-noise generator which would
enable limiting circumferential correlation to a duct width of 30 inches, thereby im-
proving the simulation flexibility.
      A second major difference was the use of a folded horn rather than a direct horn
for the CM. The principal difficulty with the direct horn was the requirement that the
SPL at the nose be less than that at the shoulder. Consequently, the duct cross-
sectional area would have to be greater at the nose than at the shoulder with the antic-
ipation that this area expansion followed by a contraction and then an expansion would
lead to considerable acoustic-transmission difficulties, The folded horn avoided some
of the difficulties since its horn area expansion nearly matched the areas required to
achieve the desired sound pressure levels. However, impedance discontinuities would
occur at the throat of the folded horn. These discontinuities were minimized during
the model portion of the concept study.

       During the design phase, the mold lines for the horns and ducts were defined in
detail. An opportunity to add, at little additional cost, the capability to drive the lab-
oratory reverberantly with the 16 noise sources also became apparent in the design
phase. This second mode of testing would be achieved by removing the ducts from the
horns at the CSM shoulder and replacing them with 16 large horn flare sections. The
flare sections would couple the noise sources to the room volume by using a portion of
the test vehicle as the horn walls. The resulting acoustical conditions would retain
progressive wave excitation over the surface of the CM and the upper surface of the
SM. The lower surface of the S and the surface of the SLA would be subjected to
reverberant energy, thus affording versatility of the testing approach and an oppor -
tunity to compare the response of vehicles to both types of laboratory forcing functions.
       The primary purpose of the SAL, as in any ground-based experimental facility,
is to provide a tool which can be used to simulate one o r more of the inservice envi-
ronments of a spacecraft. With this tool, the experimenter may study the vibrations
of either a full-scale or model vehicle to simulated environments, and then utilize the
experimental results to predict the vibrations of the full-scale vehicle to actual en-
vironments. The utility of any experiment involving such simulation is proportional
to the degree of confidence which can be placed in the accuracy of the vibration re-
sponse predictions that can be made from the experiment. Under the proper choice of
field parameters, different fluctuating pressure fields can produce essentially identical


8
average vibration response in a structure, Thus, in general, the simulated environ-
ment need not always be completely accurate in itself but rather must provide an ac-
curate vibration prediction tool. The variable parameters for optimizing simulation,
which served as design requirements for the SAL, are compared with flight conditions
in table I.
       The comparisons in table I indicate that the SAL could achieve a rather accurate
simulation of the pressure field from rocket noise at launch and a less accurate simu-
lation of the pressure field resulting from aerodynamic pressure fluctuations. The
principal deficiencies of the latter simulation are (1)inability to simulate the longitu-
dinal and lateral correlation functions except to the approximation of (sin ky)/ky,
where k is the acoustic wavelength constant and y is distance, for the reverberant
configuration; o r cos ky, longitudinally, and one-sixteenth of the circumference lat -
erally in the progressive wave patterns; and (2) inability to vary the spectrum as a
function of longitudinal position in either configuration. These deficiencies result from
the use of an acoustic field to simulate nonacoustic phenomena. However, the signifi-
cance of the deficiencies is still not established. Existing theory and experience indi-
cated that their effects could be minimized through development of proper equivalent
spectra for the ground simulation. Therefore, early experimental programs in the
SAL, together with supporting theoretical studies (refs. 4 and 5), were directed toward
developing the necessary equivalences and proving the results by comparing the vibra-
tion field in actual vehicles measured both in flight and in the SAL. These efforts are
continuing, and the results already achieved (ref. 6) toward simulation of flight re-
sponse are quite promising. The following section is a detailed description of the fa-
cility, as built.

                              FACILITY DESCRIPTION

                                       General
       The SAL (fig. 9) is housed in a tower which has external dimensions of 105 feet
high, 60 feet deep, and 70 feet wide. The tower consists of a structural steel frame-
work with concrete panels for the exterior walls, and can accommodate a vehicle up
to 30 feet in diameter and 85 feet in height. A door 40 feet high and 32 feet wide pro-
vides access for bringing individual spacecraft modules into the laboratory, The lab-
oratory is serviced by a 75-ton fixed-point hoist which is used for stacking modular
components of an integrated spacecraft, and which can be used to suspend a spacecraft
during testing, A 5-ton circular bridge crane is used for general-purpose material
handling and for handling test ducts. Permanent and movable platforms are located
at elevations of 15, 30, 45, 60, and 75 feet. The movable platforms are 3-foot-wide
catwalks which encircle the test vehicles. An elevator 6 feet wide, 7 feet deep, and
8 feet high is used for personnel and equipment access to the various levels and to the
adjacent control room. Pneumatic and electrical utility connections, communications
stations, and instrumentation and cable chases are located throughout the laboratory.
      TWQmodes of testing are presently available in the laboratory: progressive
wave, the primary mode; and progressive wave/reverberant f i l l -in, the secondary
mode.


                                                                                          9
      In progressive wave tests, the exposed surface of a test vehicle is enveloped by
controlled high-intensity sound, Sixteen separate progressive wave sound fields are
directed downward over the vehicle in separate encircling ducts as shown in figure 9.
The cross-sectional area of the ducts is adjustable so that specified sound pressure
levels can be achieved along the longitudinal axis of the test vehicle. Sound energy is
supplied by 16 noise sources, o r air modulators, which are electrically programed and
have an output of 10 000 acoustic watts each, The air kodulators are suspended from
the top platform in the tower and are attached to coupling horns which are connected to
the ducts. The air modulators are independently controlled so that the correlation of
the acoustic fields between the ducts can be programed. The 160 000 acoustic watts of
power generated by the air modulators provide an overall SPL of 169 dB at the horn/
duct interface.
      In progressive wave/reverberant fill-in testing, the ducts are removed from the
horns and replaced with extension horn flare sections which couple the acoustic energy
to the acoustic response modes of chamber volume. Thus, the lower portion of the
vehicle is subjected to reverberant loading.
      The air modulators require a large volume of compressed air (approximately
27 000 standard cu ft/min) which is supplied by a constant-flow centrifugal air com-
pressor driven by a 4500-horsepower electric motor. The compressor is located in
an adjacent building and draws its supply of air from within the tower, making the air
system a closed loop, with the tower volume serving as a plenum. A i r manifolds are
connected to the air modulators by hoses.

                              Apollo Test Configuration
      The SAL horn/duct system is presently configured specifically for the Apollo
spacecraft (fig. 10). In this configuration, the complete Apollo test article (consisting
of a CM, an SM, an SLA, and an LM located inside the SLA) is positioned on top of a
Saturn instrument unit (IU) and a base fixture (which simulates the S-IVB forward
skirt). The entire stack is in a vertical orientation. The dome of a forward tank of
the S-IVB booster is also mounted, consistent with flight location, inside the S-IVB
forward skirt to assure proper internal acoustical boundary conditions. The circular
duct system is positioned around the entire Apollo vehicle stack (fig. 11) to contain the
high-energy acoustic progressive waves which are generated above the stack and
passed aftward over the outer shells of the vehicles. Approximately 75 percent of the
acoustic energy passes down over the SM. The remainder is directed via a splitter
arrangement in the initial, o r transition, horn section through a reverse, o r folded,
horn backup over the face of the CM. Anechoic termination wedges are located at the


      'Standard longitudinal Apollo station numbers are used to identify measurement
locations. These station numbers along the longitudinal axis are identified as Xa----
(with up to four digits to f i l l the blanks). In SAL, measurement locations from Xa 552
(bottom of the SLA) to Xa 1260 (top of the upper terminator) are available.



10
end of each duct run and of each horn run to assure that a plane wave condition is main-
tained. This is necessary to preclude the occurrence of standing acoustic waves and to
assure compliance with plane wave propagation objectives. The latter allows the SPL
to be increased o r decreased along the length of the specimen by moving the outer wall
of the duct in o r out with respect to the vehicle outer shell (that is, the depth of the
duct is variable). The spectral shape of the acoustic waves is controlled by appropri-
ate programing of the electrical input signal to the driver coil of the air modulator
which generates the acoustic waves. The acoustic levels are controlled by the pro-
gramed output of the air modulator and by the radial placement of the duct with respect
to the outer face of the vehicle shell. The duct is divided into 16 acoustically separate
channels so that many combinations of levels, shapes, and correlations can be pro-
gramed around the circumference of the test article.
      The transition horns (fig. 12), which couple the air -modulator acoustic output
with the folded-horn/duct system, are constructed of epoxy fiber glass and have access
ports for mounting microphones so that the microphone diaphragms are flush with the
internal wall of the horns. The transition horns are bolted to the steel folded-horn
sections which surround the CM. A steel upper terminator unit having 16 compart-
ments, each lined abundantly with fiber-glass absorptive material and fitted with fiber-
glass wedges, is bolted to the top of the 16 folded-horn sections. The V-shaped duct
supports (fig. 13), which are bolted to the lower faces of the folded-horn sections and
extend downward over the SM, SLA, and IU, are constructed of plywood faced with
sheet metal. The outer walls of the ducts (fig. 14) are steel rolled to a curvature that
is concentric with the surface of the test article. Slotted tabs are provided on the
outer walls of the ducts, and multiple bolting locations are provided on the V-shaped
duct supports to allow radial adjustment of the cross-sectional area of the ducts. The
cross-sectional area of each duct is bounded by the outer wall, two walls of the V-
shaped duct supports, and the surface of the test vehicle. In a similar fashion, the
surface of the CM serves as a fourth horn boundary in the reverse-horn sections.
Fiber -glass wedges, which serve as lower terminators, are positioned at the bottom
of each duct in the area of the IU and the base fixture. When the reverberant flare
system (fig. 15) is used in lieu of the duct system, the acoustic progressive waves are
coupled directly to the room and no anechoic terminators are used. All steel walls of
the horn/duct assemblies are coated with several thick layers of viscoelastic damping
compound. The weight of the horn/duct assemblies is supported by the building plat-
forms through hangar rods and bolting arrangements so that no load is exerted on the
test vehicle by the test hardware. Soft, highly compliant sealing hoses provide the
only contact between the horn/duct systems and the test vehicle. The sealing hoses
run longitudinally along the vehicle and separate the horn/duct walls from the vehicle
surface. Acoustical isolation between adjacent horns and adjacent ducts is provided
by the sealing hoses without interference with the vibration response of the surface of
the test vehicle, During assembly of the horns and ducts around the vehicle, illumi-
nation checks are made with electrical lights for duct leaks which, when found, are
eliminated by the application of rubber sealing compound. A hyperbolic -exponential
design with an aspect ratio of 0.6 was used for the expansions of all horns, and a de-
sign cut-off frequency of 25 Hz was used throughout with the exception of the reverber-
ant flare sections where 50 Hz had to be used because of space limitations (fig. 16).
      The air modulators (fig. 17) are connected to the top of the initial horns with a
quick =disconnect arrangement. Ancillary equipment items, including a cooling system



                                                                                      11
and a dc field supply, are located on adjacent platforms. The air modulators are
linear -vane devices with electromagnetically driven cylindrical valves and were de -
veloped specifically for the SAL. The units are water cooled with a vacuum-assisted
return system. The modulator valves are suspended on continuous rubber diaphragms
and are driven inductively by variable electrical programing signals interacting with
magnetic fields (ref. 7).

                             Control and Instrumentation
       The control system equipment, located in a room adjacent to the acoustic tower,
consists of 16 control and power channels, one for each of the 16 air modulators
(fig. 18). Each channel includes a separate electrical white-noise generator and
1/3 -octave band shaper for random programing, and a separate 3000-watt-power am-
plifier so that acoustic energy which is uncorrelated between ducts can be produced by
the separate air modulators. The amplified programing signals are connected via
cables to the air modulators in the tower. Through patching changes, one white-noise
generator and shaper can be used to drive all amplifier and air -modulator channels to
obtain an all -correlated acoustic condition between the ducts. Intermediate correlation
combinations are also possible. Oscillators are available and the air modulators can
be driven sinusoidally, o r sinusoid programing can be mixed with random programing.
While versatility of control is provided, a single master -gain control is used to in-
crease and decrease the output levels of all air modulators simultaneously during a
test run. Rapid attainment either of test levels or of shutdown was designed into the
system to minimize undesired excitation and structural fatigue of the test vehicle.
Other operational features include equipment malfunction alarms and automatic shut -
down; emergency termination switches for the amplifier system and the air compres -
sor; an arrangement allowing for selection of any control channel for monitoring by the
test conductor; an environmental condition (temperature, humidity, and pressure) re -
cording system; a flexible control and data instrumentation patching capability; plug -in
modular components for quick replacement of malfunctioning units; intercom and tele -
vision systems; and an analog data acquisition system consisting of signal -conditioning
amplifiers and magnetic tape recorders. Presently, the data acquisition system can
accommodate simultaneously 35 channels of horn/duct microphone measurements,
 160 channels of test vehicle microphone and accelerometer measurements, and
 50 channels of strain gage measurements. Multiple test runs with repatching can be
used to obtain a larger number of response measurements on the test vehicle.
      Each air modulator is calibrated using a plane wave tube (especially constructed
for the purpose) before being installed in the SAL for a testing operation. All tests of
airframe vehicles are preceded by a calibration test series using a boilerplate vehicle.
During these calibration tests, the amplitudes and spectral shapes a r e adjusted se-
quentially in each duct at planned test levels. This procedure assures appropriate
compensation for individual air -modulator/duct anomalies that may be present, and
assures correct settings at high levels where acoustical nonlinearities occur. The
controls for each channel are then documented and the test stack is torn down. The
boilerplate vehicle is replaced with the actual spacecraft test article and the horn/duct
systems reinstalled. A low-level test run for checking the test environment and for
ranging of data acquisition equipment precedes high-level runs. For the high-level
runs, the test conductor uses a single master -gain control to apply acoustic excitation



12
    to the vehicle. Tape-recorded test data can be reduced with either analog or digital
    equipment at data reduction facilities located elsewhere at NASA MSC.

                                  FACILITY PERFORMANCE


I          The major features of the facility performance for both the progressive wave duct
    and the reverberant modes of operation are reviewed in this section, In addition, some
    of the detailed performance characteristics of the coupling horns and ducts are ex-
    amined, and the problems associated with coupling the progressive wave duct to the
    vehicle are discussed. Vibration responses, which are obtained with accelerometers
    at three locations on the SLA, are compared for both progressive wave duct and re-
    verberant excitation. Vibration responses are presented which were obtained with ac -
    celerometers at eight locations on the SM, for both progressive wave duct and flight
    excitation.

                                Progressive Wave Performance
          As described in previous sections, the progressive wave mode of operation al-
    lows variation of the overall SPL axially along the test article for all stations below
    the CSM shoulder. Furthermore, the progressive wave mode allows freedom in se-
    lecting the spectrum and level for ea@ duct and the correlation parameters among
    various ducts. Therefore, for any individual duct, the spectrum throughout the duct
    has a definite relation to the spectrum at all other points along the duct. The relation-
    ship may be varied only by changing the axial variation of the duct cross-sectional
    area, the characteristics of the acoustical termination, o r the axial impedance charac-
    teristics of the vehicle.
           A i r modulators were designed to meet the requirements of the SAL, and provide
    a maximum of 10 000 watts acoustical power output over a frequency range of 30 to
    1000 Hz. The high-frequency performance of the facility is thus limited by the capabil-
    ity of the noise source above 1000 Hz, whereas the low-frequency performance is con-
    trolled by the horn cut-off characteristics and the terminating impedances. Within
    these frequency response constraints, a large variety of spectra can be generated, as
    indicated by the range of spectra measured in several experiments at the CSM shoul-
    der, station Xa 1008 (fig. 19). Figure 20 shows that the overall level can be varied
    over at least 30 dB from 140 to 169.5 dB at the CSM shoulder station. Note that these
    particular spectra were chosen for specific experimental objectives and do not repre-
    sent all possible spectra. For example, spectra which peak at either the low-
    frequency, middle -frequency, or high-frequency ends of the overall envelope indicated
    in the figure may be produced.
          Figure 2 1 gives the spectra resulting at the Apollo shoulder for one setting of the
    electronic spectrum shaper and for various voltage amplitudes across the air modula-
    tor. Note that all spectra are essentially similar below 500 Hz. However, in the fre-
    quency range above 500 Hz, the rolloff for the high-level spectra is considerably less
    than for the lowest level spectra. This nonlinear property, termed macrosonic atten-
    uation, results from the distortion of high-level acoustic energy in its propagation in


                                                                                           13
the initial horn. The distortion produces a triangular waveform which, when fully de-
veloped, will give a rolloff of approximately 3 dB per octave. For the data in figure 21,
the highest level spectra is approaching the theoretical 3 -dB per octave rolloff.

      For some applications, the presence of distortion at high frequency is undesir-
able. However, the distortion is most useful f o r the majority of applications since it
provides the only currently available method of extending the spectrum beyond the con-
trollable limits of the acoustic noise source.
      The variation of SPL along the axis of the vehicle is accomplished by varying the
cross-sectional area of the ducts. The variation permits a change of area along the
SM from the 90-sq-in. fixed cross section at the shoulder to as much as 450 sq in. at
the base of the SM. The area along the SLA can vary from a minimum of 90 sq in. at       '

the top of the SLA to a maximum of approximately 750 sq in. at the base. Part of the
variation along the SLA comes from the increase in diameter of 13 feet at the top to
22 feet at the base, and the remainder comes from the ability to vary the radial dimen-
sion (or depth) of the duct from 4-1/2 to 15 inches.
       Figure 22 illustrates the axial range of variation of SPL which has been found for
the Apollo configuration. The ideal variation of SPL for both minimum and maximum
duct spacings compares very closely with that measured in the high-frequency region.
At low frequencies, however, the decrease of SPL along the vehicle is greater thanthat
resulting from the area variation alone, The effect of frequency is best illustrated in
figure 23, which gives the measured 1/3-octave band spectra in decibels relative to
the shoulder spectra for four locations down the side of the test article. The high-
frequency levels in figure 22 represent the average of the three 1/3-octave bands cen-
tered on 800 Hz (from fig. 23); the low-frequency levels were derived from the six
1/3-octave bands centered on 112 Hz.
      Thus, figure 23 shows that the transition between the low- and high-frequency
region occurs just above 250 Hz. As will be seen later, the maximum absorption of
acoustic power by the vehicle structure occurs just below 250 Hz, with a considerable
decrease in acoustic absorption at higher frequencies. Therefore, the additional de-
crease in SPL along the axis of the vehicle for the low-frequency region is attributed
to the absorption of acoustic power by the vehicle.
       The mechanism for this absorption can be seen from a simplified acoustic model
of the duct/vehicle system as a duct with a continuous resistive absorber forming one
side. Analysis of the model indicates that the attenuation in decibels along the duct
due to absorption of acoustic power should vary directly with axial distance and in-
versely with radial duct dimension (or depth) for the Apollo structure. Therefore, if
a lesser low-frequency SPL gradient along the vehicle were desired, the depth of the
duct at the shoulder would need to be increased to obtain lower attenuation. Of course,
the increase of area at the shoulder will have a side effect of reducing the maximum
SPL in the duct at the shoulder. The simplified analysis also suggests that if the pro-
gressive wave duct mode of testing were utilized for vehicles of lower surface weight
than that of Apollo (approximately 2 lb/sq ft), careful consideration would have to be
given to the duct depth versus SPL gradient requirements.
      The utilization of 16 ducts and their associated air modulators enables a con-
trolled variation of the circumferential spatial correlation of the sound field along

14
    the vehicle. As discussed in previous sections, this acoustic system, together with its
    electronic controls, can operate in any mode from "all ducts correlated" to "all ducts
    uncorrelated. '' The practical achievement of the "all ducts correlated" condition is yet
    to be demonstrated in the facility. Early experiments revealed that unity correlation
    w a s difficult to maintain from duct to duct over a wide frequency range, primarily be-
    cause of variations among the acoustic noise sources. These variations among noise
    sources also made it difficult to obtain identical spectra and amplitudes among the
    ducts. The variation in SPL o r in the 1/3-octave band sound pressure levels for all
    16 ducts operating in the uncorrelated mode is shown in figure 24. As shown from the
    data envelopes, when the overall sound pressure levels are controlled to within
    *1-1/2 dB, the sound pressure levels in 1/3-octave bands remain within *2 to 3 dB
    over a substantial portion of the frequency range. However, deviations up to 4 dB are
    noted in the high-frequency end of the spectra. The increase in deviation in high fre-
    quency for the spectra is associated with the fact that the levels in this frequency range
    are generated both by controlled modulation and nonlinear distortion of noise from
    lower frequency modulation. In any event, the overall variation illustrated in figure 24
    is considered quite acceptable for practical test purposes.

           A great number of interesting experimental results have been derived from the
    facility. Many of these experiments are directed toward obtaining better understanding
    of detailed factors which affect the overall performance of the facility. Although space
    does not permit discussion of all investigations here, two of the detailed factors have
    general application to progressive wave duct excitation of aerospace vehicles and will
    be discussed briefly in the following paragraphs,


                                      Horn Performance
          In the design of a high-intensity acoustic facility, horns are employed to give a
    smooth transition from the very small area of the air-modulator throat to a large area
    at the entrance to a test section, Ideally, the horns should be perfectly terminated in
    impedances which match the characteristic impedance of air (or pc) and act as perfect
    couplers for the energy over the entire frequency range. However, in any finite-length
    horn/duct system, the termination is always less than perfect and will cause reflected
    waves. The reflections result in the buildup of standing waves, which may be found ex-
    perimentally by probing the sound field along the axis of the horn. A typical result of
    such a probe is given in figure 25 for the initial horn and for three discrete frequen-
    cies.
           At 400 Hz, a variation of SPL along the axis departs from the ideal horn area ex-
    pansion by less than 1 dB. However, at 100 Hz and lower frequencies, a greater dif-
'
    ference is found between the ideal and the real horn. The difference can be quantified
    i n terms of the standing wave ratio, which is the peak-to-peak difference in decibels
    of the departure of the pressure amplitude from the mean. This behavior can also be
    related to the effective absorption coefficient of the termination to the horn (and is a
    measure of the quality of the termination).
          Both the standing wave ratio and the effective absorption coefficient for the initial
    horn, reverse horn, and reverberant flare horn are given in figures 26(a), 26(b), and
    26(c), respectively. The effective absorption for the initial horn approaches 100 per-
    cent for frequencies above 150 Hz. However, below 100 Hz, the absorption varies be-
    tween 70 and 90 percent, depending on frequency and type of termination. Although

                                                                                           15
the absorption for most acoustical purposes is generally of primary interest, the
standing wave ratio is perhaps more meaningful from the point of view of assessing fa-
cility performance, since it gives twice the maximum deviation from the mean SPL in
terms of decibels. Also, as seen in figure 26, the standing wave ratio is a more sen-
sitive indicator than the absorption coefficient in detecting minor departures from the
ideal.

                                                                                              1
                                       Duct Seals

       The sealing of the individual ducts to the vehicle to prevent leakage of sound into
adjacent ducts is necessary to maintain independent noise fields and for the adequate
acoustic termination of each noise source. A leak along the duct acts as a distributed
inductive shunt and causes a significant degradation of the low -frequency performance
of the entire system, in addition to providing added attenuation along the duct. The
potential seriousness of the situation is illustrated in figure 27, which gives results
from a one-third scale model of a typical duct section studied during the design of the
facility. Spectra are given for three stations located in the parallel section of the duct,
varying between 2 and 80 inches from the interface between the horn and duct. The
data for the 2-inch location in figure 27 demonstrate that the overall frequency re-
sponse of the horn/duct configuration rolled off below 100 Hz. However, with a tightly
sealed configuration, the low-f requency performance is significantly improved with the
low-frequency cut-off occurring at approximately 30 Hz. Furthermore, the results for
locations farther down the duct show that considerable attenuation is occasioned by the
leak.

      These two effects of improper sealing make it essential to seal the vehicle to the
duct acoustically. However, the sealing requirement conflicts somewhat with the re -
quirement that the presence of the duct shall not inhibit the vibration response of the
vehicle. This potential problem area was recognized early in the design concept study
and resulted in experimental studies of various types of sealing devices to meet both
criteria, The final result for the ducts along the Apollo vehicle is a 1-inch-diameter
rubber hose of low durometer, supplemented with plastic sealants over local contour
variations about the vehicle mold lines.
      The noise reduction between adjacent ducts (fig. 28) is approximately 15 to 20 dB
over both the CM and the SM. However, the noise reduction between these same ducts,
when measured at the base of the SLA, is only 5 to 10 dB for frequencies below ap-
proximately 300 Hz and increases to approximately 20 dB above that frequency. This
lower noise reduction at the base of the SLA is suspected to result from the reradiation
of energy by the vehicle into adjacent ducts. This would also explain the increase of
the noise reduction to the 20-dB level at frequencies above the principal response f r e -
quencies of the vehicle, as discussed previously and exhibited in the axial attenuation
of figure 22.

      The seal design, which gives a reasonable noise reduction, simultaneously en-
ables achievement of designed low -frequency response performance characteristics.
       To test the possible interference of the sealed ducts with the vibration response
of the vehicle, experiments were conducted in which the vehicle was mechanically ex-
cited, both with and without the acoustic duct system. A typical vibration response,

16
*
    measured in 1/3-octave bands, for a boilerplate CM is given in figure 29 for both
    cases. For convenience, the vibration response is expressed in decibels relative to
    10-6g. Little variation was experienced throughout the spectrum. Figure 30 gives a
    summary of the differences in response measured in the SLA at six accelerometer lo-
    cations for mechanical excitation, both with and without the duct system coupled to the
    vehicle. Again, the variation appears to be within the statistical accuracy of the data.
    These and other experiments demonstrated that the seals currently in use are more
    than adequate for the Apollo vehicle. However, if vehicles of significantly lower sur -
    face weight were to be tested in a similar configuration, the adequacy of the seals
    would need to be demonstrated again.


                                    Reverberant Performance
          The second basic mode of operation provided in the SAL is the semi-reverberant
    mode discussed in a previous section. Although the principal experimentation to date
    has been with the progressive wave mode, the measurements with the reverberant'mode
    indicate that it will also furnish a practical tool f o r certain Apollo test applications.
          The acoustical absorption provided inside the SAL is given in figure 31. The ab-
    sorption below approximately 1200 to 1600 Hz averages a little over 4000 sq ft, re-
    sulting in an absorption coefficient of approximately 0.12, based on a wall surface
    area. The absorption coefficient is approximately eight times higher than would be ex-
    pected in a standard hard-walled reverberation chamber. However, it is not the result
    of the classical acoustic absorption expected from soft resistive absorptive materials;
    rather it is the result of the vehicle, of the steel gratings provided at every platform
    level, and of the various steel piping and other systems provided in the tower for gen-
    eral facility operation. The increase in absorption illustrated in frequencies above
    1600 Hz is the result of natural air absorption in the room and is expected to become
    asymptotically proportional to the square of frequency.
          Figure 32 gives the range of sound pressure levels measured along the SLA im-
    mediately adjacent to the skin and in the general chamber volume. The levels are the
    result of a reasonably flat input spectrum at almost full acoustic power. Note that the
    levels adjacent to the SLA are within 1 o r 2 dB of those predicted for the launch case.
    Therefore, this configuration has utility for some test purposes utilizing the SLA.
          The difference between the sound pressure levels in the general chamber volume
    and those adjacent to the actual structure, as illustrated in figure 32, is important to
    note. Although the usual practice for equipment testing is to specify and measure the
    average level in the general volume of a reverberant chamber, the levels which are
    most important for full vehicle testing are those adjacent to the skin. Thus, in de-
    signing a vehicle test, differences between the chamber reverberant level and the
    pressure on the skin of the order of those shown in figure 32 must be considered in
    specifying and measuring the test spectrum.
          The relative spectra between the Apollo shoulder station and the four longitudi-
    nal stations along the test article are given in figure 33. These data, which are meas-
    ured at the same stations utilized in figure 23, show the type of variation of axial
    sound pressures which might be expected from a combination of a close-coupled


                                                                                            17
horn/vehicle configuration in a reverberant chamber. Naturally, the absolute magni -
tude of the difference between the close-coupled region and the throat of the horn in the
reverberant chamber is dependent on both the coupling area and the absorption of the
chamber.

                                   Vibration Response
      The ultimate intent of the acoustic facility is to produce a vibration field within
the vehicle which is similar to that actually encountered in its mission performance.
The transfer function, which relates the average vibration within the vehicle to the
surface acoustic pressures, is known to be a function of the type of external pressure
of the fluctuating field. Figure 34 gives the transfer function for three accelerometers
located on the §LA for both the progressive wave duct and reverberant field excita-
tions, The data show that the shapes of the transfer functions are almost identical and
the absolute magnitudes are similar, although the reverberant sound field appears to
produce a response averaging approximately 3 dB higher than that produced by pro-
gressive wave duct excitation,
      Note that the frequency response characteristics and the magnitude of the re-
sponses which govern the transfer functions are a function of the SLA structure, size,
stiffness, mass, and damping, as well as the characteristics of the room and the
method of excitation, and therefore cannot be applied to other vehicles without suitable
correction.
      Figure 35 gives the space average fluctuating pressure spectra measured on the
surface of the SM during Apollo flights. In an attempt to match the SM vibration re-
sponse in SAL, acoustic spectra (fig, 35) were applied to a prototype airframe (honey-
comb structural shell) SM with the progressive wave duct configuration. Figure 36
presents the resulting two vibration response spectra for flight and laboratory cases.
Each curve represents an average of eight accelerometers located on the SM outer
shell with the locations in the laboratory test closely duplicating those in flight.

      Further indications of good response simulations attainable in SAL are presented
in another paper (ref. 6) discussing a specific test program in the facility.

                                 CONCLUDING REMARKS

      Simulation of vehicle vibration response to the acoustic waves propagating for -
ward from the first-stage booster engine at lift-off is reasonably straightforward
through application of progressive acoustic waves in the Spacecraft Acoustic Labora-
tory. However, simulation of vehicle vibration response to aerodynamically induced
fluctuating pressures, through the transonic and maximum dynamic -pressure flight
regimes (by using acoustic progressive waves in the laboratory), required adjustments
to the correlation, amplitude, and spectral shapes of the laboratory composite wave
energy. The laboratory acoustic environment applied to the vehicle is not neces-
sarily a duplication, acoustically, of the flight fluctuating pressure environment
when attempting to achieve duplicate vehicle vibration response in the laboratory,
Until adjustment criteria can be developed for the wide range of fluctuating pressure

18
environments and the vehicle structural characteristics which are possible, testing will
probably follow a two-step procedure. The first step will be to program the laboratory
environment to match the measured or predicted service environment in accordance
with the amplitude and spectral shape. Comparison of vehicle vibration responses ob-
tained from the first step with service vibration responses will then lead to the second
step of adjusting the laboratory environment conditions, including phase correlation co -
efficients, if possible, to achieve a duplication in the laboratory of the service vibra-
tion responses,
       Checkout and development tests have proved the practicality and workability of
the fluctuating pressure simulation approach embodied in the Spacecraft Acoustic Lab -
oratory for full-scale ground testing of large vehicles. Examination of acoustic per -
formance data has shown that the design requirements for the Spacecraft Acoustic
Laboratory have been met o r exceeded. Vehicle vibration responses, which closely
duplicate responses measured in flight, have been obtained in the Spacecraft Acoustic
Laboratory f o r the Apollo spacecraft.
      The Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory has been and currently is supporting the
Apollo Program with evaluations of structurally complete prototype spacecraft. Fur -
ther use of this unique facility in support of the Apollo Applications Program is sched-
uled, and application of this simulation technique to future programs (such as the
Manned Orbital Laboratory and the Mars Mission), which will have vehicles with new
shapes and sizes, is possible with merely a modification of a portion of the acoustic
test hardware.

      Manned Spacecraft Center
           National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                 Houston, Texas, February 29, 1968
                        914 -50-20-15 -72




                                                                                     19
                          1
                I
               .E
               '8
               ,h
               e,
                cn
                cn
                0
                a
                k
                0




     -
     B
     cd
     h
     5
     E
     cd
     cn
     W
     0
     E
     r!W
     n
     E
     k
     a
     F
     u
     .r(

     0
     W
     M
     M
     z"
     u




                     ..

           d
           0




20
NASA-S-68-1032




         Figure 1. - Apollo spacecraft vehicle in launch and boost configuration.
   NASA-S-68- 1033




                                            Mach 0.9




                                            Mach 1.43
 Figure 2.   - Sketches of two flow regimes over the Apollo vehicle from Marshall Space
                Flight Center wind-tunnel tests (original SLA configuration).


                                                                                     21
       NASA-S-68-1034




                     180


                                                                         X NASA Arne3 15 5 p e r c e n t scale model)
               3
               0     170                                                 A Douglas 4 by 4 (2.75-percent scale model)
               -sE
              g.
              0
               rl    160
               X
               N

               s
               8 150
               -I
               n.
               -
               -
               v)




               0




                          1200       1100   1000        900            800        700           600         500         400

                                                   Apollo body station coordinates, X,,   in.


Figure 3. - Comparison of maximum overall aerodynamic pressure fluctuations found
  in previous studies of typical configurations corrected to flight dynamic pressure
  (original SLA configuration).

         NASA-S-68-1035


                     0-
                                                                                                                         Mach
                                                                                                                        number
          CI.                                      I
          A
          n
          v)
                -10   -                                                                                                   2.5


                                                                                                                         2 .o
          2
          Y

          m -20
          -0          -                                                                                                   1.5
          J
          Q




                -30   -                                                                                                   1.0



                      'Jv        I                       I                                 I
                -40                    1      I                    I                                  I
                                                                                                                   I      I



        Figure 4. - Typical relative pressure spectra downstream of shoulder
                              at various Mach numbers.


22
      NASA-S-68-1036



                             160    c




                       e
                       n     150
             .         .-D
                       E


                             14 0




                             130




                             120




                             110        I       I         I        I        I           I     I     I          I    I
                                        1       2         5       10       20          50    100   200     500     1000

                                                                        Frequency, Hz

      Figure 5. - Typical spectra of pressure fluctuations in 1/3 octaves for
                   several positions and several Mach numbers.

        NASA-5-68- 1037




                       170
                 T
                 n
                 .-D
                 E 160
              x  Fl
                 X
                 hl
                 2 150                                        Plus 10 dB /decade
                 8
                 2                                                     Minus 10 dB /decade
                 CL
                 UY
                 t 140
                 u

                 0
                 I
                 m
                 \
                 rl

                       130                                                 -       .
                             1      2       5       10   20        50      100     200       500   1000 2000
                                                                       Frequency, Hz

Figure 6. - Design curve for random noise spectrum at shoulder of Apollo vehicle
                    with an overall level objective of 171 dB.


                                                                                                                          23
     NASA-S-68-1038

              170   r
                                                                F a c i l i t y design spectrum at shoulder
       Q                                                        of Apollo vehicle 7
       m
       n
       e
       .-0
        E
      P0
       ..-I
       X'
       cu
        ..
        2
       Y

       m
     ' - 0




              130                                Maximum estimated noise
                                                                                           booster shoulder
                                        from rockets at I
                               0-              service module shoulder                  -\




              NASA-S-68-1039




                                                   Progressive wave
                                                   with two sources


                           Figure 8. - Three facility concepts for SAL.

24
                                      v.
                                       ,Anechoic wedges

         Figure 9. - Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory.




              NASA-S-68-104 1




               Upper tennlnator (1)




               ’ Command module




Figure 10. - Arrangement of test article and horn/duct system.


                                                                 25
                                                                             1




     Figure 11. - Apollo vehicle in SAL after installation of duct system.


26
L horn assembly with air modulators installed,
     Figure 13. - Ducts removed showing contact of V-shaped duct supports with
                             outer shell of SM vehicle,
28
     Figure 15. - S L reverberant flare system installed around Apollo vehicle.


30
Figure 16. -   L reverberant flare system.
     a,
     5
     w
     0
     W
     k
     *
     0
     d
     I4



     3E
     k
     .d
     d




32
     i
     a,
    c1
    rn
    h
9   rn
d   d
    0
    k
    c,
    0
    0




    a,
    k
    7
    ba
    G




    33
     NASA-S-68- 105 0




                                                                            horn)




         Accelerometer


          Figure 19. - Measurement locations for Apollo tests in the SAL.


34
        NASA-S-68-105 1
                    160




                    120
              si
              :
              0

             h
             \ 110
             l-l




                    100
                                 31.5    63   125 250       500   1000 2000
                                                Frequency, Hz


         Figure 20.       - Typical spectra in SAL at Apollo shoulder.
                   NASA-5-68-1052


                         170



                   -B    160

                    e
                    .-
                    E
                   y     150
                   0
                   4
                    X

                    .. 140
                    N
                    e

                         130




                         110



                         100
                            OA    31.5   63   125   250 500 1000 2000
                                                Frequency, Hz

Figure 21. - Spectra obtained at Apollo shoulder in SAL by varying overall
                      power input to noise makers.


                                                                              35
       NASA-S-68-1053
                2
                    0
                                                    Maximum duct spacing    I
                   -2
                   -4
                   -6
                   -8
                  -10

            n
                  -12
            J

            v, -14
            a
             L

            2 -16
             3
            r" -18 I
             ul
                                I    I     I           I            I
             ..     2
            U
             F
            m
            -a
                    O
            2      -2
            n.
            *      -4
                   -6                          to area expansion
                   -8
                  -10
                  -12
                  - 14          I          I
                                                       I
                                                                    I

                  -16
                  -18
                        1000   900       800         700           600     500
                                         Apollo stations




     Figure 22. - Axial variation in SPL for maximum and minimum duct spacing.

36
NASA-S-68-1054
       _ _



          0



       -10



       -20

              CI             I
                             I
                                 l           I
                                             I
                                                 I           l
                                                             I
                                                             1
                                                                         l
                                                                         1
                                                                         I
                                                                                      1
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I

              t              I                                           I            I
         0



       -10



       -2 0
                   I   I             I   I           I   I       I   I       I   I         I   I
              OA           31.5              63          125      250                500       1000
                                                     Frequency, Hz
                                                                                      --I      Xa 1082

                                                                                      -        Xa 826
                                                                                      -3




                                                                                               X, 670
                                                                                      --- X,552

 Figure 23. - Spectra in ducts for two duct spacings from Apollo.


                                                                                                         37
             NA SA-S-68- 105 5




      Figure 24. - Typical envelope of SPL variation in SAL for 16-duct operation.


              NASA -S-68-105 6




                                         Distance from horn throat, in.


     Figure 25. - Axial variation in SPL of initial horn for single frequency excitation.


38
NASA-S-68- 1042




                                                                           0‘
                                                                       10 .-
                                                                                Y

                                                                                E


                                                                                .-m
                                                                                E

                                                                       0        %
          50   63   80   100    125   160    200   250   315   400   500        v)


                                  Frequency, Hr



                               (a) Initial horn.

                                                                           B”
NASA-S-68-1044



 Y
 E
 0)
 2    .
 et 100
 Y


 .-
  E
 0)


 .-
 0

 t    80
 80




                           (b) Reverse horn.

                Figure 26. - Typical horn characteristics.


                                                                                      39
     NASA-S-68-1057




                                                m
                                                -0




                             Frequency, H t



                      (e) Reverberant flare,
                      Figure 26. - Concluded.




40
    NASA-S-68- 1058

          160



          150

     .-
      E   140
    ?-
     0
     rl
     X
     N   130
     Y
      !?!150
     m
     -0
      c




     \
          120



          110
                  31,s    63        125' 250 500       1000 2000
                                      Frequency, Hz
                         0 2 in below horn /duct interface
                                e


                         A 40 in ,below horn /duct interface   '




                           80 in. below horn /duct interface




Figure 27. - Effect of seal on acoustic performance of a duct (taken from a
                          one -third scale model).


                                                                              41
                                                                               30
                                           Frequency, Hz



              Figure 28. - Typical noise reduction between adjacent ducts.

                   NASA-S-68-1060


                       150




                      100
                               31.5   63   125    250      500   1000   2000
                                           Frequency, Hz

 Figure 29. - m i c a 1 response of boilerplate 1150 CM with and without ducts installed.


42
        NASA-S-68-106 1


                   20

              .
             m
             Y
             0
             O         10
             \
         .-I
             .-
             S

             W
             E
             0


         L
             g         o
         c
         U
             -
             W
         ‘Z
        ,1
         1.2 -10
         e
         -
         W
             W
             0
             V
         a
                  -20
                            OA    31.5        63         125         250       500    1000         2000
                                                               Frequency, Hz


Figure 30. - Difference in airframe SLA response with and without ducts installed
                         for six measurement locations.


         NA SA-S -68- 1062




                       10 000
                  .-2 8000
                  n
                   .
                   I 6000
                  .-
                  0
                  S
                  Y
                  Q
                  p 4000
                  n
                  m
                  L.
                  u
                  a
                  E,
                  5 . 2000

                                                                                                         - 0.04 a
                        1000I *     I I   I        I I         i I    I I      I I   I t     I I     I




                                  Figure 31. - SAL chamber absorption.

                                                                                                                    43
                    NASA-5-68-1063



                     2
                     m
                     n
                     2
                     .-
                     0
                     E
                    P0
                     r(

                     X
                    N




                     >
                     0,
                     m
                     Y
                     0
                     0

                    c
                    r(




                              OA   31.5   63    125   250     500      1000   2000
                                                  Frequency, Hz



     Figure 32. - Range of sound pressure spectra for SAL reverberant flare operation.

              NA SA-S-68- 1045




              n
                          0
               L
               aJ
              Io,
               J
               0
              s
               v)



              Y
               !i-10
              m
              -a
               z
              -I
              Q
              in
               >
               aJ    -20
              m
              U
              0
              0
               I
              rn
              \
              4
                     -30
                                   31.5    63         125      250      500    1000   2000
                                                      Frequency , Hz

         Figure 33. - Sound pressure spectra for SAL reverberant flare operation.


44
          NA SA-S-68-1046




                    0




                     OA     31.5   63     125    250     500   1000 2000
                                         Frequency, Hz




Figure 34. - SLA response characteristics at three locations for two acoustic fields.


                                                                                    45
        hASA-S-6d-1047




                    OA      31.5     63     125     250     500   1000   2000
                                            Frequency, Hz



        Figure 35. - Space average pressure spectra on Apollo SM.

                   NASA-S-68- 1048



                          150




                     m
                     -0




                     m
                     z 110
                     0


                     \
                     4

                          100
                                   31.5   63 125 250        500 1000
                                           Frequency, Hz

     Figure 36. - Average vibration response of Apollo SM for flight and
                           SAL pressure fields.

46
                                   REFERENCES

1. Eldred, K. McK. : Concept Study for Simulation of Fluctuating Pressure Loads on
     the Apollo Vehicle in the Acoustic Laboratory. Rep. WR 63-11, Wyle Labora-
     tories, Sept. 24, 1963.
2, Murray, F. M. : Acoustical Consulting Relative to the Acoustical Laboratory,
    Building 49, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Clear Lake. Rep. W R 64-6,
    Wyle Laboratories, Oct. 312, 1964.

3. Jones, G. W., Jr. ; and Foughner, J. T . , Jr. : Investigation of Buffet Pressures
     on Models of Large Manned Launch Vehicle Configurations. NASA TN D-1633,
     1963.
4. Eldred, K. McK. : Basic Considerations in the Development of Vibro-Acoustic
     Test Methodology for the MSC Spacecraft Acoustic Laboratory. Rep. WR 66-33,
     Wyle Laboratories, June 1966.
5. White, R. W. : Predicted Vibration Responses of Apollo Structure and Effects of
    Pressure Correlation Lengths on Response, Rep. WR 67-4, Wyle Laboratories,
    Mar. 1967.

6. Dorland, W. D. ; Wren, R. J. ; and Eldred, K. McK. : Development of Acoustic
     Test Conditions for Apollo Lunar Module Flight Qualification.
     NASA TM X-58016, 1968.

7. Anon. : Model EPT -200 Electro -Pneumatic Transducer Instruction Manual.
     Rep. EPT-200-85 -1, Ling Electronics, 1965.




                                                                                   47

