---
title: Kinetics and Thermodynamics in High- Temperature Gases
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19700022795
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19700022795
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: SPECIAL_PUBLICATION
center: Glenn Research Center
publication_date: 1995-11-22
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 47466c468baa031f007a0812b25e55f25d65fc063ee4924df47a01b133d9f285
pages: 152
words: 27703
cv_look_pages: 6
---

TI   A    YNA
HIGH-TE   GAS
                                                      NASA SP-239




KINETICS AND THERMODYNAMICS

 IN HIGH-TEMPERATURE GASES


                   A conference held at
          Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
                     March 19, 1970




            Prepared by Lewis Research CeBter




     ScientiJZc and Technical Information Division
     OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION                          1970
     NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                                                   Washington, D.C.



     d
For sale by the Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information
                                              -
                   Springfield, Virginia 22151 Price $3.00




           d
                            FOREWORD

     The Lewis Research Center is the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration principal field installation f o r research and
development of advanced aerospace propulsion and power genera-
tion systems. While much of the work at Lewis in these areas is
applied research, a balanced effort must include basic, creative
research. Such an effort establishes the base from which come
future engineering applications.
     Aircraft and rocket propulsion and, to a lesser extent, power
generation involve the chemistry and physics of combustion and
the properties of gases at high temperatures. NASA and i t s pred-
 ecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, have
long maintained a basic research program in these fields. The
results of this work are published as NASA reports and in the
technical journals, but an occasional technical conference further
assists in communicating with others in the scientific fraternity.
Therefore, this conference is presented to describe selected
topics of Lewis work in the kinetics and thermodynamics of com-
bustion and high-temperature gases.


                                         Bruce T. Lundin
                                         Director




                                iii
J
                                    CONTENTS
                                                                      Page
FOREWORD..      ...................................                     iii

CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIA
     I. Complex Chemical Equilibrium Calculations
           Sanford Gordon  .............................                 1
    11. Calculation of the Equilibrium Properties of Plasmas
           Sheldon Heimel  .............................                17
   111. Thermodynamics of the Internal Cowbustion Engine
           Frank J. Zeleznik.  ...........................              31

TRANSPORT PHENOMENA
   N. Transport Properties of High-Temperature Gases
          Richards. Brokaw     ...........................              41
   V. Experimental Measurements of Diffusion Coefficients
        for Atomic Oxygen
          Charles E. Baker.    ...........................              63
   VI. Transport Properties of Complex Mixtures
          RogerA. Svehla.    ............................               75

CHEMICAL KINETICS
  VII. Combustion Chemistry
           FrankE. Belles..    ...........................              89
  VTII. Rate Constants from Ignition Studies of the H2-CO-02 System
           Theodore A. Brabbs, Frank E. Belles, and
            Richard S. Brokaw    ..........................            105
   M. Kinetics of the Dissociation of Bromine
           Marvin Warshay.   ............................              119
    X. Chemical Kinetic Computations for Multireaction Systems
           Pavid A. Bittker  ............................              133




                                         V
     I. C O M P L E X C H E M I C A L E Q U I L I B R I U M C A L C U L A T I O N S
                                   Sanford Gordon

     Many of the chemical and flow processes taking place in rockets and airbreath-
ing engines occur at high temperatures (of the order of, say, 2000 to 5000 K). At
these temperatures, for example, molecules break up into atoms o r free radicals,
some species react to form new species, o r neutral species ionize. The result is
that we often have to deal with mixtures containing many kinds of chemical species.
If we want to know theoretical properties of these complex mixtures, such as
thermodynamic or transport properties, it is first necessary to calculate the equi-
librium composition of the mixtures.
     For a number of years Lewis has been working with equilibrium calculations
for a wide variety of chemical systems. To c a r r y out these calculations, w e have
developed mathematical procedures and computer programs (refs. 1 to 7).
     Based on our experience, we could discuss many aspects of the equilibrium
calculation; however, this paper is concerned only with the following topics: (1)a
comparison between two formulations for chemical equilibrium and (2) a compari-
son of some thermodynamic derivatives for reacting and nonreacting systems.



                TWO FORMULATIONS FOR CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

     The two formulations currently used for obtaining chemical equilibrium com-
positions will be referred to as the equilibrium constant method and the free-energy
minimization method. The equilibrium constant method has been in use for many
years and is the one usually described in thermodynamic texts (e. g., ref. 8). The
free-energy minimization method was suggested in 1958 (ref. 9) and is not as well
known. Both methods a r e based on the same principle for the condition of chemical
equilibrium, namely, minimum f r e e energy. This principle can be expressed
mathematically as




where G is the Gibbs f r e e energy, T is temperature, and P is pressure.             Equa-
    tion (1) says that at constant temperature and pressure the condition necessary for
    thermodynamic equilibrium is that the Gibbs free energy be stationary with respect
    to all independent variations in composition.
         Depending on the details of how equation (1) is developed (ref. 7), we can end
    up with either the equilibrium constant method o r the free-energy minimization
    method. Rather than reviewing these details here, I will illustrate these methods
    by m e a w of a few examples.



                              Equilibrium Constant Method

        One reaction. - The simplest example of an equilibrium problem is one in-
    volving two species. For example, for molecular and atomic hydrogen (H2 and H),
    we can write down the following reaction

                                         1 H2=H
                                         -
                                         2

    (Hydrogen is the working fluid of a nuclear rocket engine and therefore the equilib-
    rium composition of this system at various conditions is of practical interest. )
         For every reaction we have an equilibrium constant K which can be expressed
    in two ways. The first way relates K to thermodynamic data:

                                             -AGO/RT
                                       K=e                                             (3)

    where AGO is the change in standard state free energy across the reaction, and
    R is the gas constant. Values f o r K as a function of temperature can be found in
    tables of thermodynamic data such as in references 10 and 11. The second way K
    may be expressed is in t e r m s of a function of composition. For equation (2) we can
    relate the constant K obtained from equation (3) as follows:




    where pH and p       are the partial pressures of H and HZ, respectively. To
                     H2
    obtain compositions, auxiliary equations are usually used in addition to equilibrium
    equations. In this case we can make use of the pressure equation (Dalton's law for
    ideal gases)



2
                                   P = p +p                                      (5)
                                           H2
where P is the system pressure.     Combining equations (4) and (5) gives the quad-
ratic espression
                                2
                               pH + K2pH - K2 P = 0                               (6 1

Equation (6) can be solved in closed form. However, a closed-form solution is
usually possible only with simple problems such as illustrated here. For example,
for T = 3000 K and P = 1 atmosphere, with the value K = 0.1574 from refer-
ence 10, equation (6) gives pH = 0.145, and from equation (5) p       = 0.855. These
numerical values will be used again in later discussion.           H2
     Several reactions. - The hydrogen-fluorine system provides an illustration of a
somewhat more complicated equilibrium problem. This system is an extremely
energetic propellant with which Lewis has done pioneering work (e. g . , ref. 12).
The problem here is to determine the equilibrium composition among the following
five species: H2, F2, H, F, and HF. Other species, such as polymers of HF
could also be considered but they w i l l be omitted in this example. The species se-
lected have the following s e t of reactions :

                                     -1H 2 = H
                                      2

                                     -1F 2 = F                                    (7)
                                      2

                                1 H2 + -
                                       1 F2
                                -                HF
                                2      2
     Corresponding to these reactions are the following equilibrium constant equa-
tions :


                                           P




                                  KHF = 1/2 1/2
                                       pR2
                                         PHF
                                           pF2     J
                                                                                         3



                       4
        In addition to these equilibrium equations and a pressure equation (such as
    eq. (5)), mass balance equations may b e used i n the form




    where a.. are the number of gram-atoms of the ith element in the jth species, n.
              9                                                                            J
    a r e moles of species j , and by a r e gram-atoms of element i per gram of mixture.
          Other than the fact that there a r e more equations to solve, there are two im-
    portant differences between this example and the previous example. The first dif-
    ference involves the use of components. For our purpose here, components a r e
    just some selected species, one for each chemical element, in t e r m s of which all
    the remainder may be written. In this example, H2 and F2 were selected as com-
    ponents. For systems which involve many species, the use of components is the
    simplest way to specify reactions systematically. Components a r e a unique feature
    of the equilibrium constant method. As we shall s e e later, the free-energy minimi-
    zation method does not use components.
          The second important difference between this example and the first example is
    that now the solution cannot be obtained in closed form. This means that we must
    resort to some graphical, trial and e r r o r , o r iterative procedure. There a r e nu-
    merous ways in which the details of solving the problem may vary (based on one's
    chemical intuition and selection of mathematical techniques), The fact that there
    a r e s o many ways to solve the problem may explain why s o many papers are written
    on this subject. (See ref. 7 for a partial list. ) Often the success of a method de-
    pends on essentially knowing the answers already o r at least quite a bit of the chem-
    istry involved for a particular chemical system.
           Many reactions. - The third example of the equilibrium constant method in-
    volves many species. The system selected to illustrate this complex equilibria
    situation is a solid rocket propellant containing the following ingredients : hydro-
    carbon binder (with some oxygen and sulfur), ammonium perchlorate, aluminum,
    and magnesium oxide. This system contains eight chemical elements: C, H, 0, N,
    Al, Mg, C1, and S. Currently, there a r e 140 possible combustion species (including
     18 condensed and 32 ionized species) in the Lewis library of thermodynamic data
    that are formed from these eight elements.
           Now, how should one go about handling the mathematics of solving about 140
     simultaneous nonlinear equations? There a r e two approaches to this problem. One
     approach, as indicated in the discussion of the previous example, is to study the
     chemistry of this specific problem and then to work out specific techniques and pro-
     cedures to solve this particular chemical system.




4
     A second approach, which is the approach we have adopted, is to generalize the     ~   ~




problem. This means that methods are developed and used which are equally appli-
cable to any chemical system (refs. 1 to 7). In order to insure that these general
methods will actually lead to a solution, attention must be given to mathematical
details such as iteration techniques, convergence controls, and singularities.
     So far, several examples of varying degrees of complexity have been discussed,
all of which can be solved by the equilibrium constant method. Now we will look a t
the free energy method.



                        Free-Energy Minirn ization Method

     The concept of minimum free energy as the criterion f o r equilibrium can be
illustrated graphically as shown in figure 1-1. We are again dealing with the first
example selected t o illustrate the use of equilibrium constants, that is, the deter-
mination of the equilibrium composition of a mixture of H2 and H at T = 3000 K
and P = 1 atmosphere. Figure 1-1 is a plot of the free energy of the mixture G
versus the partial pressure of H2. (We could equally well have used pH as the
abscissa. ) The minimum value of G occurs at p          = 0.855 which is exactly the
                                                     H2
value obtained by the equilibrium constant method. This graphical example illus-
trates how one might apply the principle of minimum free energy as the criterion
for chemical equilibrium. However, as soon as the problem becomes even slightly
more complicated than this simple example, the graphical method becomes imprac-
tical or, more usually, impossible t o use.
     Therefore, we must u s e equations. As is often true in minimization problems,
the function to be minimized is subject to certain constraints. In this case, G is
to be minimized subject to the mass balance constraints given by equation (9).
Equation (1)then becomes


                        6   [.
                             +    hi(zaijnj - b q
                                     j            T7 p
                                                       = 0



where hi are Lagrangian multipliers. After performing some mathematical de-
tails (ref. 7), one ends up with


                                          1




                                                                                                5
    ..   The equations in equation (11) (one for each species) are analogous to the equilib-
         rium constant equations used in the equilibrium constant method. This w i l l be il-
         lustrated by applying equation (1 l ) to the hydrogen-fluorine problem used previously
         and comparing these with the analogous equation (8).
              F o r the five species, H2, Fa, H, F, and HF, equation (11) gives

                                 In pH = [(-GO).,
                                      2
                                                        + 2hH
                                                                         IFT 7



              For the purpose of comparison, equation (8) may be written in logarithmic
         variables and terms slightly rearranged as follows :

                                       l n p H = l n K H + 1- l n p




                                                                            r
                                                          2         H2


                                       l n p F = l n K F + -1 l n p
                                                            2       F2

                                                            1 In pFp
                                                  1 In pH + -
                                In pHF = In K~~ + -
                                                  2      2 2
                                                                           J
             At least two points might be made concerning equations (12) and (13). First,
         equation (12) has more equations than equation (13) because the Lagrangian multi-
         pliers AH and XF are variables which must be solved for simultaneously with the
         composition variables. Second, before equation (13) can even be written, a set of
         reactions for the system (eq. (7)) must first be specified. In contrast, no reactions
         are required for equation (12), nor, as a matter of fact, can reactions be used if
         they a r e specified.
              At this point it would seem reasonable to inquire whether o r not there are any
         features in the two sets of equations (12) and (13) which would make one formulation




6
preferable to the other. Superficially it appears that the equilibrium constant
method (eq. (13)) might be preferable simply because fewer equations and fewer
variables are involved. However, if generalized methods of solution are used, the            .,
two formulations reduce to the same number of iterative equations (ref. 3). On the
other hand, based on experience with both formulations, we have found that the
equilibrium constant method has some disadvantages not found in the free-energy
method. These disadvantages are
       (1)There is more bookkeeping. First, components must be selected, then re-
actions must be written in t e r m s of these components (or, equivalently, a r r a y s of
stoichiometric coefficients in t e r m s of components must be calculated) and, finally,
equilibrium constants for these reactions must be generated. None of this is neces-
s a r y with the free-energy method.
       (2) Numerical difficulties can and do occur when components become extremely
small. For example, F2 is a bad choice for a component for an initial mixture of
3H2 + F2 at 500 K and P = 1 atmosphere, inasmuch as equilibrium calculations
give pF =              In order to avoid this and other problems which result from
        2
using components, some investigators (ref. 13) have suggested switching compo-
nents in the middle of a calculation. However, with the free-energy method one
does not use components in the first place and therefore this type of difficulty never
arises.
     (3) The possibility of condensed phases complicates the equilibrium calcula-
tions. A commonly used procedure is to complete the calculations assuming that
only gases a r e present and then to test whether a condensed phase should, in fact,
have been included. Simple tests are available with both formulations.
     With the equilibrium constant method, the condensed phase should be included
if the following condition is met:

                                     In pvap > In K

where In K is based on the vaporization reaction f o r some species A

                               A(condensed)     A(vapor)                              (15)

However, equation (14)cannot be used if there is no vapor phase, as in the case of
A1203(c). This fact can result in much special handling and programming for spe-
cies such as A1203(c) (refs. 4 and 5).
     With the free-energy method, by contrast, the following simple criterion for
inclusion of a condensed phase can be used which does not depend on the presence
of the corresponding gas phase:




                                                                                                  7 .
    (4)It is more difficult to extend the generalized method of solution for nonideal
equations of state when using the equilibrium constant method than when using the
free-energy method (refs. 6 and 7).



                         THERMOD YNAMl C DERIVAT1VE S

     W e know that some confusion exists about thermodynamic derivatives because
of the numerous inquiries we receive concerning them. This confusion often occurs
because the person does not distinguish clearly the difference between reacting and
nonreacting systems.
     W e will use specific heat and the isentropic exponent to illustrate the problem.
The question w e are asked most often is "For a given composition at a specified
temperature and pressure, how can there be -    two values of specific heat?" The
explanation is made.simple by an examination of figure 1-2. Two curves are
shown plotted of enthalpy as a function of temperature. By definition, specific
heat is the slope of these curves:




      W e w i l l assume that the equilibrium mixture of hydrogen is the same as that
used for our first example of chemical equilibrium (p = 0.855 and pH = 0.145
f o r T = 3000 K and P = 1 atm).                          H2
      Now consider what happens if a flow process takes us from our starting thermo-
dynamic state to another thermodynamic state, f o r example, T = 2500 K and P =
1 atmosphere. If the flow process is rapid relative to the chemical reaction rate,
then the chemical process can be considered nonreacting. This process is some-
times referred to as a "frozen" composition process. The upper curve in fig-
u r e 1-2 exemplifies the nonreacting situation. The drop in enthalpy shown by this
curve is due just to the change of temperature from 3000 to 2500 K. How&ever, if
the flow process is very slow relative to the reaction rate, then composition has
time to adjust to new equilibrium values corresponding to the new thermodynamic
state. This process is called a reacting or equilibrium composition process and is
illustrated by the lower curve in figure 1-2. In this case the change in enthalpy is
due to two factors. One factor, as before, is the change in temperature, and the
second factor is the change in composition. It can be seen that a change in compo-
sition may affect enthalpy more than a change in temperature.
     How does all this relate to specific heat? Well, two curves pass through the
point at T = 3000 K corresponding to the two flow processes just discussed. Since
specific heat is just the slope of these curves, it is clear that there certainly can be
two values of specific heat for the same thermodynamic conditions.
     Figure 1-3 shows specific heat for the hydrogen system as a function of temper-
ature f o r the two conditions of reacting and nonreacting systems. At 3800 K and
1 atmosphere, the equilibrium value of 44 calories per gram per K is nine times
the frozen value of 4 . 8 calories per gram per K. For lower pressures, the factor
between the two values can be 20 o r more (ref. 14). The large differences in these
values point up the importance of distinguishing between reacting and nonreacting
processes.


                                 Isentropic Exponent

    In many textbooks on fluid dynamics (see ref. 15, for example), the isentropic
exponent is given the symbol y and defined as the ratio of specific heat a t constant
pressure to specific heat at constant volume

                                          y = - cP

                                               cV


Based on this definition, various isentropic relations may be written such as

                               P V =~ P     ~ =VConstant
                                                  ~




                                      a=    4 z
     However, equations (19) to (21) are valid only if we are dealing with a nonreact-
ing (frozen) system. In the c a s e of a reacting (equilibrium) system, the correct
thermodynamic expression for isentropic exponent ys is




                                                                                           9   .
             The relations corresponding to equations (19) to (21) are now




                                             a = )/ysnRT

         where




         The volume derivatives in equation (26) a r e discussed in reference 7. Equations
         (23) to (25) may give considerably different values than the corresponding equations
         (19) to (21). For example, using data given in reference 14, the correct expression
         for equilibrium velocity of sound (eq. (25)) gives 5343 feet per second, whereas the
         incorrect expression (eq. (21)) gives 5873 feet p e r second, a value which is too high
         by 10 percent.
              Figure 1-4 illustrates, by means of an unusual example, that the isentropic ex-
         ponent is not the ratio of specific heats. Figure 1-4 is for a chemical system con-
         taining beryllium oxide as one of the products of combustion. The curve is a plot
         of In P versus In p for the isentropic expansion from combustion conditions to
         lower pressures and temperatures. At the combustion point (high temperature)
         the beryllium oxide is in the liquid phase. During isentropic expansion the temper-
         ature drops until the freezing point of beryllium oxide is reached. The temperature
         remains at the freezing point, while the liquid is being converted to the solid phase.
         The dashed part of the curve indicates the region where both the liquid and solid
         phases of beryllium oxide exist and where the temperature remains constant.
              The slope of the curve can be obtained both graphically and analytically. Ref-
         erence 7 gives an analytic expression for the slope ys when just ehtropy is con-
         stant :




.   10
                         Y- =                cP
                                    a In V

In the two solid sections of the curve, the analytic values obtained    means of
equation (27) match the graphical values to all figures shown. However, where
temperature as well as entropy is constant, equation (27) cannot be applied because
it contains derivatives with respect to temperature ( ( a In V/a In T)P and C ) which
                                                                              P
are not defined for constant temperature. For constant entropy and temperature,
the following expression for the slope was derived:

                                   a In P             -1
                         ys, T    (-)
                                   a lnp
                                                  =




This analytic expression also gives values which match the graphical slopes to all
figures shown in the dashed part of the curve in figure 1-4. The interesting fact in
this analysis is that in the region of constant entropy and temperature y s, = 0.996.
Inasmuch as the ratio of specific heats can never be less than 1, this unusual exam-
ple demonstrates that, indeed, the isentropic exponent is not the ratio of specific
heats.


                                COMPUTER PROGRAM

     The computer program developed at Lewis to c a r r y out complex chemical equi-
libria calculations has the following capabilities:
     (1)It calculates equilibrium compositions, thermodynamic mixture properties
(such as enthalpy and entropy), and thermodynamic derivatives for any of the follow-
ing assigned pairs of thermodynamic state functions: (T, P), (T, V), (H, P), (U, V),
(S,P), and (S,VI.
     (2) It is a general program designed to handle any chemical system for which
thermodynamic data are available.
     (3) It considers gas and condensed phases and currently includes thermodynamic
data f o r 402 species.
     (4) It contains subroutines for the following applications: constant pressure o r
volume combustion, theoretical rocket performance, shock wave calculations, and
Chapman- Jouguet detonations.
           Inquiries concerning this program may be addressed to the author o r to
       Mrs. Bonnie McBride of Lewis.


                                          REFERENCES

        1. Huff, Vearl N. ; Gordon, Sanford; and Morrell, Virginia E. : General Method
            and Thermodynamic Tables for Computation of Equilibrium Composition and
            Temperatures of Chemical Reactions. NACA Rep. 1037, 1951.
        2. Gordon, Sanford; Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Huff, Vearl N. : A General Method
            f o r Automatic Computation of Equilibrium Compositions and Theoretical
            Rocket Performance of Propellants. NASA TN D-132, 1959.
        3. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: An Analytical Investigation of Three
            General Methods of Calculating Chemical-Equilibrium Compositions. NASA
            TN D-473, 1960.
        4. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: A General IBM 704 or 7090 Com-
            puter Program f o r Computation of Chemical Equilibrium Compositions,
            Rocket Performance, and Chapman- Jouguet Detonations. NASA TN D- 1454,
            1962.
        5. Gordon, Sanford; and Zeleznik, Frank J. : A General IBM 704 o r 7090 Com-
             puter Program f o r Computation of Chemical Equilibrium Compositions,
             Rocket Performance, and Chapman-Jouguet Detonations. Supplement 1 -
             Assigned Area-Ratio Performance. NASA TN D-1737, 1963.
        6. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: Equilibrium Computations for Multi-
            component Plasmas. Can. J. Phys., vol. 44, no. 4, Apr. 1966, pp. 877-893.
        7. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: Calculation of Complex Chemical
            Equilibria. Ind. Eng. Chem., vol. 60, no. 6, June 1968, pp. 27-57. (See
            also Applied Thermodynamics. American Chemical Society Publications,
            1968, p. 303).
        8. Kirkwood, John G. ; and Oppenheim, Irwin: Chemical Thermodynamics.
            McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc. , 1961.
        9. White, W. B.; Johnson, S . M. ; and Dantzig, G. B. : Chemical Equilibrium in
            Complex Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 28, no. 5, May 1958, pp. 751-755.
       l(r. Anon. : JANAF Thermochemical Tables.      The Dow Chemical Co. , Midland,
             Mich., Dec. 31, 1960 to June 30, 1969.




. 12
                                                                                    -'
11. McBride, Bonnie J. ; Heimel, Sheldon; Ehlers, Janet G. ; and Gordon, Sanford:
     Thermodynamic Properties to 6000' K f o r 210 Substances Involving the First
     18 Elements. NASA SP-3001, 1963.                                               *.

12. Douglass, H. W.; Hennings, G.; and Price, H. G., Jr.: Experimental Per-
     f ormance of Liquid Hydrogen and Liquid Fluorine in Regeneratively Cooled
     Rocket Engines. NASA TM X-87, 1959.
13. Feldmann, H. F. ; Simons, W. H. ; and Bienstock, D. : Calculating Equilibrium
     Compositions of Multiconstituent, Multiphase, Chemical Reacting Systems.
     Rep. BM-RI-7257, Bureau of Mines, May 1969.
14. Svehla, Roger A. : Thermodynamic and Transport Properties f o r the Hydrogen-
     Oxygen System. NASA SP-3011, 1964.
15. Shapiro, Ascher H. : Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid
     Flow. Vol. 1. Ronald Press Co., 1953.




                                                                                         13.
             FREE
           ENERGY,
              G,
            kca 119




                              PARTIAL PRESSURE OF H2, ATM                  -
                                                                        CS 5 3 32 4

             Figure E l . - Example of minimum free energy as criterion for equilib-
               rium. Mixture of H2 and H at T = 3000 K and P = 1 atmosphere.




     ENTHALPY, 12
        h,
       kcallg  11
                       PH = 0.025          .
                                                      /
                                               AEACTING
                                                                               -r       \O'/P




                 10                   /               ( EQU1L1BRIUM)
                                                                               P = 1 ATM
                        I            I            I             I              I                  I
                      2500          2600        2700       2800           2900                   3000
                                               TEMPERATURE, T, K                   CS- 5 3 327

       Figure 1-2. - Example of how two values of specific heat C may exist at one point
                                                                 P
         (same temperature, pressure, and composition).




14
          50    r
          40
                                                           REACTING SYSTEM
S PECIF IC 30
  HEAT,
   cP,
call(g)(K)
           2o
           20
                t
           10

                                  I                 I                  I
            2000                 3000          4000                  5000
                                 TEMPERATURE, T, K              CS-53325



  Figure 1-3. - Comparison of specific heat for reacting and nonreacting sys-
    tems. Mixture of H2 and H at P = 1 atmosphere.




                                        FOR CONSTANT s (SEE EQ. (27))
                             ---_-FOR CONSTANT T AND s (SEE EQ. (28))



  In P




                          In P                                       CS- 5 3 32 9

    Figure 1-4. - &entropic exponent for usual situation of constant entropy, y,,
      and for special situation of constant entropy and temperature y,, T.




                                                                                    15
16
              11.    C A L C U L A T I O N O F THE E Q U I L I B R I U M
                        PROPERTIES OF P L A S M A S
                                  Sheldon Heimel

     The calculation of the equilibrium properties of plasmas is an important sub-
ject because many physical situations in space technology involve plasmas. For
example, the entry of a high-speed probe into a planetary atmosphere causes
shock-ionization. The proper design of a heat shield for such a probe and the
choice of an entry pattern requires knowledge of chemical compositions and ther-
modynamic properties of plasmas (ref. 1). Other situations involving plasma
properties are rocket exhausts , thermionic diodes , and magnetohydrodynamic
power generators (ref. 2).
     The topics that will be covered in this paper are as follows:
     (1) The place of plasma calculations in the context of equilibrium calculations
     (2) The problems involved in plasma calculations, both theoretical and prac-
          tical
     (3) The effect of the assumptions used in the calculations, as illustrated by
          hydrogen and lithium plasmas
     (4)The effect of the composition model for the atmosphere of the planet
          Jupiter on its high -temperature properties



                  PLACE OF PLASMA CALCULATIONS IN CONTEXT
                         OF EQUILIBRIUM CALCULATIONS

     In the first paper of this conference, Mr. Gordon discussed the calculation of
the thermodynamic properties of combustion gases. When ionized, some com -
bustion gases can be treated by a very simple model, known as the Saha model
(ref. 3). Later on, this model is used as a basis for comparison with a more rig-
orous model of a plasma.
     The Saha gas can be illustrated by considering the single-step ionization




                                                                                       17
     The Saha assumptions are
         (1) The ground state makes the chief contribution t o the electronic partition
     function of the ion and atom.
          (2) The m a s s of the ion is approximately equal t o the mass of the atom.
         (3) The effect of the electric field on the ionization potential (IP) is negligible.
     This means that the isolated-atom o r classical IP can be used.
         In a rigorous sense, the mass-action law for equation (1) states


                                     N+N -

                                       NO           QO


     where N is the number of particles of a kind described by the subscript, Q is the
     partition function of a particular species, Ieff is the effective IP, k is the
     Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature in degrees Kelvin. (The
     subscripts +, -, and o refer to the unipositive ion, the electron, and the neutral
     atom, respectively. )
          If the Saha assumptions are applied to equation (2), it becomes



                                                                                         (3)
                                       NO


     where g1 is the ground-state statistical weight (multiplicity) of the species re-
     ferred t o by the subscript and I is the classical ionization potential.



                   COMPARISON OF COMBUSTION GASES AND PLASMAS

          In regard to the third assumption, the Saha gas is not a plasma in the sense
     of the present discussion because the microfields from the charged particles have
     negligible effects. The plasmas to be discussed do have significant interactions.
     A plasma will be defined as an ionized gas which is macroscopically neutral but
     which is nonneutral over a distance which does not exceed the Debye length.
          There are additional differences between combustion gases and plasmas. The
     usual temperature range f o r combustion gases is 300 to 5000 K; that for plasmas
     is above 3000 K. The main constituents of combustion gases are molecules and
     atoms. Plasmas consist chiefly of atoms, ions, and electrons. The effective IP




18



                     a
of a combustion gas is the isolated-atom IP; that for a plasma is the isolated-atom
IP reduced by the effects of electrical interactions.
     There is also a difference in the kind of chemical potential used for the two
gases. (The chemical potential of a species is the increase in the Gibbs free ener-
gy of the gaseous mixture produced by the addition of one mole of the species in-
volved.) For a combustion gas, the ideal-gas chemical potential is used. For a
plasma, the ideal-gas chemical potential is increased by a term describing the
Coulombic forces.
     The electronic levels to be considered for a combustion gas are the first few
levels. Those for a plasma are all the theoretically predicted levels up to the re-
duced IP.



         THEORETlCA L C ON S IDERATlON S FOR P LA SMA CA LCU LATlONS

     The last feature of the comparison implies that, for a plasma, levels past the
reduced IP are not considered in the electronic partition function. If they were
included, the partition function would increase without limit (or diverge). This
problem of divergence will be discussed shortly.
     A related problem that arises in plasma calculations is the lowering of the IP.
This problem comes about because it is easier to ionize a species immersed in an
electric field. The question is: How much does the IP decrease ?
     A third problem is that of the missing levels: The literature does not supply
all the levels needed for practical calculations.
     The final problem is the perturbation or displacement of levels by the micro-
fields. Since this effect has been shown to be small, it will not be discussed fur-
ther (refs. 4 to 6).
     Once the Coulombic effects have been described adequately, the thermody-
namic consequences follow logically (ref. 7). These consequences are the reduc-
tion of pressure in the equation of state and the corrections to the ideal-gas prop-
erties, for example, heat capacity, enthalpy, and entropy, called the excess func-
tions.



                DIVERGENCE OF ELECTRONIC PARTITION FUNCTION

    Divergence of the electronic partition function can be better understood by
considering the electronic partition function for the simple case of the hydrogen
atom, namely,




                                                                                       19
                                          n= 1

     where n is the principal quantum number, g is the statistical weight, and E is
     the electronic energy. For the hydrogen atom, g n = 2n2 and values for E are ob-
     tained from the Rydberg-Ritz equation.
          Table 11-1 gives representative principal quantum numbers up to 1000 and their
     corresponding radii in centimeters. The radii were computed from the formula
     (ref. a)


                                          an = ao n2                                  (5)


     where an is the radius f o r the nth principal quantum number and a. is theBohr
     radius. If principal quantum numbers from one t o infinity were used, the sum in
     equation (4) would diverge, and the radius calculated from equation (5) would in-
     crease without limit. However, at a principal quantum number of 1000, the radius
     is      centimeter, which is unrealistically large. Thus, one should be able to
     terminate the sum at some principal quantum number below 1000.
         What, then, is the role of orbital size at different temperatures with regard t o
     termination of the partition function? The answer lies in the interplay of orbital
     size an and the size of the contribution of individual energy levels




     to the sum. At a typical combustion gas temperature of 3000 K (see table 11-1),
     not only does each excited state (n > 1) up to the unrealistic radius make a negli-
     gible contribution, but the totality of these contributions is negligible. In other
     words, the sum is insensitive to the exact radius at which i t is cut off. If the sum
     is terminated almost anywhere below n = 1000, Qel would still be 2. However,
     at a typical plasma temperature of 30 000 K, table 11-1 shows that each excited
     state makes a significant contribution to the sum. Therefore, the sum is sensitive
     to the exact location of the cutoff. Practical experience indicates that, at 30 000 K,
     ionization is important. Therefore Coulombic forces must be included in a suitable
     criterion for cutoff.
          Several methods that have been proposed for approximating cutoff are as
     follows :




20
Inglis-Teller (ref. 9)



                                             2/15
                                            “e

Ecker-Weizel (ref. lo), Margenau-Lewis (ref. ll), andKaeppeler-Baumann (ref. 12)



                             n* = 2 . 7 5 ~ 14(iJ
                                             0                               (7)



Gurvich (ref. 13)


                               n* = 2.461     (a)’”
Bethe (ref. 8)



                                 r* =     (&T3                               (9)



Debye-Hcckel (ref. 14)




                                            + l)IPH 1/2
                                      [             ]
                                      (Zi


                              n*=            AI


                                          4ne2 Cnizi2
                                  K   =
                                              kT

Admittedly, there is no exact procedure for terminating the electronic partition
function. However, the Debye -Hackel theory of electrolytes has been selected for
use in the present work because it yields a consistent set of corrections to the
chemical potentials, thermodynamic functions, and equation of state (ref. 14).




                                                                                    21
             The symbols used in the equations for the Debye-Heckel theory are as follows:
     AI       lowering of ionization potential

     zi       charge number of the charged species i
     K        inverse Debye length
     e        electron charge
     n*       maximum principal quantum number

     IPH ionization potential of hydrogen atom
     n.  particle density of the charged species i
         1
     k        Boltzmann constant
     The ionization potential of hydrogen is used in the expression for n* since it is
     assumed that the high-lying levels are hydrogenic.



                                LOWERING OF IONIZATION POTENTIAL

             Figure 11-1 shows the physical basis of the reduction of the ionization poten-
     tial (ref. 3). The potential energy is plotted against distance of the electron from
     the nucleus. The upper portion of the figure shows that to transform an isolated
     atom A' in its ground state into an unexcited ion A' and an electron e-, the
                         is required. The lower plot shows how a n external field per-
     energy 'classical
     turbs the potential energy curves. Therefore, the same transformation in an
     electric field requires less energy. This can be interpreted as a lowering of the
     ionization potential AI. In a plasma, an atom is exposed to the action of the
     Coulomb fields of the ions and electrons (the electric microfields). Therefore, a
     lowering of the ionization potential is to be expected.
          The important thing about AI is that it defines the highest energy level to be
     included in the electronic partition function. The lower dashed line in the lower
     plot can be interpreted as the highest level to be used.



                                     MIS SING LEVELS PROBLEM

          Practical calculations require a knowledge of all electronic energy levels up
     to the reduced IP. However, the spectroscopic data (ref. 15) are incomplete in
     two respects: first, for each principal level given, the literature does not supply
     the fine structure of sublevels predicted by wave mechanics, and second, it does




22



                      d
not supply enough of the principal levels for prkctical calculations (ref. 16). Fig-
ure 11-2 shows a specific example of the effects of including such levels.
     In this figure, the particle density of neutral helium is plotted versus the elec-
tronic partition function at 40 000 K and 0.01 atmosphere. The circles enclose
energy-level diagrams which symbolize what kinds of levels were used at each
point. In the first energy-level diagram only observed principal levels (n = 1, 2, 3)
and sublevels were used. In the second diagram the missing sublevels belonging to
the observed principal levels were interpolated In the third diagram both types of
levels were extrapolated up t o the reduced IP. As one would surmise, the more
numerous the levels used in the sum, the higher the partition function and particle
density.



                    NECESSITY FOR ITERATIVE CALCULATIONS

     In addition to the theoretical problems discussed in the previous sections,
there are practical considerations governing the actual calculation. The main dif -
ficulty in performing the calculation is the prior knowledge of particle densities in
the plasma required by the Debye-Hsckel theory (eq. (12)). To overcome this dif-
ficulty, a composition is assumed. This allows the computation of a trial value of
the Debye length and thus lowering of the ionization potential. For each species,
energy levels a r e summed up to its reduced ionization potential, thus yielding a
truncated partition function. New particle densities a r e then calculated and com -
pared with the previous estimates. If the two sets of estimates do not agree within
a specified tolerance, iteration is continued until they do. At the point of conver-
gence, the thermodynamic properties and their derivatives a r e calculated.



                          EFFECT OF ASSUMPTIONS USED

     Obviously, the Saha model does not require this type of iteration because no
IP lowering is used. But, how realistic a r e the Saha assumptions as compared
with the Debye-Hiickel theory? Before detailed answers are given, some trends
can be predicted from the mass-action law.
     In the Saha model, Ieff is calculated as if ionization were negligible. Since
high pressure represses ionization, the Saha model would be expected to do well
at high pressure. In the Saha model, Qo is calculated as i f excited states of the
atom made no contribution. This would be true at low temperature. In general,




                                                                                          23
     then, the Saha model would be expected to be more realistic at high pressure and
     low temperature.
          The next two figures present curves of the ratio of the particle density of the
     neutral atom using the Saha model to the same quantity for the Debye-HCckel
     theory. This ratio is derived by dividing equation (1) by the Saha equation (2). The
     quantities that cancel are the partition function of the electron and the classical
     ionization potential. Among the quantities that do remain is the IP lowering. De-
     tailed calculations show that for high pressures, the ratio of particle densities is
     close to 1, but may be either greater o r less than 1.
          The predicted trends will now be checked against the results of calculations
     for hydrogen and lithium.
          Figure 11-3 gives the ratio of particle densities of hydrogen for both models
     as a function of pressure, with temperature as a parameter. A temperature of
      10 000 K is low enough s o that the Saha model is realistic at all pressures. At
     20 000 K , it does w e l l only at the higher pressures. At 40 000 K, the Saha model
     is not realistic at any pressure. Thus, the discrepancies between the two models
     follow the expected trend.
           Figure II-4 gives the ratio of particle densities of lithium. Again, the dis-
      crepancies are in the expected direction. The discrepancies are much smaller
     than those for hydrogen, partly because lower temperatures were used. The
      reason that some of the ratios are greater than 1 at the high pressures is that
      AI/kT is significant.



               EFFECT OF COMPOSITION MODEL OF JUPITER'S ATMOSPHERE
                         ON ITS HIGH-TW\PERATURE PROPERTIES

         The possible effects of not making a careful calculation of plasma properties
     have now been presented. The results given by the method selected will now be
     given for the atmosphere of Jupiter. Figure 11-5 isa plot of dimensionless heat ca-
     pacity versus pressure for ionized mixtures of hydrogen and helium at 40 000 K.
     Hydrogen and helium a r e the chief constituents of the Jovian atmosphere. The
     temperature of 40 000 K is typical for an entry probe at flight speeds of 140 000
     and 190 000 feet per second. The heat capacity is calculated for three composition
     models, namely, atomic hydrogen-helium ratios (H/He) of 2 , 5, and 10. Pre-
     viously this ratio was throught to be 2 (ref. 17). The latest observations of Jupiter
     show that H/He exceeds 5 (ref. 18). Since helium is the key unknown in the Jovian
     atmosphere, it may be necessary t o send sacrificial probes into it to determine




24


                    d
the helium content more precisely (ref. 1).
     In summary, the problems involved in calculating the properties of plasmas
have been discussed. A practical method for dealing with these problems has been
presented. The calculation of the properties of the Jovian atmosphere is simply
one application of the rigorous method used to treat plasmas.



                                  REFERENCES

 1. Gilligan, J. E. : Thermophysical Aspects and Feasibility of a Jupiter Atmos-
     pheric Entry. Rep. S-4, IIT Research Inst. (NASA CR-93814), Jan. 1968.
 2. Fuhs, A. E. : Instrumentation for High Speed Plasma Flow. AGARDograph
     96, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1965.
 3. Cooper, J. : Plasma Spectroscopy. Reports on Progress in Physics. Vol. 29,
     Pt. 1. A. C. Steckland, ed., Inst. Physics and Physical Soc., London,
     1966, pp. 35-130.
 4. Aller, Lawrence H. : Astrophysics: The Atmospheres of the Sun and Stars.
     Second e d . , Ronald Press Co., 1963.
 5. Michels, A. ; et al. : A r c Discharge in He and H2 Under High Pressure. Coll.
     Intern. Centre Natl. Recherche Sci., Paris, no. 77, 1959, pp. 267-281.
 6. Cooper, J. : Summary of Discussions. The Lowering of the.Ionization Po-
     tential and Related Problems of the Equilibrium Plasma. J. Cooper, ed.
     Rep. 79, Joint Inst. for Lab. Astrophysics, July 15, 1966, pp. 193-199.
 7. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: Equilibrium Computations for
     Multicomponent Plasmas. NASA TN D-2806, 1965.
 8. Bethe, H. A. : The Specific Heat of Air up to 25 000' C. Rep. OSRD 20.869,
     Office of Scientific Research and Development, Feb. 9, 1942.
 9. Inglis, D. R. ; and Teller, E. : Ionic Depression of the Series Limit in One-
      Electron Spectra. Astrophys. J. , vol. 90, 1939, pp. 439-448.
10. Ecker, G. ; and Weizel, W. : Zustandssumme und Effektive Ionisierungs-
     spannung eines Atoms in Inneren des Plasmas. Ann. d. Physik, vol. 17,
     nos. 2-3, 1956, pp. 126-140.
11. Margenau, Henry; and Lewis, Marvin: Structure of Spectral Lines from
     Plasmas. Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 31, no. 3, July 1959, pp. 569-615.




                                                                                     25
     12. Kaeppeler, H. J. ; and Baumann, G. : Irreversible Stochastic Thermodynam-
          ics and the Transport Phenomena in a Reacting Plasma. Forschungsinstitut
          fur Physik d e r Strahlantriebe e. V. , Stuttgart (AFOSR-TR-57-20, DDC
          No. AD-120462), Nov. 1956.
     13. Gurvich, L. V. ; and Kvlividze, V. A. : Thermodynamic Functions of Mon-
          atomic and Diatomic Gases over a Wide Temperature Range. I. Thermo-
          dynamic Functions of Ideal Monatomic Gases. Russian J. Phys. Chem. ,
          vol. 35, no. 8, Aug. 1961, pp. 822-827.
     14. Griem, Hans R. : Plasma Spectroscopy. McGraw-Hill Book Co. , Inc. , 1964.
     15. Moore, Charlotte E. : Atomic Energy Levels. Circ. 467, National Bureau
          of Standards. Vol. I - June 15, 1949; Vol. II - Aug. 15, 1952; and Vol. 111-
          May 1, 1958.
     16. McChesney, M. : Equilibrium Shock-Wave Calculations in Inert-Gas, Mul-
          tiply Ionized Debye-HUckel Plasmas. Can. J. Phys. , vol. 42, no. 12,
          Dec. 1964, pp. 2473-2494.
     17. Nelson, H. F. ; and Goulard, R. : Equilibrium Radiation from Isothermal
          Hydrogen-Helium Plasmas. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer,
          V O ~ . 8, 1968, pp. 1351-1372.

     18. Owen, Tobias; and Mason, Harold P. : New Studies of Jupiter's Atmosphere.
          J. Atmospheric Sci. , vol. 26, no. 5, pt. 1, Sept. 1969, pp. 870-873.




26
           TABLE 11-1. - ELECTRONIC PARTITION OF

                            HYDROGEN ATOM



   Principal quantum number, n               -1
   Radius, cm
                              - En/kT
   Contribution t o sum, g, e
     For combustion g a s at 3000 K          2
     For plasma at 30 000 K                  2




                                      I     At t e-
                                  0

                                                          ISOLATED ATOM


POTENTIAL ENERGY, -ICLASSICAL
        V


                                                               ATOM IN
                                                               EXTERNAL FIELD

                                             I I

                   'ICLAS    s ICAL '      DISTANCE
                                                               CS-53270
            Figure II-1. - Lowering of ionization potential.




                                                                                27
       nHe, PARTICLES/
             CM3




                            109
                                1     2      4 6 810         20     40
         CS-53269                ELECTRONIC PARTITION FUNCTION OF He
        Figure 11-2. - Effect of missing energy levels on properties of helium
          atom. T = 40 000 K; P = 0.01 atmosphere.




          CS-53275                              PRESSURE, ATM
     Figure 11-3. - Ratio of hydrogen atom number densities using Saha and Debye'
       Hickel assumptions.




28
                     L2

                     LO




                        .4

                        .2
                        .(   11     .01        .1            1           10
    CS-53277                              PRESSURE, ATM
Figure 11-4. - Ratio of lithium atom number densities using Saha and Debye-
  Hiickel assumptions.




         CplR




                 .001             .1          10           1000
                                   PRESSURE, ATM             cs-53278

           Figure II-5. - Effect of Jovian model on heat capacity
             at. 40 000 K.




                                                                              29



            d
30
             111.       T H E R M O D Y N A M I C S OF THE I N T E R N A L
                              C O M B U S T I O N ENGINE
                                   Frank J. Zeleznik

     The ubiquitous automobile has played both the role of hero and villian during
the course of its history. At the present time it is being cast as the villian with
increasing frequency because it has been indicted as a major source of air pollution.
It is just this characterization that is responsible for our renewed interest in the
automobile.
     When we speak of the automobile as a source of air pollution, we really mean
the heart of the automobile, the internal combustion engine. The prototype of the
modern internal combustion engine was first successfully operated by Nicholas
August Otto in 1876. In spite of its long history, the internal combustion engine is
still poorly understood in t e r m s of the details of the physical processes that take
place during its operations.
      The internal combustion engine operates on what is known as the Otto cycle,
and Otto cycle calculations have been with u s for many years (ref. 1). The em -
phasis in earlier calculations was usually on the performance rather than on the
pollution aspects. Performance characteristics can often be estimated reasonably
accurately even with a considerable degree of simplification. W e are interested
in the pollution aspects of the internal combustion engine, and therefore the cal-
 culations must be performed with more care.
      Our extensive experience with equilibrium calculations places u s in a position
to carry out such careful calculations (ref. 2). We have just recently begun such
an analysis, and its objective is the prediction of exhaust gas properties. I will
describe our progress by first reviewing the Otto cycle, and then I will illustrate
the effect of various assumptions on the calculated results.



                             DESCRIPTION OF OTTO CYCLE

    The typical four-stroke Otto cycle is schematically indicated in figure 111-1.
Here we see that the internal combustion engine can be simply thought of as a cyl-
inder with one end closed and the other end fitted with a moveable piston. An inlet




                                                                                          31



                    d
         port at the closed end admits a combustible mixture into the cylinder, while an
         exhaust port permits burned gas to escape. The operation of such an engine may
         be simultaneously represented by these sketches and by a pressure volume chart
         as in figure III-2. The four-stroke cycle begins with the piston at the top, cor-
         responding to minimum volume. As the volume increases, the intake valve dpens
         and allows a fuel-air mixture to enter the engine at ambient conditions. When the
         volume has increased to its maximum value, the intake valve closes, and the piston
         reverses its direction. This reduces the volume, compresses the combustible
.        mixture, and raises its temperature and pressure above the ambient values.
         When the volume has once more been decreased t o its minimum value, the com-
         bustible mixture is ignited by a spark plug and the combustion process quickly
         raises the temperature and pressure by an additional amount. The increased pres-
         s u r e changes the direction of the piston once more, thus expanding the combustion
         gases. As the hot combustion gases expand, they do work on the piston and also
         lose some of their energy by heat transfer to the cooled walls. Near the end of the
         expansion stroke the temperature and pressure are considerably lower than their
         values at combustion. Nevertheless, a t the end of the expansion stroke the pres-
         s u r e is usually somewhat higher than the ambient pressure. At this point the ex-
         haust valve opens and the pressure is suddenly lowered to the ambient value; this
         is accompanied by a surge of gas out through the exhaust port. Concurrently the
         piston once more reverses direction and begins to expel the combustion gases that
         still remain in the cylinder. Not all of the remaining gas is expelled during this
         exhaust strokeof the piston since at least a portion of it will remain in the cavity
         that serves as a combustion chamber. This residual gas will dilute the fresh fuel
         mixture that will enter the cylinder as the next four-stroke cycle commences.



                          THERMODYNAMIC SIMUMTION OF OTTO CYCLE

              We shall now attempt to simulate the actual Otto cycle by thermodynamic
         calculations. It should be understood from the outset that thermodynamics alone
         cannot supply a truly realistic picture of the Otto cycle. At some point it becomes
         necessary to abandon a wholly thermodynamic analysis by including important rate
         processes such as heat transfer and chemical kinetics. However, thermodynamic
         analysis is a useful first step in the simulation since it supplies some insight into
         the operation of the Otto cycle and helps a person to form a judgement about the
         relative importance of some of the parameters. Therefore, in all the calculations
         t o be discussed below, we assumed that combustion takes place instantaneously
         and essentially at constant volume and that there is no heat transfer. The fuel,




    32
called gasoline, is a mixture of 25 percent benzene, 25 percent octane, and
50 percent dodecane by weight. Also the engine operates at a compression ratio
of a : i .
      A first attempt at a simulation of this cycle is illustrated in table 111-1. To
simplify the calculation, we assume that there is no pressure drop below the am-
bient pressure during the intake stroke; that is, throttling is negligible. Further
we assume that the fuel is fully vaporized and that none of the burned gas from the
previous cycle remains in the engine. We also assume that the combustion pro-
ducts remain in chemical equilibrium.
      Here we see the specific volume, pressure, and temperature in the engine at
five points in the cycle. The five points correspond t o the numbers in figure Et-2
and are the conditions at (1)the start of the compression stroke, (2) the end of the
compression stroke, (3) the start of the expansion stroke, (4) the end of the ex-
pansion stroke, and (5) the end of isentropic blowdown to ambient pressure. This
calculation represents a considerable idealization of the actual processes taking
place in the internal combustion engine. A somewhat more realistic calculation
is shown in table 111-2, where we have modified the calculation t o allow the fuel to
partially vaporize in the intake manifold and permitted residual exhaust gases to
remain in the engine from cycle to cycle. Additionally it seems experimentally
that the concentration of nitric oxide, one of the air pollutants, is unaffected by
the expansion, and its concentration remains fixed at the combustion values. This
cycle calculation is labeled as B, while the previous calculations of table Ill-1
are labeled as A. As can be seen, there is a discernible difference between the
results of the two calculations.
      We can introduce one more element of reality while still remaining wholly
within the thermodynamic framework. The additional factor, throttling, is the
pressure drop that occurs as the fuel-air mixture passes through the intake sys-
tem. The appearance of the throttled Otto cycle on a pressure-volume chart is
 shown in figure HI-3. The cross-hatched area represents that part of the cycle
that corresponds t o the unthrottled cycle. A cycle calculation for a throttled
 engine is shown in table 111-3, where the numbering of points is consistent with
the numbering in figure III-3. The throttled cycle calculation is labeled as C,
while A once more corresponds to the initial cycle calculation presented as
table III-1. Here we see that throttling produces substantial differences from the
 idealized cycle. This is particularly true of the pressure.
       The presence of residual exhaust gases considerably complicates Otto cycle
 calculations. The reason for this is that the properties of the residual gas are
 not known until the cycle has been completed. Thus, to initiate a cycle calculation
 it is necessary t o assume the properties of the exhaust gas for the first cycle and




                                                                                        33
     then repeatedly traverse the cycle until the calculation converges. This, in effect,
     simulates the startup of an automobile; equivalently this can be taken as an indi-
     cation of the time required f o r the disappearance of the effects due to large per-
     turbations in the operation of the engine. The exhaust gas temperature corre-
     sponding to calculation C is shown in table 111-4 as a function of the number of
     times the cycle is traversed. We see that the effect of the initial exhaust gas
     properties persists for about three cycles.



                              OTTO CYCLE AND AIR POLLUTION

          The cycle calculations, in their present form, are idealizations but they do
     shed light on the air pollution problem. In dealing with automobile air pollution,
     we are concerned with the emission of hydrocarbons, oxides of nitrogen, and
     carbon monoxide. The production of all of these species is influenced by wall
     quenching; that i s , the contact of the hot gases with the cool cylinder walls.
     However, sampling experiments (ref. 3) indicate that only something of the order
     of 1 m a s s percent of the cylinder contents is directly affected by wall quenching.
     Thus thermodynamics should give a reasonable estimate o l pollutant concentra-
     tions in the exhaust. With this in mind let us compare the pollutant concentration
     in exhaust gases from two fuels, natural gas and gasoline. A great deal has re-
     cently been said about the possibility of reducing air pollution by using natural gas
     as a fuel. In table 111-5 we see exhaust gas properties for the two fuels. In each
     case the cycle calculation corresponded to the throttled Otto cycle that is labeled
     C in table 111-3. Here we see, f o r the assumptions made in the calculation, that
     gasoline produces approximately twice the amount of carbon monoxide and 35 per-
     cent more nitric oxides. Neither fuel shows any hydrocarbon, which indicates
     that exhaust hydrocarbons are a result of wall quenching.
          The importance of wall quenching f o r the production of carbon monoxide and
     hydrocarbons suggests that these species might be eliminated merely by providing
     a suitable high temperature environment. One of the automotive emission control
     devices currently under development attempts to do just this. It is known as an
     exhaust manifold reactor or thermal reactor. Its purpose is to eliminate, by
     oxidation, any hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide that are exhausted by the auto-
     mobile engine. Such a reactor is shown attached to an engine in figure 111-4. Air
     is mixed with the exhaust gas at the exhaust port and allowed t o react in the reac-
     tor. A more detailed sketch of a typical reactor is shown in figure 111-5. We see
     that it is merely an insulated cylinder where sufficient residence time can be pro-
     vided for the reactions t o take place. The residence time is typically of the order




34
qf 20 milliseconds.   The effective operation of such a reactor is critically depend-
ent on the temperature. This is shown in figure Ill-6, which presents the dis-
appearance rate of carbon monoxide. The data were obtained by integrating a sys-
tem of ordinary differential equations corresponding t o 29 reversible chemical
reactions. Although the oxidation of carbon monoxide proceeds quite rapidly at
1200 K, it goes relatively slowly at 900 K. As shown in table 111-2 for the calcu-
lation labeled B y the exhaust gas temperature was 1246 K. This was the calcu-
lated exhaust temperature in the absence of any heat transfer. It is not difficult
to imagine that, had we included heat transfer, the temperature would be consid-
erably lower and could easily approach 900 K, where the reactor ceases to be
effective .
     None of the calculations that have been described include heat transfer effects.
The presence of heat transfer makes the Otto cycle calculations time dependent in
the sense that the Otto cycle conditions depend on the speed with which the cycle
is traversed. We are currently working on the problem, but we have not yet
reached the stage where we can present results for typical situations.



                                   REFERENC ES

1. Starkman, E. S. ; Patterson, D. J. : and Taylor, C. Fayette; eds: Digital
    Calculations of Engine Cycles. Progress in Technology Series, Vol. 7.
    Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
2. Zeleznik, Frank J. ; and Gordon, Sanford: Calculation of Complex Chemical
    Equilibria. Applied Thermodynamics. American Chemical Society Publica-
    tions, 1968, p. 303.
3. Starkman, E. S. ; Stewart, H. E. ; and Zvonow, V. A. : An Investigation Into
    the Formation and Modification of Emission Precursors. Paper 690020,
    SAE, Jan. 1969.




                                                                                        35
     TABLE III-1. - IDEALIZED OTTO CYCLE

     RESULTS FOR UNTHROTTLED ENGINE

     [Fuel, stoichiometric gasoline-air; com-
       pression ratio, 8; assumptions, fully
       vaporized fuel, no residual exhaust gas,
       che




     1
            Volume,     Pressure,       I'emperature
               cc/g       atm                K

              849.9         1.0              300
              106.2        16.93             667
              106.2        77.88            2874
              849.9         6.38            19 15
             3700.5         1.0             1308




      TABLE III-2. - UNTHROTTLED OTTO

              CYCLE CALCULATIONS

        [Fuel, stoichiometric gasoline-air;
          compression ratio, 8. ]

     ] Point I P r e s s u r e , atml Temperature, K 1
                 B        A         B        A
                                             (b)
       -         (a)     @)         (4

        1        1.0 1.0            314      300
        2       15.97 16.93         628      667
        3       77.29 77.88        2851     2874
        4        6.12 6.38         1828     1915
        5        10    1.0         1246     1308
      aPartial fuel vaporization; residual ex-
        haust gases: oxides of nitrogen
        frozen; no throttling.
      bNo fuel vaporization; no residual ex-
         haust gases; oxides of nitrogen in
         equilibrium; no throttling.




36
 TABLE 111-3. - THROTTLED OTTO                                     TABLE m - 4 . -CON-

       CYCLE CALCULATIONS                                           VERGENCE RATE

 [Fuel, stoichiometric gasoline-air;                                IN OTTO CYCLE
   compression ratio, 8. ]
                                                                     CALCULATIONS




  I1 1 1 1
Point P r e s s u r e , atm Temperature, K
                                                                   [Fuel, stoichiometric
         C     I A                    A
                                                                     gasoline-air; com -
                                                                     pression ratio, 8;
                                                                     residual gas for
        0.50
        7.90
       34.82
                 1.0
                16.93
                77.88
                           6347;
                          2800
                                      667
                                      300
                                     2874
                                                                     first cycle, air at
                                                                     300 K. ]
        2.79     6.38     1820       1915
        1.0      1.0      1469       1308
“Partial fuel vaporization; residual
   exhaust gases; oxides of nitrogen
   frozen; throttling.
bpTo fuel vaporization; no residual ex-
   haust gases; oxides of nitrogen in
   equilibrium; no throttling.




                                    TABLE 111-5. - EFFECT OF

                                     FUEL ON EXHAUST GAS

                                            PROPERTIES

                                     [Stoichiometric fuel-air;
                                       compression ratio, 8;
                                       pressure, 1 . 0 atm. ]



                                               Mole fraction

                                            0.00842     0.00870
                                             .00300      .00574
                                             .09181      . 12769
                                             .00287      .00226
                                             .18621      .12260
                                             .00586      .00799
                                             . 00000     .00001
                                             .70184      .72501

                                   aTemperature, 1393 K.
                                   bTemperature, 1469 K.




                                                                                           37
       INTAKE           COMPRESSION          EXPANSION           EXHAUST
                                                                  CS-53342

            Figure m-1.- Schematic representation of Otto cycle.




                                              3




                                COMBUST ION

     CYLINDER PRESSURE                               XPANSION STROKE


                                 COMPRESS1
                                 STROKE
                                                                 \
                                                                  -
                                                                  -\5
                                                                     \


                                   INTAKE STROKE         EXHAUST STROKE
                                             CYLINDER VOLUME
                                                                  cs-53343

       Figure III-2.   - Pressure-volume diagram for unthrottled Otto cycle.




38
                                         3




                           COMBUST ION

CYLINDER PRESSURE
                                                  -COMPRESSION
                                      2
                                MHAUS
                                                                   5

                       I

                                   CYLINDER VOLUME
                                                           cs-53339

 Figure III-3. - Pressure-volume diagram for throttled Otto cycle.




                                  THERMAL REACTOR




                                                SECTION VIEW
                                                        CS-52353

 Figure III-4. - Thermal reactor installed on automobile engine.




                                                                       39
                              ENGINE EXHAUST + INJECTED AIR




     1 MI B                 INNER CAN-,                                             B181

                                                                  CS-523 54


                                   TO EXHAUST SYSTEM
                           Figure III-5. - Typical thermal reactor.




              COI
              %                                                       900 K




                      0           5          10         15
                                        TIME, mSEC
                                                                      cs-53335

                Figure III-6. - Oxidation rate of carbon monoxide in exhaust gas.




40



                  a
                     IV.     T R A N S P O R T P R O P E R T I E S OF
                           HIGH T E M P E R A T U R E G A S E S *
                                    Richard S. Brokaw

     The transport properties of dilute monatomic gases at low t o moderate tem-
peratures a r e now well understood; the rigorous Chapman-Enskog theory appears
to provide an entirely adequate description for these gases. The theory applies
to molecules with spherically symmetrical intermolecular force fields and hence
is not strictly applicable to polyatomic gases. In practice, however, it turns out
that theory gives a good account of the viscosities and diffusion coefficients of
polyatomic gases and gas mixtures. The thermal conductivity poses a special
problem, however, because internal energy modes - rotation, vibration, etc. -
make a contribution to the heat flux. Here there has been recent progress -
notably the work of Mason and Monchick (refs. 1 and 2) - so that we now have an
improved understanding of the problem, sufficient for most practical purposes.
For example, if we know the viscosity of a gas and something of its molecular
properties (heat capacity, moments of inertia, dipole moment, if any) we should
be able to predict its thermal conductivity within a few percent (except, perhaps,
for strongly polar gases).
     Consequently in this paper I take the position that we have an adequate theo-
retical framework for predicting transport properties of high temperature gases
and that differences from room temperature gases a r i s e as a consequence of
phenomena not usually encountered at modest temperatures, for example , the
presence of mobile chemical equilibria o r the presence of atoms or free radicals
which are valence unsaturated. As a starting point the next section discusses
briefly transport properties of gases at moderate temperatures. That will be
followed with a section on heat conduction in chemically reacting gas mixtures, and
then a section on the effect of the "unusual" intermolecular forces between labile
atoms and/or free radicals. The paper concludes with a discussion of some of the
unique phenomena in ionized gases (plasmas).



;
     A l s o presented a t the Third International Symposium on High Temperature Technology,
Asilomar, California, 1967.




                                                                                               41
                  TRANSPORT PROPERTIES AT MODERATE TEMPERATURES

         The rigorous Chapman-Enskog theory leads to the following expressions for the
     transport properties of dilute monatomic gases (ref. 3):
     Viscosity




     Thermal conductivity




     Self -diffusion coefficient


                                      D = 8? ( T ) A P



     These formulas involve well-known quantities such as the atomic m a s s m, the
     Boltzmann constant k, the temperature T, the heat capacity cv      (=  k) , and the
     density p. In addition, the formulas contain cross sections (or collision inte-
     grals) u2 and
             77
                     g,  and to compute these the intermolecular force law must be
     known. However, the potential appears explicitly in an integrand which is then
     averaged by three integrations. Consequently the collision integrals are not very
     sensitive to the details of the intermolecular potential.
          Figure IV- 1 compares experimental and calculated viscosity data for argon
     over a wide temperature range. The curve has been computed f o r the potential
     energy function shown in the inset in figure IV-1 (a combination of an inverse sixth
     power attractive potential, which has a theoretical basis in the dispersion forces ,
     with an exponential repulsion). The potential has been chosen (ref. 4) to take
     account of equation-of -state and crystal properties as well as viscosity coefficients.
     For example, the interatomic distance in solid argon is 3.8 A, (just inside the
     minimum of the potential energy curve at 3.866 A). And the depth of the attractive
     well, 123.2 K, is consistent with argon's heat of sublimation of 0 K. The same




42
potential successfully describes the thermal conductivity (fig. IV-2) and self -
diffusion coefficients (fig. IV-3) for argon.
       For gas mixtures the expressions for the viscosity and thermal conductivity
a r e algebraically complicated and contain cross sections characteristic of inter -
actions between unlike molecules. In principle this requires a knowledge of the
intermolecular potential between the unlike species; however, in practice, rough
estimates based on empirical combination rules, which average potential parameters
of the pure components, work reasonably well for the valence-saturated gases en-
countered at ordinary temperatures. With mixtures of polar and nonpolar gases
the polar-nonpolar interactions are essentially of a nonpolar nature; hence, the un-
like cross sections are smaller than might be inferred from a simple averaging of
the cross sections of the pure components.
       Experimental viscosities of nitrogen-hydrogen (ref. 5) and ammonia-hydrogen
(ref. 6) mixtures are shown in figure IV-4. The solid lines have been computed
using empirical combination rules t o estimate the N2 - H2 and NH3 - H2 inter-
molecular potentials. The agreement between theory and experiment is generally
good (although f o r NH3 - H2 mixtures the accord is even better if experimental
diffusion coefficients are analyzed t o estimate the NH3 - H2 potential; s e e ref. 7).
The dashed curve for NH3 - H2 mixtures was calculated assuming the NH3 - H2
cross section to be the geometric mean of the NH3 - NH3 and H2 - H2 cross sec-
tions. This procedure (which works reasonably well for nonpolar mixtures) over-
estimates the cross section s o that the predicted viscosities are too low.
       Experimental thermal conductivities (ref. 8) for these same mixtures are
 shown in figure IV-5. The curves, calculated using Hirschfelder's (ref. 9) Eucken-
type approximation for gas mixtures, agree reasonably well with experiment,
although the e r r o r s a r e larger than in the case of viscosity. This is in part due to
larger experimental e r r o r s , but may also be due to approximations in the theory.
 (But a more sophisticated theory f o r gas mixtures seems scarcely better, ref. 2.)
       Thus we have adequate theory for predicting transport properties of dilute
 gases. The remainder of the paper will be devoted to the phenomena which do not
usually arise in room temperature gases.



               HEAT CONDUCTION IN CHEMICALLY REACTING GASES

     At high temperatures many gases a r e partially dissociated and undergo a varie-
ty of chemical reactions. In reacting gases, heat transport may be considerably
larger than in "frozen" (nonreacting) mixtures. Large amounts of heat can be
carried as chemical enthalpy of molecules that diffuse because the gas composition


 c


                                                                                              43
     varies with temperature. For example, in a gas that absorbs heat by dissociating
     as the temperature is raised, heat is transported when a molecule dissociates in
     the high-temperature region and the fragments diffuse toward the cooler region. In
     the low-temperature region the fragments recombine and release the heat absorbed
     at high temperature.
          When chemical reaction rates are very high, chemical equilibrium can be as-
     sumed t o exist locally throughout a gas mixture. It is then possible, by differen-
     tiating the equilibrium relations, to relate the concentration gradients to the tem -
     perature gradient. In this event one can define a n equilibrium thermal conductivity
     Xe independent of apparatus geometry and scale:

                                           Xe = Xf 4- hr                                 (4)

     where Xf is the conductivity in the absence of reaction (the frozen thermal con-
     ductivity) and A, is the augmentation due to the reactions.
          A general expression for the thermal conductivity due to chemical reactions
     has been developed (refs. 9 and 10) that is applicable t o mixtures involving any
     number of reactants, inert diluents, and chemical equilibria, provided chemical
     equilibrium exists locally in the temperature gradient. For a simple dissociation
     of the type A TZ nB the thermal conductivity due t o chemical reaction is


                                 X =--D        ~     P   ~X ~~ X2   ~
                                  r
                                          RT       RT ("xA+xB) 2
                                                     2


     Here Dm is the binary diffusion coefficient between components A and B, AH
     is the heat of reaction, and xA and xB are the mole fractions of the components.
     Note that unless both species are present Xr is zero. Furthermore, since, in a
     dissociating g a s the composition varies with pressure, we expect the heat con-
     ductivity to vary with pressure also. This is in contrast to the behavior of non-
     reacting gases, f o r which the heat conductivity is independent of pressure.
          Experimental (ref. 11) and theoretical (ref. 12) conductivities for the N204 Z
     2N02 system at one atmosphere are shown in figure IV-6. The dashed curve indi-
     cates the frozen conductivity. Thus Xr is the major contribution to the heat con-
     ductivity; at the maximum (where the m a s s fractions of N204 and NO2 are equal)
     the conductivity is comparable to that of a light gas such as helium and an order of
     magnitude greater than in the chemically frozen gas mixture.
          The theoretical expression for a system involving two reactions has been tested
     (ref. 13) for the case of hydrogen fluoride vapor. At moderate pressures the




44
pressure-volume-temperature behavior of hydrogen fluoride can be described in
t e r m s of a monomer-hexamer equilibrium, while low pressure data suggest a dimer
as well. Although the actual state of the vapor is uncertain, it appears that at low
and moderate pressures the equilibria

                          2HF   = (HF)2   AH2 = 7 . 4 kcal


                         6HF zz (HF)6     AH6 = 40.5 kcal

serve to specify the system rather well.
     Computed and experimental (ref. 14) thermal conductivities are compared in
figure IV-7. The solid line was computed assuming both dimer and hexamer equi-
libria; whereas the dashed line was computed considering only the hexamer equi-
librium. Note the extreme pressure dependence of the thermal conductivity. The
maximum conductivity is more than three times that of hydrogen at the same tem-
perature and some 33 times the frozen thermal conductivity expected in the absence
of reaction. The inclusion of a dimer equilibrium markedly improves the agree-
ment between theory and experiment in the low-pressure region.
     The experimental studies on nitrogen tetroxide and hydrogen fluoride prove the
validity of the theoretical expressions for thermal conductivity of reacting gases in
chemical equilibrium. The theory has also been successfully applied to data for
the PC15 PC13 + C12 equilibrium (ref. 15).
     Thus far we have considered systems where the chemical reactions are so rapid
that chemical equilibrium prevails locally at all points in the gas mixture. Let u s
now consider the reduction of heat transport caused by reduced reaction rates. A
general expression has been derived (ref. 16) for the apparent thermal conductivity
of reacting mixtures in which a single reaction proceeds at a finite rate. In contrast
to systems where reaction rates are either very high o r very low, it is found that
heat conduction depends on the geometry and scale of the system and also the cata-
lytic activity of the surfaces.
     For a plane parallel plate geometry, with one surface noncatalytic and the
other surface a perfect catalyst, the effective thermal conductivity is




where




                                                                                         45
     Here (33 is the chemical reaction rate at equilibrium (that is the total rate ineither
     direction - not the net rate, which is zero, of course), and 2 is the distance be-
     tween the plates. For simple systems it can be shown that


                                         cp2 =--‘e    ‘Diff
                                                f‘    ‘Chem

     If the diffusion time ?-,,iff is short in comparison with the chemical relaxation
     time ‘(-,hem,      -            -                  -
                     cp 0, tanh q/cp 1, and X* Xf. In other words, the concentra-
     tion gradients are washed out by diffusion and the frozen conductivity is obtained.
     On the other hand if the chemical time is short, the concentration gradients are
                    -               -
     maintained, cp 00, tanh p/cp 0, and X* he.       +


          The theory can be applied t o low-pressure measurements (ref. 11) on the
     N204 = 2N02 system, as shown in figure IV-8. The upper and lower dashed
     curves are respectively, the computed equilibrium and frozen conductivities. The
     solid curve has been fitted to the data assuming negligible surface reaction and
     assuming that the rate constant f o r the dissociation reaction

                                    N204 + M         - 2N02 + M
     is 5.3X109 cubic centimeters per mole per second a t 296 K. This is in reasonable
     agreement with values derived from ultrasonic absorption measurements by Sessler
     (ref. 17) and by Cher (ref. 18) who reported values of 4.7X109 and 4.lXlO 9,
     respectively.
         Thus we seem to have an adequate understanding of the effects of chemical
     reaction on heat conduction. This is fortunate, because these mobile chemical
     equilibria are frequently encountered in high temperature gas mixtures.

                   MULTl PLE INTERACTION CURVES AND PROPERTIES OF
                             LABILE ATOMS AND FREE RADICALS
          The discussion thus far has been concerned with systems in which it is as-
     sumed that a pair of colliding atoms o r molecules can interact along only one po-
     tential energy curve. However, in collisions between atoms o r free radicals pos-




46
sessing unpaired electron spins, multiple interaction curves a r e possible. For
example, if two hydrogen atoms collide with spins opposed, they follow the '2
attractive potential (which corresponds to the H2 molecule); this occurs on one
collision in four. On the other hand in three out of four collisions the spins a r e
parallel and the atoms follow the antibonding 3C repulsive potential. With other
atoms these interactions can be much more complex: two ground state oxygen
atoms can follow any of 18 different potential energy curves (ref. 19). It has
been shown (ref. 20) that, when there a r e multiple interaction curves, the trans-
port property formulas of classical kinetic theory remain valid but the collision
integrals must be averaged over the different curves, with each one weighted a c -
cording to its statistical weight.
      These interactions between labile atoms o r free radicals a r e usually much
stronger than the interactions between valence saturated species, and this in turn
has an effect on the transport properties. This is illustrated in figure IV-9 where
the viscosities of atomic and molecular hydrogen are compared. The experimental
viscosities for hydrogen atoms have been deduced by Browning and Fox (ref. 21)
from their measurements on hydrogen atom-molecule mixtures, assuming an ap-
propriate f i t t o Margenau's calculation (ref. 22) of the H - H2 interaction. The
experimental atom viscosities are in near-perfect agreement with the accurate
quantal calculations of Buckingham , Browning, and Gal (ref. 2 3) shown as a solid
line.
      On the other hand, if one were t o naively overlook the 'C and 3C potentials
and assume weak forces analogous to the H2 - H2 and H - H2 interactions, a con-
siderably smaller H atom c r o s s section would be predicted. The dashed curve in
figure IV-9 shows such a prediction based on Lennard-Jones (12-6) potential force
 constants of aH-H = 2.53 A, (E/k)H-H =031.3 K. (These values were obtained
from the force constants uH         = 2.75 A, (E/k)H-H3 = 32.27 K (ref. 24), and
                                 -       3
                                         Y            Y

          = 2.968   A, (E/k)H -H = 33.3 K (ref. 25) by inverting the usual combining
OH2 -Ha                      2       2
rules for the potential parameters (ref. 26). )
     Thus the effects due to multiple interaction curves seem well-understood and
we find a satisfying agreement between theory and experiment in the case of atomic
hydrogen. Of course in high temperature gas mixtures involving many different
atoms and radicals the situation may be complex indeed, and it might be necessary
to consider hundreds of interactions for a truly rigorous calculation of transport
properties. (A reasonably complete treatment for the nitrogen-oxygen system , for
high temperature a i r , includes more than 30 interactions (ref. 27).) The potential
curves for many interactions a r e known only poorly, if at all - especially some of




                                                                                        47



                       a
     the repulsive interactions. And the repulsive interactions play an important role
     because of the high multiplicities which are frequently associated with such states.



                         TRANSPORT PROPERTIES OF IONIZED GASES

          At temperatures in the neighborhood of 10 000 K and moderate pressures
     almost all gases a r e to some extent ionized. Such gases possess unusual prop-
     erties because of the presence of the very light electrons and because of the very
     long range Coulomb interaction between the charged species.
          The precise experimental determination of the transport properties of plasmas
     is extremely difficult; hence the usual interplay between theory and accurate ex-
     perimentation is lacking. Consequently the theory must be developed with sophis-
     tication and care.
           For unionized gases the lowest nonzero Chapman-Enskog approximation pro-
     vides a generally adequate description of the transport properties (with the possible
     exception of the coefficients of thermal diffusion). Consequently some have applied
     these lowest approximations to ionized gases, although calculations (ref. 28) for
     the Lorentzian gas should have suggested the possibility of slow convergence in the
     case of plasmas. Ahtye (ref. 29) realized that higher approximations were required
     and the matter has been further and extensively explored by Devoto (refs. 30 and 31).
          Some of Devoto's (ref. 31) results for argon at atmospheric p r e s s u r e a r e p r e -
     sented in figure IV-10, which shows the ratios of the lowest nonzero Chapman-
     Enskog approximations to the highest approximations calculated by Devoto. The
     ratios a r e plotted against temperature, with a secondary scale showing the degree
     of ionization CY. The ratio of the first to second approximation for viscosity
     {qI1/[ql2 is within 1 percent of unity at low temperatures and drops off to about
     0.89 as the gas approaches complete ionization. This is about the same as the
     ratio Devoto calculated (ref. 30) for a fully ionized hydrogen plasma (0.833) and
     indicates that the first approximation is not sufficient for accurate calculations at
     high degrees of ionization. The accuracy of the second approximation is not known,
     but it is probably within 1 o r 2 percent, if the result f o r the Lorentzian gas is any
     guide (ref. 28).
           The ratio of the second to fourth approximation for the translational thermal
     conductivity [XI2/[ AI4 (the first Chapman-Enskog approximation is zero) drops to
     about 0 . 4 3 at high temperature, showing that [XI2 is seriously in e r r o r ([AI2/[Xl4
     for fully ionized hydrogen is 0.438 (ref. 30)). Devoto finds [Al3/[XI4      within 3 per-
     cent of unity, so that [AI4 must be accurate indeed.




48
       The ratio [ ~ ] ~ / [ aindicates
                                 ]~     that the first approximation to the electrical con-
ductivity is inadequate under any circumstances. At high temperatures the higher
approximations converge rapidly (at 10 000 K the second approximation is within
5 percent of the fourth) but at low temperatures even the fourth approximation
seems not to have converged on the true value. For example at 4000 K, [ u ] ~ / [ u ]=~
0 . 6 3 and [aI3/[al4 = 0 . 8 2 .
       Thus it seems that accurate calculations for ionized gases require the higher
Chapman-Enskog approximations, which are algebraically complicated. It would
be very desirable to develop simpler expressions; Devoto (ref. 31) has done some
work in this-direction.
       A partially ionized gas contains at least three species: ions, electrons, and
the parent atoms. In order to describe the transport properties, c r o s s sections
for all the pair interactions must be obtained. Let u s consider argon as an ex-
ample. The interactions are A r - Ar, A r - e, Ar - Ar', Ar' - Ar', e - e, and
Ar' - e.
       If we regard the argon-argon cross section as llnormal", all the other cross
sections a r e in one way o r another abnormal o r peculiar. Argon atoms a r e very
transparent t o electrons s o the atom-electron cross section is unusually small
                              a
 (about 0. 5 to, perhaps, 7 (ref. 2) compared with 13 to 15 for the Ar-Ar c r o s s
section (ref. 32)). On the other hand the argon atom-ion c r o s s sections appear
unusually large. One might at first assume that the atom-ion cross section would
be comparable to the atom-atom c r o s s section. However, when an ion encounters
its parent atom, resonant charge transfer occurs; this gives r i s e to an exchange
force which increases the elastic collision cross sections (by about 80 percent in
the case of argon (ref. 32)). But charge exchange has a further effect on the dif-
fusion o r mobility of ions. This resonant exchange is probable on grazing collisions
between ions and their parent atoms, and a grazing collision with charge transfer
is equivalent to a head-on collision without charge transfer insofar as the transport
 of charge is concerned.
        To a good approximation the contribution of the ionization equilibrium to the
heat conductivity is (refs. 9 and 33)

                                      DAr-Ar' P AH2
                          X
                              r
                                  r            - xArxAr+
                                         RT    RT2 ( x A r + x          )2
                                                                 Ar'

Here AH is now the heat of ionization while xAr and x                        a r e the mole frac-
                                                                       Ar'




                                                                                                    49
         tions of atoms and ions; the atom-ion diffusion coefficient D              , is small be-
                                                                            Ar -Ar’
         cause of the large charge transfer cross section.
                The consequences of the small atom-electron cross section and large atom-
         ion cross section are apparent in figure IV-11,where the thermal conductivity of
         argon at atmospheric pressure is plotted as a function of temperature. An auxil-
         iary scale shows the degree of ionization cy. The curves for the equilibrium and
         translational heat conductivity were computed by Devoto (ref. 31), and the curve
         f o r atomic argon was calculated by Amdur and Mason (ref. 34). The experimental
         data below 5000 K (solid symbols) are derived from shock tube heat transfer studies
         (refs. 35 and 36), and the data in the 8000 to 12 000 K range (open symbols) were
         deduced from arc temperature profiles (ref. 37).
                Note that the heat conductivity in slightly ionized argon is considerably larger
         than in the unionized gas. For example at 9300 K where the gas is only 1 percent
         ionized the heat conductivity is about 80 percent higher than in atomic argon. This
         is in part due to the small electron m a s s and in part due t o the small argon-electron
         cross section.
                Note too that at higher temperatures the ionization reaction contributes t o the
         heat conductivity; for example, at 13 500 K the equilibrium conductivity he is
         about 75 percent l a r g e r than the translational conductivity, Atrans.   However, this
         is a rather small increase, in comparison with the eight-to tenfold increase in heat
         conductivity caused by the dissociation of diatomic molecules (ref. 9). The reason,
         of course, is the very small ion-atom diffusion coefficient which is in turn a con-
         sequence of the large resonant charge transfer cross section.
                The ion-ion, electron-electron, and ion-electron interactions are all coulombic,
         an extremely strong and long range interaction, which makes these cross sections
         very large; in fact if the collision integrals are evaluated for the simple coulomb
         potential, they a r e found to diverge (ref. 38). This difficulty is most easily cir-
          cumvented by cutting off the integration for the cross section at some large distance
         such as the mean interparticle distance, or better yet, at the Debye length


                                                                                               (9)
                                            d=(-y’2


         where ne is the number density of electrons and e is the electronic charge. This
         procedure is justified by the argument that the electrical charge of distant particles




    50
r
is effectively screened o r neutralized by nearby particles of opposite charge. 1
     However, it seems preferable t o introduce the assumption of screening at the
 outset and describe the charged particle interactions by the screened coulomb po-
tential,




The plus sign applies for ion-ion and electron-electron interactions, and the minus
sign applies for the ion-electron interaction. Liboff (ref. 39) and Kihara (ref. 40)
have developed analytic expressions for the collision integrals for this potential
Which are valid at high temperatures, and recently Mason, Munn, and Smith
(ref. 41) have done the necessary numerical work to evaluate the integrals for low
temperatures as well.
     Normally, intermolecular potentials depend on intermolecular distance, and,
in the case of polyatomic molecules, on the angular orientation of the molecules.
The screened coulomb potential is unique, however, in that the potential itself de-
pends on both temperature and pressure, since the Debye length d is a function of
temperature and the charged particle density.
     This leads to pressure-dependent cross sections, which is also unique. For
example, Liboff's expression for the cross section which is important in deter-
mining viscosity is




                      a2
                       77 =         [~ln
                                                  - -1 1n(8ane) + l n 2 - y
                                                    4
                                                                            1
( y = 0. 577 = Euler's constant); the other cross sections are similar, but with dif-
ferent numerical constants. When the degree of ionization is small, ne is pro-
portional to the square root of the pressure, whereas in the fully ionized gas ne
varies directly with the pressure. In either case, the cross sections increase as

     'Following Ahtye and Devoto, equation (9) considers both electrons and ions effective in
screening; if electrons only a r e considered, then d = ( k T / 4 ~ n , e ~ ) ~ /It~ .would seem r e a -
sonable to include screening by the ions in calculating a property such a s viscosity, which is
determined largely by the heavy ions. On the other hand, for the heat conductivity, determined
mostly by the rapid motions of the electrons, the slow-moving ions probably do not s c r e e n ef-
fectively. (Private communication from D r . F. A . Lyman.)




                                                                                                           51
     the pressure is lowered so that the viscosity and translational thermal conductivity
     should increase with increasing pressure.
          This effect is shown in figure IV-12, where the viscosity of argon is plotted as
     a function of temperature f o r a number of pressures. Most of the calculations are
     due to Ahtye (ref. 29) (solid curves); his results at atmospheric pressure agree
     reasonably closely with Devoto's (ref. 31) computations (dashed curve). Two fea-
     tures are noteworthy. First, at high temperatures the viscosity is pressure de-
     pendent, because of the dependence of the shielded coulomb cross sections on elec-
     tron density. Second, the high temperature viscosities are low, a consequence of
     the enormous size of the shielded coulomb cross sections.
          Two concluding observations about the transport properties of ionized gases are
     in order: First, What about quantum effects? Mason, Munn, and Smith (ref. 41)
     have considered this question and conclude that quantum corrections are important
     in high density plasmas (say, ne > lo2' ~ m - at     ) temperatures; above lo6 K
                                                       ~ all
     quantum effects are important in low density plasmas too. Second, Mason and
     Sherman (ref. 42) have made estimates of cross sections for symmetric resonant
     charge exchange between ions differing by one in electronic charge (processes such
                    -
     as Ar' + Ar++ Ar++ + Ar'). They find that at most temperatures and electron
     densities of interest these cross sections are negligible in comparison with the
     screened coulomb cross sections for diffusion. This means that resonant charge
     transfer between ions will not affect the thermal conductivity of plasmas by depress-
     ing the rate of diffusive transport of ionization energy. This is in contrast to the
     situation in partially ionized gases, where, as we have already seen, ion-neutral
     exchange is important. Thus it appears that theory is adequate for calculating prop-
     erties of multiply ionized plasmas, provided only that quantum effects are negligible,
     and the shielded coulomb potential is appropriate for describing interactions between
      charged particles (T 3/ne > 10 -7 (0K ~ m ) ~ ) .



                                  CONCLUDING REMARKS

          I hope the foregoing sections convince the reader that we do indeed have the
     theoretical tools for estimating high temperature transport properties. We must
     be certain that we consider all important aspects - effects due t o chemical re-
     actions, multiple interaction curves, and, in partially ionized gases, charge trans-
     fer and the long range coulomb forces. In ionized gases w e must also take account
     of the higher Chapman-Enskog approximations, and in this regard algebraic sim -
     plifications would be most welcome. Then too, for many interactions between
     valence unsaturated atoms o r free radicals the multiple intermolecular potentials




52
are unknown. But this is a problem of quantum chemistry and not a concern of
transport theory per se.



                                  REFERENCES

1. Mason, E. A. ; and Monchick, L. : Heat Conductivity of Polyatomic and Polar
    Gases. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 36, no. 6, Mar. 15, 1962, pp. 1622-1639.
2. Monchick, L. ; Pereira, A. N. G. ; and Mason, E. A.: Heat Conductivity of
    Polyatomic and Polar Gases and Gas Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 42,
    no. 9, May 1, 1965, pp. 3241-3256.
3. Hirschfelder, Joseph 0.; Curtiss, Charles F. ; and Bird, R. Byron: Molecular
    Theory of Gases and Liquids. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. , 1954, p. 527.
4. Mason, Edward A. ; and Rice, William E. : The Intermolecular Potentials for
    Some Simple Nonpolar Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 22, 1954, pp. 843-
    851.
5. Trautz, Max; and Baumann, P. B. : Viscosity, Heat Conductivity and Diffusion
    in Gas Mixtures. II. The Viscosities of Hydrogen, Nitrogen and Hydrogen-
    Carbon Monoxide Mixtures. Ann. Physik, vol. 2 , 1929, pp. 733-736.
6. Trautz , Max; and Heberling, Robert: Viscosity, Heat Conductivity and Diffusion
    in Gas Mixtures. XVII. The Viscosity of Ammonia and Its Mixtures with
    Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Oxygen, Ethylene. Ann. Physik, vol. 10, 1931, pp. 155-
    177.
7. Brokaw, Richard S. ; Svehla, Roger A. ; and Baker, Charles E. : Transport
    Properties of Dilute Gas Mixtures. NASA TN D-2580, 1965.
8. Gray, P. ; and Wright, P. G. : The Thermal Conductivity of Mixtures of Nitro-
    gen, Ammonia and Hydrogen. Proc. Roy. SOC. (London), ser. A, vol. 263,
    no. 1313, Sept. 5, 1961, pp. 161-188.
9. Butler, J a m e s N. ; and Brokaw, Richard S. : Thermal Conductivity of Gas
    Mixtures in Chemical Equilibrium. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 26, no. 6, June
    1957, pp. 1636-1643.




                                                                                     53
     10. Brokaw, Richard S. : Thermal Conductivity of Gas Mixtures in Chemical Equi-
          librium. II. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 32, no. 4, Apr. 1960, pp. 1005-1006.
     11. Coffin, Kenneth P. ; and O'Neal, Cleveland, Jr. : Experimental Thermal Con-
          ductivities of the N204=2N02 System. NACA TN 4209, 1958.
     12. Brokaw, Richard S. ; and Svehla, Roger A. : Viscosity and Thermal Conduc-
          tivity of the N204=2N02 System. J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 44, no. 12, June 15,
           1966, pp. 4643-4645.
     13. Brokaw, R. S. : Energy Transport in High Temperature and Reacting Gases.
          Planetary Space Sei., vol. 3, 1961, pp. 238-252.
     14. Franck, E. U. ; and Spalthoff, W. : Abnormal Heat Conductivity of Gaseous
          Hydrogen Fluoride. Naturwissenschaften, vol. 40, 1953, p. 580.
     15. Chakraborti, P. K. : Thermal Conductivity of Dissociating Phosphorous
          Pentachloride. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 38, no. 3, Feb. 1, 1963, pp. 575-577.
     16. Brokaw, Richard S. : "Thermal Conductivity" and Chemical Kinetics. J.
           Chem. Phys., vol. 35, no. 5, Nov. 1961, pp. 1569-1580.
     17. Sessler, G. : Schallausbreitung in Teilweise Dissoziiertem, Gasfzrmigen
          Distickstofftetroxyd. Acustica, vol. 10, 1960, pp. 44-59.
     18. Cher, Mark: Rate of Dissociation of N204 by Ultrasonic Absorption Meas-
          urements. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 37, no. 11, Dec. 1, 1962, pp. 2564-
          2570.
     19. Vanderslice, Joseph T. ; Mason, Edward A. ; and Maisch, William G. :
          Interactions Between Ground State Oxygen Atoms and Molecules: 0-0and
          02-02.   J. Chem. Phys., vol. 32, no. 2, Feb. 1960, pp. 515-524.
     20. Mason, Edward A. ; Vanderslice, Joseph T. ; and Yos, Jerrold M. : Trans-
          port Properties of High-Temperature Multicomponent Gas Mixtures. Phys.
          Fluids, vol. 2, no. 6, Nov.-Dec. 1959, pp. 688-694.
     21. Browning, R. ; and Fox, J. W. : The Coefficient of Viscosity of Atomic
          Hydrogen and the Coefficient of Mutual Diffusion for Atomic and Molecular
          Hydrogen. Proc. Roy. SOC. (London), ser. A, vol. 278, no. 1373, Mar. 24,
           1964, pp. 274-286.
     22. Margenau, Henry: The Forces Between a Hydrogen Molecule and a Hydrogen
          Atom. Phys. Rev., vol. 66, no. 11-12, Dec. 1-5, 1944, pp. 303-306.




54
23. Buckingham, R. A. ; Fox, J. W. ; and Gal, E. : The Coefficients of Viscosity
     and Thermal Conductivity of Atomic Hydrogen from 1 t o 400' K. Proc.
     Roy. SOC. (London), ser. A., vol. 284, no. 1397, Feb. 23, 1965, pp. 237-
     251.
214. Clifton, David G. : Calculations of the Coefficient of Viscosity and the Coef-
      ficients of Diffusion f o r Dissociating Hydrogen. J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 35,
      no. 4 , Oct. 1961, pp. 1417-1420.
25. Hirschfelder, Joseph 0. ; Curtiss, Charles F. ; and Bird, R. Byron: Molecular
     Theory of Gases and Liquids. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. , 1954, p. 1110.
26. Hirschfelder, Joseph 0. ; Curtiss, Charles F. ; and Bird, R. Byron: Molecular
     Theory of Gases and Liquids. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. , 1954, eqs. 8.4-8
     and 8.4-9, p. 567.
27. Yun, K. S. ; and Mason, E. A. : Collision Integrals for the Transport Prop-
     erties of Dissociating Air at High Temperatures. Phys. Fluids, vol. 5,
     no. 4, Apr. 1962, pp. 380-386.
28. Chapman, Sydney; and Cowling, T. 6. : The Mathematical Theory of Non-
     Uniform Gases. Second ed. , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1953, pp. 193-198.
29. Ahtye, Warren F. : A Critical Evaluation of Methods for Calculating Transport
     Coefficients of Partially and Fully Ionized Gases. NASA T N D-2611, 1965.
30. Devoto, R. S. : Transport Properties of Ionized Monatomic Gases. Phys.
     Fluids, vol. 9 , no. 6 , June 1966, pp. 1230-1240.
31. Devoto, R. S. : Transport Coefficients of Partially Ionized Argon. Phys.
     Fluids, vol. 10, no. 2 , Feb. 1967, pp. 354-364.
32. Devoto, R. Stephen: Argon Plasma Transport Properties. Rep. SUDAER-
     217, Stanford Univ. (NASA CR-68297), Feb. 1965.
33. Meador, W. E. , Jr. ; and Staton, L. D. : Electrical and Thermal Properties
     of Plasmas. Phys. Fluids, vol. 8, no. 9, Sept. 1965, pp. 1694-1703.
34. Amdur, I. ; and Mason, E. A. : Properties of Gases at Very High Tempera-
     tures. Phys. Fluids, vol. 1, no. 5, Sept.-Oct. 1958, pp. 370-383.
35. Smiley, Edward F. , 11: The Measurement of the Thermal Conductivity of
     Gases at High Temperatures with a Shocktube: Experimental Results in
     Argon at Temperatures Between 1000° K and 3300' K. PhD Thesis, Catholic
     Univ. of America, 1957.




                                                                                      55



                      d
     36. Collins, D. J. ; and Menard, W. A. : Measurement of the Thermal conductivity
          of Noble Gases in the Temperature Range 1500 t o 5000 Deg Kelvin. J. Heat
          Transfer, vol. 88, no. 1, Feb. 1966, pp. 52-56.
     37. Knopp, C. F. ; and Cambel, Ali Bulent: Experimental Determination of the
          Thermal Conductivity of Atmospheric Argon Plasma. Phys. Fluids, vol. 9,
          no. 5, May 1966, pp. 989-996.
     38. Chapman, Sydney; and Cowling, T. G. : The Mathematical Theory of Non-
          Uniform Gases. Second ed. , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1953, pp. 177-179.
     39. Liboff, Richard L. : Transport Coefficients Determined Using the Shielded
           Coulomb Potential. Phys. Fluids, vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. -Feb. 1959, pp. 40-
          46.
     40. Kihara, Taro: On the Coefficients of Irreversible Processes in a Highly
          Ionized Gas. J. Phys. SOC. Japan, vol. 14, no. 4, Apr. 1959, pp. 402-
          410.
     41. Mason, E. A. ; Munn, R. J. ; and Smith, Francis J. : Transport Coefficients
          of Ionized Gases. Phys. Fluids, vol. 10, no. 8, Aug. 1967, pp. 1827-
          1832.
     42. Mason, E. A. ; and Sherman, Martin P. : Effect of Resonant Charge Exchange
          on Heat Conduction in Plasmas. Phys. Fluids, vol. 9, no. 10, Oct. 1966,
          pp. 1989-1991.




56
                                           TEMP, K
                      50       100   200       400




    VISCOSITY,
    MICROPOISE




                          c

        (38-43805

     Figure N-1. - Viscosity of argon. Comparison of theory and
       experiment.




                     50       100    200 300     500     1000   ZOO0   5000
                                               TEMP, K
Figure IV-2. - Thermal conductivity of argon. Comparison of theory and
  experiment.




                                                                              57


            a
          D,
     CM2 SEC-'
     (p = 1ATM)




                                              TWIP, K
       Figure IV-3. - Self-diffusion coefficient of argon.
         Comparison of theory and experiment.




                        18Or                                            1




     VISCOSITY,
     M I C R O P O I S E1 4 0
                        1201
                                t                                     \-I


                                0   .2       .4           .6     .8     1.0
              CS-43803               M O L E F R A C T I O N OF H p
       Figure IV-4. - Viscosity of gas mixtures. Comparison
         of theory and experiment.



58
THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY,
     W CM-' K - l




                        0       .2          .4         .6        .8      1.0
                                     MOLE FRACTION OF SECOND GAS
Figure IV-5. - Thermal conductivity of gas mixtures, 25.3'      C. Compari-
  son of theory and experiment.




    THERMAL
  CONDUCTIVITY,
    w C M - ~~ - 1




                        0    300            350           400         450
       CS-43810                             TEMP, K
     Figure IV-6. - Thermal conductivity of nitrogen tetroxide - nitrogen
       dioxide system. P = 1 atmosphere (ref. 12).




                                                                               59
        THERMAL
      CONDUCTIVITY,
        W CM-’ K - l




          CS-43809
                              jl
                              10
                               8
                               6

                               4


                               2-
                                                        -
                                                        ---
                                                           I




                                                     PRESSURE, ATM
                                                                  CALCULATED, MONOMER-
                                                                    D I M E R - H E X A M ER
                                                                  CALCULATED, M O N O M E R -
                                                                    HEXAMER
                                                                  EXPERIMENT




     Figure IV-7. - Thermal c o n d u c t i v i t y o f h y d r o g e n fluoride v a p o r at 267.7 K.




                                     20x10-4
                                        I
                                     18 -

                                     16 -

                                     14 -

                                     12 -
               THERMAL
             CONDUCTIVITY,           10 -
               W CM-’ K - l



                                                 P
                                      b-

                                       6-
                                            A’
                                      4-

                                       2-   Af   -------       ----------                 -
                                      0;            I   I IIIlll         I    I   I I I Ill]




60
VISCOSITY,
MICROPOISE




                 40
                  150     200             250       300         350    400    450
    CS-43811                                    TEMP, K
    Figure IV-9. - Viscosities of atomic and molecular hydrogen.




   LO                                                         2, VISCOSITY RATIO


                                                              CTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY RATIO
                  I

                                 \[iJ2/G14,             HEAT CONDUCTIVITY RATIO



        ,
        0      5000      10000
                        TEMP, K
                                          15000         20000

                  I I I f     f       I    I    I   I    I
                10-5    10-2.1            .5            .95
                                  a                                                CS-43807

   Figure IV-10. - Comparison of lowest Chapman Enskog ap-
     proximations with higher approximations. (Argon, 1 atm. )




                                                                                              61
                     3ooxg-4




       THERMAL
     CONDUCTIVITY,
      w CM-’ K-I




                                                                      ~   ..
                                           TEMP, K



         CS- 438 02
                                                    a
        Figure IV-11. - Thermal conductivity of partially ionized argon
          (1 atm).




        VISCOSITY,
            POISE




               (35-43812
                Figure




62



        d
        V. E X P E R I M E N T A L M E A S U R E M E N T S O F D I F F U S I O N
                 COEFFICIENTS FOR ATOMIC OXYGEN
                                  C h a r l e s E. Baker

     For the past several years there has been considerable interest at the Lewis
Research Center in measuring the transport properties of gases. For example, the
self-diffusion coefficient of gaseous ammonia as a function of temperature has re-
cently been measured (ref. 1). Although there is still a lack of data for some sys-
tems, especially polar gases, the theoretical understanding of stable gas systems
is satisfactory. The potential parameters obtained for a gas from one transport
property can be used to calculate the other transport properties of the gas.
     When molecules a r e subjected to the high temperatures found in such applica-
tions as combustion processes and space-vehicle reentry, unstable species such as
free radicals and atoms a r e produced. Because of the importance of these unstable
species to high-temperature transport properties (paper TV by R. S. Brokaw), our
current experimental effort involves measuring the diffusion coefficient of atomic
oxygen through various background gases.
     There a r e several reasons for beginning our studies with atomic oxygen. It is
a constituent of our atmosphere and thus is important in any process involving high-
temperature air. In addition, it has been shown spectroscopically and by rocket
release experiments that most oxygen above an altitude of 100 kilometers is in the
atomic rather than molecular state. There a r e also some experimental reasons
which make atomic oxygen a good first choice for study. These a r e discussed in
the experimental section of this paper.
     The conventional method for measuring the diffusion coefficient of stable spe-
cies is illustrated by figure V-1. (This was the method employed in ref. 1. ) Gases
A and B a r e placed in cells separated by a removable diaphragm. Diffusion starts
when the diaphragm is removed in such a way as to minimize disturbance of the
interface. After a suitable time, the diaphragm is replaced, the resulting mixtures
in the two cells analyzed, and the diffusion coefficient computed. Obviously such a
method could not be used to measure the diffusion coefficient of, for example,
atomic oxygen into molecular oxygen because of the rapid recombination of the oxy-
gen atoms into oxygen molecules. Because of the experimental difficulties involved,




                                                                                       63
     very little work has been reported on the diffusion of unstable atoms. Krongelb and
     Strandberg (ref. 2) measured the diffusion of atomic oxygen into molecular oxygen
     using the electron spin resonance (ESR) technique, which takes advantage of the un-
     paired electron in atomic oxygen. Using a similar technique, Wise and coworkers
     also measured the diffusion coefficient of atomic oxygen into molecular oxygen
     (ref. 3) as well as atomic hydrogen into molecular hydrogen (ref. 4). Morgan and
     Schiff used the concentration gradient produced by a catalytic sink to measure the
     diffusion coefficients of atomic oxygen (refs. 5 and 6), atomic nitrogen (ref. 6),
     and atomic hydrogen (ref. 7 ) through several background gases.
          The method for determining atom diffusion coefficients that will be discussed
     in this paper uses recombination of the atoms of a partially dissociated gas on a
     catalytic surface placed in the gas flow. The essential features of the method are
     illustrated in figure V-2. A gas such as oxygen flows past the cavity of a micro-
     wave generator, and a few percent of the molecules a r e dissociated. The resulting
     mixture of atoms and molecules continues down the tube, flows past the catalytic
     probe, and then into high-speed pumps. The catalytic probe responds to the recom-
     bination of the atoms on its surface. The next section of this paper shows that an
     experiment of this type is capable of yielding information from which the diffusion
     coefficient of the atom through the background gas can be determined.



                                 THEORETiCAL BACKGROUND

            The following steps must take place for an atom to recombine on a catalytic
     surface:
            (1)Transport of the atom to the surface
            (2) Adsorption of the atom by the surface
            (3) Residence of the atom on the surface until recombination occurs
            (4) Desorption of the resulting molecule from the surface
            (5) Transport of this molecule away from the surface
            Steps (1)and (5) may be regarded as transport effects, and steps (2) to (4) as
     kinetic effects. If the time for either step (1) o r (5) is large compared with the time
     f o r the other steps, the process is transport o r diffusion controlled. Similarly, if
     the time f o r one of the steps (2) to (4)is large, the process is kinetically o r rate
     controlled. If the two effects have comparable times, the reaction is an intermedi-
     ate one.
            Hartunian and Liu (ref. 8) have considered the slow flow of a partially dissoci-
     ated gas about a spherical catalytic probe and have shown that the averaged inte-
     grated heat flux to the surface (per unit area) is closely appr'oximated by




64
where p is the density, Co is the atom concentration in the free stream, hR is
the specific heat of recombination of the atoms, D is the diffusion coefficient for
the atom through the background gas, a is the probe radius, and K = G/(D/a).
In this last expression,    is the t'true" rate constant for the surface recombina-
tion. From equation (l),when K >> 1,




which is the diffusion-controlled limit. Similarly, when K << 1,




which is the rate-controlled limit. Using equations (2) and (3), we can now rewrite
equation (1)as




     Equation (4) makes the same kinds of predictions about whether a process is
diffusion controlled or rate controlled as did the physical picture of the recombina-
tion process described at the beginning of this section. If the surface is a very ac-
tive catalyst, that is, if     is large, qR will be large, l/QR will be small, and
the process will be diffusion controlled. In other words, the surface is such a n ef-
ficient catalyst that the atoms on the surface rapidly recombine; the overall process
is limited only by the rate at which atoms are delivered t o the surface. Conversely,
if the surface is a poor catalyst, G,   and hence qR, will be small, l/qR will be
large, and the process will be rate controlled. The same kind of reasoning holds
for the D/a term, which changes with pressure and probe radius,
     Equation (4) can also be written in the following form




Substituting the values of   qR and qD given in equations (2) and (3) yields




                                                                                        65
          The reaction rate observed is a result of the interaction of the true reaction
     rate effects and the diffusional effects, and from equation (6) one may write an ex-
     pression f o r an apparent reaction rate %
                                                 a




     Inverting and using D = DO/p, where D = Do at some reference pressure po
     (1 t o r r in this paper), yields




     Equation (8) is the theoretical basis for this experimental method for obtaining atom
     diffusion coefficients. From the experimental measurements, % may be deter-
                                                                        a
     mined as a function of pressure and probe radius. According to equation ( 8 ) , a plot
     of l/$     against ap should be a straight line with a slope of l/Do and an inter-
              a
     cept of l/Q.


                       EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE

          The apparatus used in this work is based on a design described by Carson and
     Hartunian (refs. 9 and 10) and is shown schematically in figure V-3. The flow tube
     is constructed of 3-inch inside diameter Pyrex pipe which is commercially avail-
     able. After passing through a suitable flowmeter and metering valve, the gas under
     investigation flows through the cavity of an 800-watt microwave generator operating
     at 2540 megahertz. The discharge produces a small percentage of oxygen atoms in
     the background gas. The resulting mixture of unstable species in a background of
     stable species flows down the tube approximately 9 feet before reaching the cata-
     lytic probes, then passes through a gate valve, and on to high-speed mechanical
     pumps. Located near the probe mount are a sidearm leading to a pressure gage,
     a titration probe needed for the oxygen atom determination, which is discussed




66
later, and a photomultiplier, also used in the oxygen atom determination.
      The catalytic probes used in this work are thermistor beads which have been
coated with about 1 micron of silver. On exposure to oxygen atoms, the silver sur-
face is rapidly converted to a black silver peroxide. This surface is a nearly ideal
catalyst for the recombination of oxygen atoms: it is very active, and this activity
is essentially temperature independent. The availability of such an excellent cata-
lyst was one of the reasons for starting our studies of atom diffusion with oxygen.
The thermistor mount is also shown in figure V-3. Normally, thermistors of three
different radii were mounted in the Lucite holder at half-radius, 120' apart. All
exposed metal surface, other than the catalytic surfaces, were coated with a var-
nish to prevent recombination on these surfaces.
      In a n experiment of this kind it is possible to operate the thermistor as a calo-
rimeter probe o r as an isothermal probe. In the calorimeter the heat released by
the recombination of the atoms on the probe surface raises the temperature of the
thermistor and, hence, reduces its resistance. This change in resistance or tem-
perature of the thermistor that occurs when the microwave generator is turned on
is a measure of the amount of recombination that is taking place on the probe sur-
face. In contrast, the isothermal probe is operated at a constant overheat; the
bridge circuit (ref. 11) of which the thermistor is a part, automatically maintains
the thermistor at a constant temperature even though recombination may o r may not
be occurring on its surface. From the difference in power (reflected in a voltage
change across the thermistor as indicated by a digital voltmeter) between the dis-
charge "off" and the discharge ?'on" conditions, the heat flux to the probe surface
due to atom recombination can b e calculated. This method has the advantage over
the calorimeter technique that radiation and conduction effects cancel.
      The procedure for a typical experimental run is as follows. A flow is set up
with the discharge off. The flow rate, resulting pressure, and voltage across the
thermistor necessary for the given overheat are recorded. The microwave gener-
ator is then turned on, and the reduced voltage now required t o maintain the therm-
istor at the given overheat noted. All the quantities necessary for the determination
 of the diffusion coefficient for the atoms through the background gas are now known
except for the free-stream atom concentration.
      The oxygen atom concentration in the free stream was determined by means of
the two-step gas titration technique described by Reeves, Mannella, and Harteck
 (ref. 12). The reactions involved in this method are as follows:




                                                                                           67
                                     NO + 0 -+NO2
                                             k2        + hv



     The second reaction is much slower than the first and the yellow-green light pro-
     duced by it s e r v e s as a n indicator for the titration. Because the intensity of this
     light is proportional to the product of the NO and 0 atom concentrations, a maxi-
     mum in the intensity occurs. At this point the NO2 concentration (and hence, the
     NO concentration) equals one-half the initial 0 atom concentration. Thus, the first
     step of this two-step titration involves adding NO2 to the stream through the titra-
     tion probe (shown in fig. V-3) until a maximum light intensity is registered by the
     photomultiplier. An NO2 flow is difficult to meter because of the formation of
     N204 and because of its corrosiveness. Hence, no attempt is made to meter NO2
     in this first step. In step two of this technique, NO is now metered into the stream
     by means of a pressure-drop technique until the same light intensity (evidenced by
     the same output of the photomultiplier) is produced. The NO now equals one-half
     the NO concentration in step one because 0 atoms are no longer consumed to form
     NO. Thus, the NO concentration in step two equals one-fourth the initial 0 atom
     concentration. Step two may be regarded as merely an indirect way of metering
     NO2. A plot of photomultiplier output against NO2 flow rate for a typical titration
     of 0 atoms is shown in figure V-4.



                         EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

          The results of some preliminary experiments at room temperature are shown
     in figure V-5. Here, the reciprocal of the apparent reaction rate constant % is
                                                                                       a
     plotted against the product of probe radius and pressure. Probes with radii of
     0.015 and 0.05 centimeter were used in these measurements. With the exception
     of the point for the large probe at an ap value of about 2x10-2 centimeter-torr,
     the pressure was not varied greatly, ranging between 0.71 and 0.84 t o r r for the
     remaining points. The point outside this range w a s taken at a pressure of 0.42 torr.
     Equation (8) predicts that, if the experimental data are plotted as in figure V-5, the
     points should fall on a straight line. Despite some scatter in the data, i t is quite
     obvious that this is indeed the case, and these results are encouraging.




68
       A determination of the diffusion coefficient for oxygen atoms through argon at
  room temperature is shown in figure V-6. The gas flowing past the microwave
  cavity was a mixture of 1 . 8 percent oxygen in argon. Under these conditions most
. of the oxygen molecules are dissociated. However, because of both volume and wall
  recombination of the oxygen atoms, the oxygen a t o p concentration near the probes
  is only about 1 percent. The determinations f o r the large and small probes were at
  a pressure of 0.84 t o r r ; the points f o r the medium probe were taken at 0.59 torr.
  The least-squares line through the points has a slope whose reciprocal gives a value
  for Do of 224 square centimeters per second at the reference pressure of 1torr.
       How does this compare with other experimental values f o r the diffusion coeffi-
  cient of oxygen atoms into argon? Morgan and Schiff (ref. 6), using a flow system
  but an otherwise different experimental method, report a value of 209 square centi-
  meters per second for oxygen atoms into argon a t 280K. This corresponds to a dif-
  fusion coefficient of 229 square centimeters per second when the necessary temper-
  ature correction is made. These results are summarized in table V-1. The good
  agreement between the results obtained by different experimental methods is cer-
  tainly encouraging. A value for the diffusion coefficient calculated from simple
  theory is also shown in table V-1. For this calculation the volume of the oxygen
  atom w a s assumed to be one-half that of the oxygen molecule

                                            1 uo3
                                      uo3 = -
                                            2     2

 and the usual combining rules were then applied. The close agreement between
 rough theory and experiment for this system is probably fortuitous. There is no
 reason to expect such good agreement between experiment and simple theory for
 other systems involving unstable species.



                                CONCLUDING REMARKS

      Results obtained on our work on atom diffusion thus far indicate that this
 method is capable of producing data from which diffusion coefficients can be ex-
 tracted. Our plans for further work on atom diffusion include the diffusion of oxy-
 gen atoms into other background gases such as helium, oxygen, and nitrogen, as
 well as the diffusion of nitrogen atoms through similar gases. These measure-
 ments will then be extended to higher temperatures. Diffusion data over a suitable
 temperature range can be used to determine parameters for appropriate interaction
 potentials. Using these potential parameters and current theory, i t is then possible




                                                                                            69
     to calculate the other transport properties for the particular system involved. The
     importance of the interactions between stable and unstable species in high-
     temperature transport property calculations will be clearly seen in paper VI by
     R. A. Svehla.


                                        REFERENCES

      1. Baker, Charles E. : Self-Diffusion in Gaseous Ammonia. J. Chem. Phys.,
          vol. 52, no. 4, Feb. 15, 1970, pp. 2159-2161.
      2. Krongelb, S.; and Strandberg, M. W. P. : U s e of Paramagnetic-Resonance
          Techniques in the Study of Atomic Oxygen Recombinations. J. Chem. Phys.,
           vol. 31, no. 5, Nov. 1959, pp. 1196-1210.                       $   6




      3. Yolles, Robert S. ; McCalley, Leonard; and Wise, Henry: Diffusion and Heter-
          ogeneous Reaction. XII. Measurements of 0-O2 Diffusion as a Function of
          Temperature. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 52, no. 2, Jan. 15, 1970, pp. 723-728.
      4. Sancier, K. M; and Wise, H. : Diffusion and Heterogeneous Reaction. XI. Dif-
          fusion Coefficient Measurements for Gas Mixture of Atomic and Molecular
           Hydrogen. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 51, no. 4, Aug. 15, 1969, pp. 1434-1438.
      5. Morgan, J. E.; and Schiff, H. I. : U s e of Catalytic Probes to Determine Atom
          Concentrations and Atom Diffusion Coefficients. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 38,
          no. 11, June 1, 1963, pp. 2631-2634.
      6. Morgan, J. E. ; and Schiff, H. I. : Diffusion Coefficients of 0 and N Atoms in
          Inert Gases. Can. J. Chem., vol. 42, no. 10, Oct. 1964, pp. 2300-2306.
      7. Khouw, B. ; Morgan, J. E. ; and Schiff, H. I. : Experimental Measurements of
           the Diffusion Coefficients of H Atoms in H2 and in H2-He and H2-Ar Mixtures.
           J. Chem. Phys., vol. 50, no. 1, Jan. 1, 1969, pp. 66-70.
      8. Hartunian, R. A. ; and Liu, S. W. : Slow Flow of a Dissociated Gas About a
          Catalytic Probe. Phys. Fluids, vol. 6, no. 3, Mar. 1963, pp. 349-354.
      9. Carson, B. H. ; and Hartunian, R. A. : Oxygen Recombination on a Catalytic
          Sphere in the Continuum-Free Molecule Transition. Rep. TR-669 (6240-20)-
          17, Aerospace Corp. (SSD-TR-66-171, DDC No. AD-801277), June 1966.
     10. Carson, Bernard H. : Experimental Studies of the Recombination of Glow-
          Discharged Oxygen on Catalytic Spheres. Ph. D. Thesis, Pennsylvania State
          Univ., 1965.




70
11. Lumley, J. L. : The Constant Temperature Hot-Thermistor Anemometer.
     Symposium on Measurement in Unsteady Flow. ASME, 1962, pp. 75-82.
12. Reeves, Robert R. ; Mannella, Gene; and Harteck, Paul: Rate of Recombina-
     tion of Oxygen Atoms. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 32, no. 2, Feb. 1960, pp.
     632-633.




                TABLE V-1.       - COMPARISON O F SEVERAL VALUES
                     O F DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT OF OXYGEN

                                  ATOMS INTO ARGON

               Diffusion coefficient at                 Source
                  298 K a n d 1 t o r r ,
                         2
                      c m /sec

                          224               This work
                         "229               Morgan and Schiff
                          2 30              Calculated f r o m simple theory
               aCorrected f r o m 280 K.




                                                                                71
     1                 GAS A


                                         I
                                          I
                                              ,!
                                              1
                                              I
                                                  I
                                                         GAS B             i
                                          MOVABLE DIAPHRAGM



                                                                     CS-53312


         Figure V-1. - Conventional method for measuring diffusion
           coefficient of stable gases.




                   j- MICR 0WAVE CAVITY
                   I

                                                                   r CATALYTIC
                                   I
                                    /
                                        r F L O W TUBE             / PROBE
                                                             1 ;

                               MIXTURE                                   TO
                               (0 + 02)                                  PUMPS




                                                                      CS- 5331 5

                Figure V-2. - Atom recombination flow system.




72
                                 r T O PRESSURE GAGE
                                            PHOTOMULTI PLlER




                                 ..-
                                 NU2                  PROBE MOUNT




                                        SECTION A-A
                                       PROBE MOUNT            CS- 5 3 3 16


                Figure V-3. - Atom recombination apparatus.




                      lsor

PHOTOMULTIPLIER
    OUT PUT,
      mV




     CS-5 32 30                 NO2 FLOW RATE, MOLESISEC
   Figure V-4. - Light intensity variation during oxygen atom titration.




                                                                             73


            a
                c
            8~10-~



            6
                       A
                       0
                                a,
                               CM
                               0.015
                                .05




            0              1             2        3           4            5~10-~
                                         ap, CM-TORR                CS-53314

     Figure V-5. - Dependence of apparent reaction rate on pressure and probe
       radius.




                0        2           4        6        8       10        12x10-2
                                         ap, CM-TORR                CS-53313

      Figure V-6. - Determination of diffusion coefficient for oxygen atoms into
        argon at 298 K.




74
    VI.    T R A N S P O R T P R O P E R T I E S OF C O M P L E X M I X T U R E S
                                 Roger A. Svehla

       In the past much effort has gone into research of the theory and measurement
of transport properties. Theory f o r tfie transport properties of dilute monatomic
gases has been well established (refs. 1 and 2), and in recent years inroads have
been made into the theory f o r polyatomic gases (refs. 3 and 4). But theory re-
quires confirmation by experiment, and this has inspired a considerable effort in
the measurement of the viscosity, thermal conductivity, and diffusion coefficients
of gases. However, these efforts have been limited almost exclusively to pure
gases and to binary or ternary mixtures. Measurements of transport properties
of systems of many species are almost totally nonexistent. This leaves the prob-
lem of obtaining data for complex systems to the man with a pencil and paper or,
better yet, a computer.
       Yet despite the fact that our knowledge of transport properties for complex
mixtures is considerably less than f o r pure gases o r simple mixtures, this area
is probably the one of most practical interest. Properties of complex mixtures
are needed for heat- and mass-transfer calculations over wide ranges of pres-
s u r e and temperature f o r many well-known processes. Some of the most common
(and most important processes) occur during combustion in automobile, rocket,
and jet engines. Others occur in the petroleum and chemical industries in hard-
ware such as heat exchangers, absorbers, or gas pipelines.


                                     EQUATIONS
    Fortunately in spite of the dearth of experimental data, rigorous equations
for mixtures a r e known (refs. 1 and 2). Thus, given the needed input, flavored
with sufficient perseverance to do the arithmetic, we can get answers.
    The problems in doing the arithmetic become apparent when we look at the
equations for the viscosity and the thermal conductivity. First, consider the
equation for the viscosity of a mixture of n gases:




                                                                                      75
     where the xi a r e the mole fractions. The vi look something like partial viscos-
     ity contributions to the total viscosity. In fact, they are obtained by solving the
     following set of simultaneous linear equations




     and the   6..   are given by
                1J




                          Cii   =   i+
                                           k= 1
                                                    2XiXk


                                                     '7ik
                                                              MiMk
                                                                          (&+?)
                                           kfi


                                c.. = --
                                 1J
                                           Vij ( M +
                                                   ~ M.)
                                                      J


     where

                                                            2 nM .M .RT

                                            - 5
                                       17ij --
                                                              2
                                              16N           TU
                                                              qi j

     and




     where N is Avogadro's number, Mi the molecular weight, R the gas constant,
     and T the temperature. The oD2  can be interpreted as a binary diffusion cross
                                               ij
     section, and the o2 as something like an average viscosity c r o s s section be-
                       V ij




76
tween species i and j . If j = i, then q.. simplifies to the expression for the
                                        13
viscosity of species i:




where no2 is the viscosity c r o s s section of species i.
           qii
     If the formulas for the coefficients (eqs. (3)) are examined, it is apparent
that each qi is approximately equal to the viscosity of species i, but becomes
modified (sometimes quite substantially), by the presence of the other species,
through the cross t e r m s involving the q.. and A . . .
                                           11       11
     The thermal conductivity can be expressed as the sum of three terms:

                                 -                                                  (4)
                   'mixture      - 'translational   +   'internal   +   'reaction

Considering each term separately,




where the Xi a r e found by solving a set of simultaneous linear equations, similar
to those for the viscosity




and the b.. a r e given by
          11




          b..
           11 =   "i"+
                  'ii
                        7,   n




                            k= 1
                                     2xixk -Mi
                                           l5
                                          (2
                                                    +-
                                                     25 M i - 3B*Mi + 4AikMiM
                                                         4
                                                    (Mi+Mk)2
                                                                                    (74


                            kfi




                                                                                          77



                        a
                     bij = -
                               (Mi + M.) 2 A. .X..
                                        3         1J 13


    where




                         25
                   x.. = -
                         32N           DO
                                            2
                                            qij

          Notice that the calculation is very similar to that for the viscosity of a mix-
    ture, except that there is a little bit more algebra i n obtaining the b.. coeffi-
                                                                             13
    cients. We also have a new term called B.. This is another dimensionless
                                                  1J'
    grouping of cross sections similar to A... However, no simple physical inter-
                                               13
    pretation is available for B.. as was for A. .. But once we know the q . . and
                                   11               4                            1J
    A . . we can calculate B.. from theory. If j = i , then h.. simplifies to
     13                        11                             1J




    which is the expression for a simple monatomic g a s possessing only translational
    energy, such as argon. Therefore, the entire first t e r m htranslational   may b e
(
    thought of as the contribution due to translational energy to the total conductivity,
         The second t e r m Xinternal represents the contribution from internal energy
    modes, such as rotational, vibrational, and electronic, to the thermal conduc -
    tivity. This is frequently expressed as
which'is the generalized Hirschfelder -Eucken expression (ref. 5) for a mixture.
The D.. are binary diffusion coefficients, the Dii self-diffusion coefficients,
       'J
and A.          the internal contribution of species i. In the past a frequently
      'internal
used expression for 1.           is the Eucken expression
                       'internal


                           x.
                            'internal
                                             't:
                                        = p.D..
                                           1    - - -5)
                                                       2 Mi
                                                           -


where p is the density and Cp the heat capacity. The expression, in effect,
assumes that relaxation times for internal energy modes a r e very long. How-
ever, Monchick, Pereira, and Mason (ref. 3) have derived expressions to include
finite relaxation times, which they express in t e r m s of collision numbers. These
relaxation effects enter into both the htranslational    and 'internal terms, de-
creasing the first t e r m and increasing the second. There is no need to belabor
the point by reproducing the equations here. Suffice it to say that it merely in-
creases the amount of algebra involved, but not the general nature of the solutions.
     The final term corresponds to the contribution from the effects of chemical
reaction (refs. 6 and 7)




                           'reaction = R    I@)
                                              V



                                             i=1
                                                          hRi



where AHi is the heat of reaction of reaction number i and v is the total
number of reactions.




In equation (11) the a& a r e the stoichiometric coefficients written for chemical
reactions involving species Yk as follows:



                         2
                         k= 1
                             a*Yk=O          i = 1 , 2 , . . ., v




                                                                                       79
         Similar to what we had previously, the XR are obtained by solving a set of
     simultaneous linear equations                i


                             V            AHi
                                 gij*Rj = -     i = 1,2, . . ., v
                            j= 1          RT

     where




          Although these equations appear somewhat complicated, especially for sys-
     tems of many species, at least they are straightforward. The main drawback is
     that they can be very lengthy. The time required to do calculations by hand be-
     comes prohibitive f o r anything more complex than a binary o r , perhaps, a ternary
     mixture. (The possibility of using approximate equations is one way of reducing
     the arithmetic. However, this line of attack has been investigated by others
     (refs. 8 and 9) and will not be repeated here.)
          As a consequence, a computer program, coded in FORTRAN IV, was written
     at Lewis to calculate the properties of mixtures. The program is a combination
     of the NASA Lewis Computer Equilibrium Calculations Program (CECS) for cal-
     culating thermodynamic properties, together with a program f o r the transport
     property calculations. The CECS part of the program provides the composition
     needed in the transport calculations in addition to the thermodynamic properties.
     The types of problems the program is capable of handling include rocket com-
     bustion, properties across normal shock waves, Chapman-Jouguet detonations,
     and properties at assigned thermodynamic states. The program handles up to
     100 chemical species in the thermodynamic calculations at any one time. In
     doing the transport calculations, the 20 most important gaseous species are used.
     This is done by selecting the 20 most important gaseous products and ignoring
     any remaining gaseous species and all liquids and solids. The composition is
     then normalized, based on those 20 gaseous species.
          Questions concerning this program, which will be published later, may be
     directed to the author. Thermodynamic data for a large number of species are
     included in the program. Transport data are also included f o r a large number of




80




                    d
species and f o r a number of interactions between different species. When transport
data a r e missing the program has built-in techniques to estimate the missing data.



                        HYDROCARBON-AIR COMBUSTION

   As a typical problem, let u s consider the interactions in hydrocarbon-air
combustion:
   (1) Species

               H, Ar, N2, H2, 02, CO, NO, C02, HZO, N, 0, OH

    (2) Interactions between identical species

                  H-H, Ar-Ar, N2-N2,      . . .,     -   Total of n = 12

    (3) Interactions between different species

       H-Ar, H-N2,   . . . , N2-H2, . . . ,   -   Total of   n(n - 1) -
                                                                      - 12(12 - 1) - 66
                                                                2          2

The most important species in this combustion system are listed in the approx-
imate order of our knowledge of the transport properties, with the best known
starting on the left. All the species a r e not important at any one time; some a r e
important at low temperatures, while others a r e important at high temperatures.
In general, more species become important at the higher temperatures as dis-
sociation occurs.
       Experimental transport data a r e available for most of the species. A large
number of measurements have been made for the eight species starting with Ar
and ending with H20. In fact, measurements of the viscosity of Ar, N2, and Ha
have recently been reported for temperatures up to 2150 K (ref. 10). In addition,
molecular beam scattering measurements are available for Ar, N2, 02,and H2,
which provide information f o r calculating the properties to considerably higher
temperatures.
       Little experimental transport data exist for the remaining species H, N, 0,
and OH. However, extensive theoretical calculations are available f o r the H-H
interaction. In addition, spectroscopic measurements of H2 provide information
f o r the 1C energy curve of the bound state. In view of this substantial amount
of information about the H-H interaction, it seemed there w a s sufficient knowledge




                                                                                          81
     to justify putting H first on the list. But, for N and 0, information is much more
     scanty. No experimental transport data are available, and knowledge is pretty
     much limited to spectroscopic measurements, which provide information on the
     bound states. Finally, f o r OH no experimental transport data are available. We
     would either have t o t r y to build up the information from data for the interactions
     between 0 and H , or t r y t o estimate the data by some other technique.
          Hydrocarbon-air interactions (2)and (3) break down into interactions for the
     pure species and interactions between different species. Of the 66 interactions
                                                                                              '
     between unlike species, there are experimental binary diffusion coefficient data f o r
     about 17 of the interactions and molecular beam scattering measurements for
     about 17 interactions. Some of the interactions have both diffusion data and beam
     scattering measurements, while others have neither. For those which have nei-
     ther, one might apply some s o r t of combining rule, using the data of the pure
     species.



                                 CALCULATED PROPERTIES

           Figures VI-1 to VI-4 show some of the individual calculated properties for
     a stoichiometric mixture, plotted at constant pressure, f o r a range of pressures.
     In figure VI-1 the combustion temperature is indicated for combustion at 1 at-
     mosphere, occurring a t about 2400 K. With increasing pressure, or other types
     of combustion such as automobile o r hypersonics, higher temperatures might be
     obtained. Notice that the enthalpy increases slowly and is pressure independent
     up to about 1700 K. This simply represents the increase in enthalpy of the four
     species N2, C 0 2 , H20, and Ar. At higher temperature, dissociation starts t o
     occur, resulting in an increasing number of species. There are as many as 11
     important species under some conditions. Recall that the specific heat Cp is
     (ijh/ijT) , so that the slope of the curve is the specific heat at that pressure. This
              P
     is illustrated in figure VI-2 by the solid upper curves referred to as equilibrium.
     In addition, there is a lower dashed curve called frozen, also sometimes referred
     to as nonreacting. This is simply the sum of the specific heats of the individual
     species each multiplied by its respective mole fraction. The difference between
     equilibrium and frozen is usually referred to as the specific heat due to chemical
     reaction and is causedby the change in composition with temperature.
           This effect can be quite large. Under some conditions the equilibrium value
     may b e as much as a n order of magnitude greater than the frozen. Incidently, as
     one would expect, the frozen curve is also pressure dependent. However, the




82
variation with pressure is too slight to be observed on the scale plotted in the
figure.
       In contrast to the curves for the enthalpy and specific heat, the results for
the viscosity show a rather well-behaved temperature dependence, as shown in
figure VI-3. Also, the pressure dependence is so slight that there is almost no
change in the viscosity from 0.01 to 100 atmospheres. This is in sharp contrast
to the results for the thermal conductivity, shown in figure VI-4. The behavior
of the thermal conductivity is quite similar to that for the specific heat. As was
the case f o r the specific heat, the equilibrium value may be greatly in excess of
the frozen value. Again the difference is due to the effect of chemical reaction,
as given by equation (10). Since this effect is present in both the specific heat
and the thermal conductivity, it would be expected that by taking a ratio of the
two properties much of this effect would cancel. This would suggest looking at
a quantity such as the Prandtl number. It is a dimensionless number frequently
used in heat- and mass-transfer calculations and includes a ratio of these two
properties. The equilibrium Prandtl number is shown in figure VI-5. It is ob-
vious that the Prandtl number varies more slowly with temperature than any of
the individual properties entering into its calculation, and more slowly with pres-
s u r e than either the specific heat o r thermal conductivity. In fact, over the entire
range of variables, the Prandtl number varies from about 0.36 to 0.73, a factor
of two, in sharp contrast with any of the individual properties. This is an inter-
 esting result in as much as .heat- and mass-transfer calculations frequently
involve dimensionless numbers, such as the Prandtl number. If one looks a t the
typical correlations which have been proposed, such as the following

                                  Nu = k R e0 . 8 ,,,1/3


where
Nu Nusselt number, hl/X
Re Reynolds number, lup/q
Pr Prandtl number, Cpv/h
and k is an adjustable constant determined by experiment, h the heat transfer
coefficient, I a characteristic dimension of the geometry, u the linear flow
velocity, p the density, and the other properties the same as before.
                                                                       c
    Solving for the heat-transfer coefficient in equation (15) gives




                                                                                           83



                      d
                                               h2/3 1/3
                                         ha,       cP
                                                  0.47
                                                17

            Expressing the heat-transfer coefficient in the form of equation (16) shows
     that the uncertainty in the coefficient is less than the uncertainty in an individual
     property because the exponents of the properties are less than one. Furthermore,
     by doing rigorous calculations for the viscosity and thermal conductivity, e r r o r s
     due to uncertainties in the transport c r o s s sections are systematic rather than
     random. This results in some degree of cancellation of these e r r o r s when a ratio
     of these properties is taken (ref. 11). However, in contrast to the result of the
     Prandtl number, the effect of chemical reaction enters as a first-order effect on
     the heat-transfer coefficient, rather than tending to cancel, as in the Prandtl num-
     ber. As a result, when the contribution due t o chemical reaction is large, the
     heat-transfer coefficient can become considerably more sensitive t o variations in
     the thermodynamic properties, than to variations in the transport properties. This
     is fortunate since, in general, thermodynamic properties are known more accu-
      rately than the corresponding transport properties.
            The data points in figure VI-5 represent experimental measurements from the
     University of Minnesota (ref. 12) and were obtained by measuring the recovery fac-
     t o r for a flat plate. The recovery factor can be expressed as the square root of
     the Prandtl number. There appears to be satisfactory agreement with the calcu-
      lations.
            In conclusion, perhaps the whole problem of calculating the transport prop-
      erties of gas mixtures might be summarized as follows. The calculation of com-
     plex mixtures requires a large quantity of input data including composition, t r a n s -
      port data for the pure species, and transport data for the interactions between
      different species. In fact, accumulating these data is the most difficult part of the
      job. But, once having done this, then, with the aid of modern day computers, we
      are now in a position to handle even very complex mixtures in a straightforward
      fashion.


                                          REFERENCES

     1. Chapman, Sydney; and Cowling, T . G. : The Mathematical Theory of Non-
         Uniform Gases. Second ed., Cambridge U*niv. Press, 1952.
     2. Hirschfelder, Joseph 0.; Curtiss, Charles F. ; and Bird, R. Byron: Molecular
         Theory of Gases and Liquids. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1954.




84
3. Monchick, L. ; Pereira, A. N. G.; and Mason, E. A.: Heat Conductivity of
    Polyatomic and Polar Gases and Gas Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 42,
    no. 9, May 1, 1965, pp. 3241-3256.
4. Mason, E. A. ; and Monchick, L. : Heat Conductivity of Polyatomic and
    Polar Gases. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 36, no. 6, Mar. 15, 1962, pp. 1622-
    1639.
5. Hirschfelder, Joseph 0. : Generalization of the Eucken Approximation for
    the Heat Conductivity of Polyatomic o r Chemically Reacting Gas Mixtures.
    International Union of P u r e and Appl. Chem. and Inst. Mech. Eng. Joint
    Conference on Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Fluids, 19 58,
    pp. 133-141.
6. Butler, James N. ; and Brokaw, Richard S. : Thermal Conductivity of Gas
    Mixtures in Chemical Equilibrium. J . Chem. Phys., vol. 26, no. 6,
    June 1957, pp. 1636-1643.
7. Brokaw, Richard S. : Thermal Conductivity of Gas Mixtures in Chemical
     Equilibrium. II. J . Chem. Phys., vol. 32, no. 4, Apr. 1960, pp. 1005-
     1006.
8. Brokaw, Richard S. : Approximate Formulas for the Viscosity and Thermal
    Conductivity of Gas Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 29, no. 2, Aug.
     1958, pp. 391-397.
9 . Reid, Robert C. ; afid Sherwood, Thomas K. : The Properties of Gases and
     Liquids: Their Estimation and Correlation. Second ed. , McGraw -Hill
     Book Co., Inc., 1966.
10. Guevara, F. A. ; McInteer, B. B. ; and Wageman, W. E. : High-Temperature
     Viscosity Ratios for Hydrogen, Helium, Argon, and Nitrogen. Phys.
     Fluids, vol. 12, no. 12, Dec. 1969, pp. 2493-2505.
11. Brokaw, R. S. : Energy Transport in High Temperature and Reacting
     Gases. Physical Chemistry in Aerodynamics and Space Flight. A. L.
     Myerson and A. C Harrison, eds., Pergamon Press, 1961, pp. 238-252.
12. Anderson, Kenneth M. ; Pulkrabek, Willard W. ; Ibele, Warren E. ; and
     Eckert, E. R. G. : Measurement of Prandtl Number and Thermal Con-
     ductivity. Rep. HTL TR-88, Univ. Minnesota (NASA CR-54634), Dec.
     15, 1968.




                                                                                85
                                                         PRESSURE,
                                                             PJ


                                                              1
     ENTHALPYJ 2OOo-                                        100
        hJ
       CAUG    1000.-

                        0-
                                          rCOMBUSTlON TEMPERATURE, P = l
                   -lo00    +




                            0    102(1003o0O4000m
                                   TEMPERATURE, K                  cs-53355
     Figure VI-1. - Enthalpy of jet-fuel/air combustion products. Stoichiometric
       mixture.




                  2.5   r                              PRESSURE,




     S PEG lFlC
                  2.0   c
                                               v-,
       HEAT,
        CP#
     CALI(G)(K)


                                                                       EQUILIBRIUM
                                                                       FROZEN

                    0           1OO02o0Ommm
                                  TEMPERATURE, K                      cs - 5 3 3 4 4

        Figure VI-2. - Specific heat of jet-fuel/air combustion products. Stoichio-
          metric mixture.




86
                  16~10~~
                                                                      PRESSURE,
                                                                            p,



VISCOSITY,
    71,
GI(CM)(SEC)




                      I        I       I        I          I            I
                  0           1000     2000   3000       4000         5000
                                     TEMPERATURE, K                  CS- 53356

   Figure VI-3. - Viscosity of jet-fuel/air combustion products.    Stoichiometric
     mixture.




                          &io-3
                                   -
                                   -
                          6
    THERMAL
  CONDUCTIVITY,
          A
 CAU(CM)( S EC) (K 1
                          2


                          0        1o0o2ooOm4o0Om
                                      TEMPERATURE, K               cs- 53345
  Figure VI-4. - Thermal coiiductivity of jet-fuel/air combustion products.
    Stoichiometric mixture.




                                                                                     87


              d
                                                          PRESSURE,
                         INERT MONATOMIC GAS = 2133.

                     -
                                             - A _ - -




     PRANDTL
     NUMBER, .4
       CpTlh

                         0 REF. 12

                 0         1ooomm4oO05o0O
                                TEMPERATURE, K           cs- 5 3 3 5 4

     Figure VI-5. - Prandtl number of jet-fuel/air combustion products.
       Stoichiometric mixture.




88
                    VII.     COMBUSTION CHEMISTRY
                                   Frank E. Belles

     This survey of combustion chemistry covers two aspects of the subject:
     (1) What is known about the reactions involved; all of this work has been done
at other laboratories.
     (2) What is known about the rates of these reactions and how to learn more;
Lewis Research Center is active in this field.
     Everyone is well aware that flames can be used in countless ways without
knowing anything at all about combustion chemistry. But when it is necessary to
extract all possible performance from a combustion system, to understand the
source and elimination of combustion-generated air pollutants, o r to devise better
ways to extinguish fires, then it also becomes necessary to know the important
combustion reactions and their rates.



                              COMBUSTION REACTIONS

                              Exper imenta I Approaches

     Consider a typical flame burning in a mixture of hydrocarbon fuel and air o r
oxygen (fig. VII-1). There are two ways to study the chemistry occurring in such
a flame.
     The overall, or global, approach is to measure the burning velocity over a
range of temperatures, pressures, and concentrations of fuel and oxygen. The
results are expressed in t e r m s of the rate of consumption of fuel and are fitted to
an expression of the following form:




Here Nfuel and No 2 a r e concentrations, and A, b, c, and E (the apparent ac-
tivation energy) a r e empirical constants. Such an expression would represent the
results precisely if all the flames studied were dominated by a slow reaction that
paced the chemistry. But under new conditions, outside the range of measurements




                                                                                          89
     used to derive A, b, c, and E, equation (1) may become invalid if the same reac-
     tion no longer controls the chemistry. Furthermore, an empirical result such as
     equation (1) says nothing about the actual reactions that are responsible for the
     consumption of fuel. F o r both reasons, the global approach has limited value.
          The second, more general, approach is to study only a few flames but in much
     greater detail. Starting about 15 years ago, a few groups began to measure pro-
     files of temperature and composition in flames. This work - much of which was
     done at the Applied Physics Laboratory of the John Hopkins University - has pro-
     vided most of the current understanding of flame chemistry. The intention here is
     not to go into this work exhaustively, but to convey its general flavor and then to
     present the chemistry that has been deduced from it.



                                         Flame Profiles
          What kind of temperature profile might one expect to find in a flame such as
     that in figure VII-l? An offhand conclusion might be that the highest temperature
     would occur in the thin, intensively luminous inner zone, which is so much brighter
     than the diffuse outer zone. Figure VII-2 shows that this is not the case. The
     profile in figure VII-2 was obtained at low pressure in a flat flame of methane
     burning in a large excess of air. Under such experimental conditions, the flame
     is thickened and the temperature is held down, so that reliable measurements can
     be made by means of a thermocouple.
          There are three regions in this profile. First, starting at the mouth of the
     burner, there is a region of slow temperature rise due to heat transfer from the
     hotter part of the flame. This prepares the mixture for rapid reaction in the
     second region, which coincides with the zone of intense luminosity; here, the tem-
     perature jumps sharply. The feature of this profile that seemed rather surprising
     in 1954, when the work was done, was the existence of a third region in which a
     further, albeit more gradual, r i s e in temperature occurs, It is in this third region
     that the final temperature, corresponding to chemical equilibrium, is attained.
          The greater significance of this work lies in the heat-release profile that can
     be derived from the temperature profile. In figure VII-3, the fraction of total heat
     release is plotted against distance. Far to the right, the temperature has reached
     its final value (fig. VII-2), all the heat has been released, and the fraction is unity.
     But when the gas leaves the luminous zone, only 60 percent of the heat has been
     released; the remaining 40 percent is released more slowly in the diffuse outer
     zone.




90


                   d
        Friedman and Burke, who measured this profile, noted that this 60 to 40 dis-
tribution corresponds to conversion in the luminous zone of the hydrogen to water
and of the carbon to carbon monoxide, with slow conversion to carbon dioxide,
the final product, in the outer zone. Initially, this was a speculative idea. Later,
the group at the Applied Physics Laboratory confirmed it by measuring compo-
sition profiles.
         Figure VII-4 shows such a profile. It was measured in a flame of methane
burning in excess oxygen at 0 . 1 atmosphere. (The difference in pressure as
compared to that used in the work depicted in figs. VII-2 and VII-3 and the sub-
stitution of oxygen for air are irrelevant to the general conclusions. ) The f r a c -
tion of the total flow of moles of gas is plotted against distance for three consti-
tuents of the mixture. Methane starts out at between 7 and 8 percent of the un-
burned mixture and disappears in the luminous zone. Its carbon is converted to
carbon monoxide, just as suspected. The luminous zone is thus the region of
primary reaction. In the succeeding secondary zone, the carbon monoxide is
gradually converted to the final product, carbon dioxide. Obviously, the chem-
i s t r y is much faster in the primary than the secondary zone. The methane in
this particular flame is destroyed i n a fraction of a millisecond.
         Other flame-sampling studies, including some in which reaction intermediates
were measured, have established the reason for this behavior in t e r m s of the de-
tailed mechanism of reaction in oxygen rich methane flames. The conclusions
drawn f r o m studies of this particular class of flames are presented next, followed
by a discussion of modifications in the reaction mechanism that occur in other
 combustion systems.



               Combustion Scheme for Methane in Excess Oxygen

     Figure VII-5(a) lists the reactions that occur in the primary (luminous) zone.
Two of them are of utmost impprtance: the attack on oxygen by hydrogen atoms,
and the initial reaction of the fuel with hydroxyl radicals.
     As a result of this initial attack, the methane is converted to methyl radicals.
These go through an intermediate stage of conversion to formaldehyde (OCH2),
which does not accumulate but is rapidly converted to carbon monoxide via the
intermediate formation of formyl radical (HCO). The second step, involving
HCO, has not been positively identified; the other reactant and product are
therefore omitted and this step is merely indicated by the wavy arrow. Meanwhile,
methane is also attacked to a certain extent by hydrogen atoms, and the molecular




                                                                                         91
     hydrogen produced as well as the water formed in the main attack on methane
     engage in the last three reactions.
          Examination of the reactions listed in figure VII-5(a) suggests the reason for
     the great speed of the chemical events that occur in the primary zone. Every r e -
     action listed involves a chain c a r r i e r - a highly reactive atom or f r e e radical.
     Moreover, every reaction produces at least one chain carrier. But four of the
     reactions (marked with asterisks) produce two. As a result, this chain of re-
     actions yields more chain c a r r i e r s than are consumed, and the extra ones can
     begin new chains. Thus, the primary zone is a region of chain-branching reac-
     tion, which is characteristically a very fast process.
          The first reaction listed in figure VII-5(a) is crucially important. Not only
     is it the means by which oxygen is attacked, but it is also the reaction that begins
     the process of chain branching. Furthermore, it is a key reaction because it
     happens to be very slow at low temperatures. There a r e two reasons for this.
     First, the reaction is quite endothermic and therefore has a very low rate at tem-
     peratures below about 1000 K. Second, at the lower temperatures a competing
     reaction (not listed) destroys hydrogen atoms. The net result is that this crucial
     reaction effectively does not occur at temperatures much below 1000 K. And it
     is undoubtedly for this reason that hydrocarbon flames do not exist in mixtures
     that cannot release enough heat to raise the temperature to about that level.
          As a result of the chain of reactions in figure VII-5(a) the gas flowing out of
     the primary zone contains carbon monoxide, plus amounts of oxygen and hydro-
     gen atoms and hydroxyl radicals that a r e far in excess of the chemical equili-
     brium values. There a r e also the unused oxygen, a small amount of hydrogen,
     and a large amount of water vapor. A good way of characterizing the situation
     is to say that the primary zone is a flame in which methane is burned to produce
     the fuel - carbon monoxide - for a second flame.
           Things are considerably simpler in the secondary zone because the fuel has
     now been converted to smaller molecules that have fewer possibilities for reac-
     tion. Figure VII-5(b) summarizes the secondary zone reactions. The first one
     listed is responsible for converting carbon monoxide to the final product, carbon
     dioxide. While this is happening, the chain c a r r i e r s shuffle their identities by
     means of the next four reactions, which now proceed in both directions because
     the temperature and the chain-carrier concentrations are high. In fact, the
      chain c a r r i e r s tend to remain in a state of chemical equilibrium among themselves
     by means of these reactions, while at the same time their population decreases.
     This decrease is effected by the two recombination reactions, in which M denotes
     a third body whose function is to absorb the recombination energy and thus to
      stabilize the newly formed oxygen or water molecule. Because three-body colli-




92
sions a r e relatively infrequent, the recombination reactions are slow and continue
after the carbon monoxide has been converted. F o r that reason, they have been
assigned to a third zone, but with the understanding that recombination actually
begins in the secondary zone.



                     Combustion Scheme for Excess Methane

     The chemistry presented in the preceding section was for the case in which
oxygen is i n stoichiometric excess. If the situation is reversed and methane is
in excess there a r e only a few changes; these are summarized in figure VII-6.
The main attack on the fuel is now by hydrogen atoms rather than hydroxyl radi-
cals. The product is methyl radical, as before, but its fate is less clear than
in the excess-oxygen case. However, it does seem clear that methyl radical is
chiefly attacked by oxygen atoms in fuel-rich mixtures with subsequent rapid con-
version to carbon monoxide. Except for these changes, the primary zone r e a c -
tions a r e as shown in figure VII-5(a).
     In the secondary zone, carbon monoxide reacts with hydroxyl radicals as
before, but some of it appears as a final product because of the deficiency of
oxygen in these mixtures. Finally, figure VII-6 lists a new recombination r e a c -
tion that is the source of some of the hydrogen appearing in the combustion pro-
dflcts.



         Combustion Scheme for Other Hydrocarbons in Excess Oxygen

     The discussion so far has pertained to methane. Suppose the fuel is some
other hydrocarbon? If it is a saturated hydrocarbon belonging to the alkane family,
and if it burns in the presence of excess oxygen, much of the combustion scheme
is the same as for methane.
     As indicated in figure VII-7, such a fuel is mainly attacked by hydroxyl rad-
icals. The resulting hydrocarbon free radical quickly undergoes thermal de-
composition to an olefin and a methyl radical. The reactions of the latter, with
the final evolution of carbon monoxide, a r e as shown in figure VII-5(a). The
carbon in the olefin also appears in carbon monoxide, following initial attack by
oxygen atoms and subsequent reactions which, although not yet known in detail,
are fast compared to the corresponding sequence for methyl radicals. The evi-
dence for this greater speed is the fact that flame sampling reveals only the




                                                                                       93
     intermediate from methyl radicals, formaldehyde. No higher -molecular -weight
     aldehydes, ketones, or alcohols a r e detected.



                       Summary of Important Combustion Reactions

          In figure VII-8 are listed the reactions that have been identified as important
     ones in hydrocarbon combustion. Clearly, they a r e not the whole story. The de-
     tailed combustion schemes have yet to be worked out for unsaturated and cyclic
     compounds, and f o r the heavier saturated hydrocarbons when burned in a deficiency
     of oxygen. Nevertheless, enough is already known to deal with many practical
     situations. And considering the enormous complexity that could in principle have
     been discovered for even so simple a fuel as methane, it is very encouraging to
     find that the really important reactions reduce to the small number shown in fig-
     ure VII-8.



                            RATES OF COMBUSTION REACTIONS

          With many of the important reactions identified, it is now pertinent to consider
     the state of knowledge of their rates. In doing so, the recombination reactions
     (fig. VII-8) a r e omitted. They are in a special category because their rates de-
     pend on the identity of the third body, M. A subsequent paper by Dr. Warshay
     discusses work designed to get a more basic understanding of the role of the third
     body in such reactions.



                                 Rates at Low Temperatures

          Of the remaining reactions, most a r e fast enough to be studied at room tem-
     perature to a few hundred K by any of a number of good experimental methods.
     In this class are (1) the reaction of hydroxyl radicals with fuel, (2) the first three
     chain-branching reactions, and (3) the one responsible for converting carbon mon-
     oxide to carbon dioxide. Consequently, the state of knowledge of these rates is
     quite good at low to moderate temperatures.
          As an example of this, table VII-1 shows the results of five recent measure-
     ments of the rate of one of the chain-branching reactions at 300 K. Three different
     techniques were used to follow either the disappearance of axeactant (OH) or the
     appearance of a product (H o r H20). The values listed for the rate coefficient




94
show a gratifyingly small range. Even the workers who encountered the largest
experimental scatter obtained values fairly close to the most precise ones, much
closer than the order -of -magnitude agreement that would have been gratefully
accepted prior to the introduction of modern methods of studying free-radical re-
actions. Critical examination of the results listed in table VII-1 shows that the
room-temperature rate of this reaction is well established. The same can b e
said of several others of the reactions that have appreciable low -temperature
rates.


                            Rates at High Temperatures

     For one reason or another, all of the experimental methods that work so
well at low to moderate temperatures fail long before combustion temperatures
are reached. And since rate coefficients increase exponentially with temperature,
long extrapolations of low-temperature results are likely to b e in e r r o r . There
is a need for reliable, direct measurements at the higher temperatures.
     At present, two experimental approaches have been developed to a point
such that they can meet this need: flame sampling and shock tubes. The two
a r e comparable with respect to the ranges of temperature and characteristic
reaction times over which they can be applied. At this laboratory, shock tubes
have been chosen as more direct and flexible tools for high-temperature rate
measurements. In preparation for the next two papers, shock-tube operation is
briefly described.



         Shock Tubes for Measurement of High-Temperature Reactions Rates

    As shown schematically in figure VII-9, a shock tube contains two sections
separated by a metal or plastic diaphragm. Both sections a r e first evacuated.
The gas mixture in which a reaction is to be studied is then admitted to the
driven section. The driver section is filled with high-pressure gas and the
diaphragm is burst. This generates a shock wave, which travels into the
driven gas at several times the speed of sound. The shock compresses and
heats the reaction mixture, and also s e t s it into motion following the shock.
Near the end of the tube are windows and an a r r a y of instruments.
     Figure VII-10 shows how the temperature changes as the heated reacting
gas flows past the windows. It jumps almost instantaneously at the shock front
from ambient to an elevated temperature, which may b e several thousand degrees




                                                                                        95
     and which is determined by the velocity of the shock. It is therefore essential to
     measure the velocity by carefully timing the arrival of the shock at two detectors
     (fig. VII-9). The flow of hot gas, in which reaction is occurring, lasts for about
     a millisecond in typical shock tubes. The temperature falls and the reaction is
     terminated when the cold, expanded driver gas moves past the window (fig. VII-lo).
          The course of reaction is followed spectroscopically by means of the instru-
     ments shown below the shock tube in figure VLI-9. This is done by observing
     changes in the intensity of light, either emitted or absorbed, that a r e directly
     related to a changing concentration. An optical system gathers the light and
     isolates an appropriate wavelength. The light is detected by a photomultiplier
     and its signals a r e displayed on an oscilloscope, where they a r e photographed.
     This mode of recording must b e used because of the exceedingly brief duration
     of the hot flow i n a shock tube.
          It was mentioned earlier that the temperature behind a shock depends on the
     shock velocity. This is not strictly true. F o r two reasons the temperature can
     change while a reaction is being observed. One of the reasons is that the heat
     of reaction may affect the temperature. This effect, however, can generally be
     reduced to minor proportions by diluting the reactive gases with a large amount
     of inert gas, such as argon, which serves as a constant-temperature bath. The
     other source of changing temperature is less obvious and has only recently come
     to be appreciated, Because the gas behind the shock is moving, a boundary layer
     develops along the walls of the tube. The effect of this layer is to increase the
     temperature in the core of the flow as indicated by the dashed line in figure VII-10.
     Furthermore, the pressure r i s e s and the time scale of the reaction is distorted.
     All these effects of the boundary layer, if neglected, can cause serious e r r o r s
     in shock-tube rate measurements. Fortunately, the theory for dealing with these
      changes exists and recent tests show that it is quite adequate.



                                  CONCLUDING REMARKS

          Great progress has been made during the past 15 years in elucidating com-
     bustion chemistry and in making it a quantitative rather than a merely descriptive
     science. In many hydrocarbon-burning combustion systems of practical interest,
     the important reactions have been identified. All of these reactions involve highly
     reactive atoms or free radicals. Reliable measurements of the rates of these
     reactions, at both low and high temperatures, are steadily accumulating. The
     two kinds of information - chemical mechanisms and rate data - provide the ability
     to predict, and thus, to control, the behavior of complex combustion systems.




96




                    d
                             Bl BLIOGRAPHY

                         Cornbu st ion Reactions

Friedman, Raymond; and Burke, Edward Measurement of Temperature Dis -
 tribution in a Low-Pressure Flat Flame. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 22, 1954,
 pp. 824-830.
Fristrom, R. M. ; and Westenberg, A. A. : Flame Structure. McGraw-Hill
 Book Co., Inc., 1965.



                     Rates of Combustion Reactions

Schofield, K.: An Evaluation of Kinetic Rate Data for Reactions of Neutrals
 of Atmospheric Interest. Planet. Space Sci., vol. 15, 1967, pp. 543-670.
Baulch, D. L. ; Drysdale, D. D. ; and Lloyd, A. C. : Critical Evaluation
 of Rate Data for Homogeneous, Gas-Phase Reactions of Interest in High-
 Temperature Systems. Rep. 1, Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., May
 1968.
Baulch, D. L.; Drysdale, D. D. ; and Lloyd, A. C. : Critical Evaluation
 of Rate Data for Homogeneous, Gas-Phase Reactions of Interest in High-
 Temperature Systems. Rep. 2, Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., Nov.
 1968.
Baulch, D. L. ; Drysdale, D. D. ; and Lloyd, A. C. : Critical Evaluation
 of Rate Data for Homogeneous, Gas-Phase Reactions of Interest in High-
 Temperature Systems. Rep. 3, Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., Apr.
 1969.


                               Shock Tubes

Greene, Edward F. ; and Toennies, J . Peter: Chemical Reactions in Shock
 Waves. Academic Press, 1964.
Mirels, H. : Flow Nonuniformity in Shock Tubes Operating at Maximum Test
 Times. Phys. Fluids, vol. 9, no. 10, Oct. 1966, pp. 1907-1912.
Warshay, Marvin: Effects of Boundary Layer Buildup in Shock Tubes upon
 Chemical Rate Measurements. NASA TN D-4795, 1968.



                                                                              97
           TABLE VII-1.      - RATE COEFFICIENTS AT 300 K




        Investigator
                            OH+H2--H20+H
                       d[HaO]/dt = d[H]/dt = k[OH][H2]

                                    Method
                                                         I
                                                       1 Rate coefficient,
                                                                       ~~




     Kaufman (1963)        OH, UV absorption             (4.3&1. O ) X I O ~
     Wise (1964)           H, ESR spectrometry           (5.7kO. 7)x109
     Dixon-Lewis (1966:    OH, ESR spectrometry          (3.9&0. 2)x109
     Greiner (1969)        OH, UV absorption             (4.I&O. 21x10~
     Wong (1970)           H20, m a s s spectrometry     (5.01t3. O)x109




98
                                                              CS-53165
                  Figure VII-1. - Premixed hydrocarbon flame.


                                                          I
                                          I               I




TEMP,
  OC
                                          I




         0                    1                                              3
                          DISTANCE ABOVE BURNER, C M              cs-53238

  Figure VII-2. - Temperature profile of a flame. Propane-air; pressure, 0.06
    atmosphere; A/F = 29.




                                                                                 99
                       lo^
                       .8

                       .6 -
      FRACTION OF
       TOTAL HEAT      -4-
         RELEASE

                       .2   -
                                        I




                            I                              20000




      FRACTIONAL
      MOLAR FLUX                                    rMETHANE

                                            ,<  /


                                                      - r C A R B O N MONOXIDE

                                                                                 I
                                                            LO                L5
            CS-53234                DISTANCE ABOVE BURNER, C M
       Figure VTI-4. - Composition profile of a flame. Methane in excess oxygen;
         pressure, 0.1 atmosphere.




100
PRIMARY ZONE:      ATTACK ON CH4 AND 02
     MAIN ATTACK ON 02:
              H+02+OH+O            :'
     MAIN ATTACK ON CH4:
              OH + CH4+ CH3 + H20
     FOLLOWED BY:
             CH3 + 02 OCH2 + OH
                           +




             OCH2+O+HCO+OH *
             HCO-CO             CO, OH, 0, H 02, H20, H2
             CHq+H+CH3+H2
             0 t H2+ OH t H :::     SECONDARY ZONE
                                                        c
             OH+H2+H20+H
             O+H20+OH+OH "
                                                         CS-5324 1

SECONDARY ZONE: ATTACK ON CO
   MAIN ATTACK ON CO:
          OH+CO+CO;!+H
   SHUFFLE REACTIONS OF CHAIN CARRIERS:
          H+02==    OH+O
          O+H2*     OH+H
          OH+H2=     H20+H
          H20+O      OH +OH

RECOMBINATION ZONE
   0 + O + M + 02 + M
   H +OH + M - H20 + M
                                            CS-53242


 Figure VII-5.   - Combustion scheme for methane with excess oxygen.




                                                                       101



            d
                      PRIMARY ZONE:
                          MAIN ATTACK ON CHq:
                                  H+CHq+CH3+H2

                          AllACK ON CH3:
                                  CH3 +O-CO

                      SECONDARY ZONE:
                          NO CHANGE

                      RECOMBINATION ZONE:
                          H + H + M + H2 + M
                                                          CS-53243

                  Figure VII-6. - Changes in combustion
                    scheme for methane with excess
                    methane.




          EVIDENCE:
               ONLY FORMALDEHYDE, OCH2, FOUND IN FLAMES

                                                            CS-53232

           Figure VII-7. - Behavior of heavier hydrocarbons with
             excess oxygen.




102


      a
L CHAIN-BRANCHING AND ATTACK ON 02: H + 02'               OH + 0

2 ATTACK ON FUEL:    CnH2n+2 + OH * C n H z n + l + H20
                     CnH2n+2 H + C n H z n + l + H2
                               +




3. OTHER CHAIN-BRANCHING REACTIONS: 0 + H2 OH -t H +




                                    OH + H2* H20 + H
                                    OCH2 -t 0- HCO +OH
                                            0 + H 2 0 + OH +OH

4. CONVERSION OF CO: CO +OH+ C02 + H

5. RECOMBINATION: 0 + 0 + M + 02 + M
                  H+OH+M+H20+M
                  H + H + M + H2 + M
                                                          CS-53235
   Figure VII-8. - Summary of important combustion reactions.




                                          SHOCK
    DRIVEN SECTION7                       DETECTORS >
                      I                                   \? \




                                                             CS-53240
       Figure VIES. - Shock tube for rate measurements.




                                                                        103
      TEMP   1

                                          TIME   -                CS-532 39

                 Figure VIT-10. - Temperature history in a shock wave.




104
       VIII.      RATE CONSTANTS F R O M I G N I T I O N STUDIES
                         OF T H E H 2 - C O - 0 2 S Y S T E M
         Theodore A. Brabbs, Frank E. Belles, and Richard S. Brokaw

     When a mixture containing hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and oxygen is sub-
jected t o a temperature and pressure pulse in a shock tube, small concentrations
of atoms and free radicals are first formed by processes such as




These concentrations may then grow exponentially by way of the well-known
branched chain scheme

                                OH+H2 %H20+H                                       (1)




                                 O+H2 k g O H + H                              (m)




                                OH + CO -%C02+H                                    (VI


Theory shows (refs. 1 and 2) that the oxygen atom concentration increases as
EO] E A exp At (except very early in the reaction), where A is the positive root
of the cubic equation

A 3 + (VI + v2 + v3 + v4 + v5)h2 + [(vl   + v5)(v3+ v4) + v3v4 h
                                                             1


                                                                                         105
      Here v 1 3 kl [H2],v2 = k2 [02],v 3 = k3[H2], v4 E k4[02][M], and v5 = k5[CO].
      Thus the exponential growth constant X depends on the gas composition and the
      rate constants of reactions I to V. This paper reports measurements on mixtures
      chosen to permit determinations of the rates of reactions I, II, ID, and V. Mix-
      t u r e s were selected by analyzing equation (1).



                                  EXPERIMENTAL ASPECTS

           Growth constants were obtained by measuring the blue carbon monoxide
      flame band emission behind incident shocks. The intensity of this radiation is
      proportional to the product of carbon monoxide and oxygen atom concentrations
      (ref. 3), and since very little carbon monoxide is consumed, the light monitors
      the increase of oxygen atom concentration with time.
           Gas mixtures contained varying amounts of hydrogen, carbon monoxide,
      oxygen and in some mixtures carbon dioxide, diluted five to tenfold with
      argon. Hydrogen, oxygen, and argon were high purity tank gases and were used
      without further purification. Carbon monoxide was condensed at liquid nitrogen
      temperature; about one-quarter of the condensate was pumped off and discarded.
      Dry ice served as a convenient source of carbon dioxide. It was purified by sub-
      liming three-quarters of a sample into a liquid nitrogen cooled trap. The first
      quarter of this trapped fraction was discarded and the middle half used for mixture
      preparation.
           Recently we showed that boundary layer effects must be considered in ana-
      lyzing data obtained behind incident shocks; the growing boundary layer causes
      increases in temperature, density, and residence time with increasing distance
      behind the shock. Conditions behind the shocks, in the region of the experimental
      measurements, were obtained from a computer program which integrated the equa-
      tions of chemical change for a shocked gas accounting for the effects of boundary
      layer buildup. In general, the extent of chemical reaction was small, and changes
      in gas properties were brought about largely by the gas dynamics associated with
      boundary layer growth.
           Exponential growth constants were obtained from plots of the logarithm of ob-
      served light intensity against gas time; the relation between gas and laboratory
      times was obtained from the computer calculations.


                                SELECTION OF GAS MIXTURES
          Let us turn now to the rationale used to select gas mixtures by analysis of




106
equation (1). To begin with, under our experimental conditions v4 is generally
small in comparison with the other v's and can be neglected for purposes of a
qualitative discussion. Secondly, h turns out t o be a small positive root - of the
order of the smaller v values and small compared with the larger v values.
Thus, we neglect h3 in comparison with the other t e r m s and rewrite equation (1):




If the amount of hydrogen in a mixture is large in comparison to oxygen, vl and
v3 are large and the term involving A2 may be neglected; in this event,




On the other hand, if only a trace of hydrogen is present, v 3 is small, the term
involving h may be neglected, and




If we choose a mixture with a large amount of carbon monoxide, v5 is large and




Whereas if there is a large amount of oxygen, v2 is large and




    This, then, outlines a strategy for obtaining rates of reations I, 11, 111, and V.
First, a mixture rich in hydrogen is used to determine k2. Next, with k2 known,
a mixture with a trace of hydrogen and rich in carbon monoxide is used to deter-
mine k3. Finally, with k3 known, mixtures with excess oxygen and varying pro-




                                                                                         107
      portions of hydrogen and carbon monoxide are used to isolate kl and k5.
           The foregoing discussion indicates a qualitative procedure for selecting g a s
      mixtures. However, we also need a quantitative measure of the sensitivity of the
      growth constant for a particular mixture to the various rate constants. For ex-
      ample, we know that t o isolate k3 we want a mixture with a trace of hydrogen, a
      small amount of oxygen, and carbon monoxide in excess. But for a candidate com-
      position, is the hydrogen concentration small enough, and is carbon monoxide
      sufficently in excess? A quantitative measure of the sensitivity to the various
      rates can be obtained by logarithmic partial differention of equation (1). For ex-
      ample,

                                       . 2
                                        A e 2u3X e (ul + u5)(u3   - u4) + v3v4
                            3x2 + 2 ( U l + u2 + u3 e u4 3. u5)X + (vl + u5)(u3 e u4) + u3v4




      Equation (7) shows the growth constant will depend on something l e s s than the
      square root of u3 - a somewhat weaker dependence than that suggested by equa-
      tion ( 5 ) .
           The mixture compositions selected a r e shown in table VIII-1 along with sen-
      sitivities calculated for a pressure of 1 atmosphere and temperatures near the           1


      midpoints of the ranges of the experimental data. These mixtures were chosen
      on the basis of (1) high sensitivity t o the rate 'constant being determined, (2) min-
      imized sensitivity to the other rate constants, (3) growth constant in a convenient
      range for measurement (5x10 3 to 7x104 sec-l), and (4)sufficient content of minor
      rate limiting constituents to permit accurate mixture preparation.
           It was necessary t o include in each mixture sufficient infrared-active gas so
      that the arrival of the contact surface could be detected by the cessation of infrared
      emission. (The position of the contact surface between driver and driven gas is
      needed in the boundary layer analysis.) Mixtures 2, 3, and 5 have substantial
      carbon monoxide concentrations; carbon dioxide was added to mixture 1 to achieve
      adequate infrared activity. Carbon dioxide was also added to mixtures 3 and 5
      to ensure vibrational relaxation of the carbon monoxide. (In preliminary experi-
      ments on a composition similar to mixture 3 , but without carbon dioxide, carbon
      monoxide w a s not relaxed and rate constants gave an activation energy of 15 kilo-
      calories for reaction 111, much higher than literature values (ref. 4). Results
      from mixture 3, with added carbon dioxide, show that the preliminary data were
      too low, particularly at the lower temperatures. )




108



                    d
                                                     ,

                    CALCULATION OF RATE CONSTANTS FROM
                        EXPONENTIAL GROWTH CONSTANTS

     Rate constants were obtained from the experimental growth constants by
means of equation (l), which was rearranged and solved for the rate constant
being sought from the mixture in question - k2 from mixture 2, k3 from mix-
ture 3, etc. Mixture 2 was studied first because the growth constants for this
mixture depend almost exclusively on k2 and are only slightly affected by the
rates of the other reactions (see table VIII-1). Values of v4 were calculated
from the k4 suggested by the Leeds group (ref. 5). Trial values of kl, k3, and
k5 were also taken from the Leeds recommendations (refs. 4 t o 6), but final
values were taken from our own determinations. This involves an interative
procedure, since our values of k3 depend, in turn, on our values $, and t o a
lesser extent k5. Two iterations sufficed to establish k2.
    Next k3 was obtained by analyzing the growth constants for mixture 3 , then
kl from mixture 1, and finally k5 from mixture 5. Three iterations around the
k3-kl-k5 loop were required.
    A least squares f i t to the Arrhenius equation was made for each s e t of rate
constants; these equations were then used in subsequent calculations.



                            RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

     The experimental results will be discussed in the order in which the data were
obtained - first k2, followed by k3, kl, and k5. This order is also, approxi-
mately, the order of decreasing precision.
     Rate constants for reaction I1 are plotted against reciprocal temperature in
figure VIII-1. The least squares line through the data is

                                  exp -16.3 kcal cm3 mole-l
                k2 = 1.25x10
                               l4    (   RT      )        sec-l



The standard deviation (ref. 7) of In k2 is *O. 094, o r about 10 percent; the
standard deviation (ref. 7) of the activation energy is 1.1 kilocalories. Rates
given by equation (8) fall somewhat below most previous high temperature (T >
1000 K) determinations and as a consequence lie about 30 percent below the
recommendation of the Leeds group (ref. 5), but well within their suggested
e r r o r limit of k50 percent. The activation energy of 16.3 kilocalories is




                                                                                      109
      slightly more than the endothermicity of reaction 11 (16.15 kcal at 1300 K) in con-
      trast to several other recent shock tube studies (refs. 5 and 7) which have yielded
      substantially lower activation energies. Indeed, equation (8) extrapolated to room
      temperature predicts rate constants which are straddled by the discordant results
      of Clyne and Thrust (ref. 9) and Kaufman and Del Greco (ref. 10) (see fig. VIII-2).
           It should be emphasized that these satisfying results are obtained only when
      the effects of boundary layer growth a r e considered. If we ignore the boundary
      layer by using the temperature and pressure immediately behind the shock in the
      data reduction, rate constants for reaction I1 are 20 to 60 percent larger with an
      apparent activation energy of only 11.9 kilocalories. This is shown as a dashed
      line in figure VIII-1. The data without boundary layer corrections extrapolated
      to room temperature a r e too high by about two o r d e r s of magnitude, as shown by
      the dashed line in figure VIII-2.
           Rate constants f o r reaction 111a r e plotted in figure V m - 3 . The least squares
      line through the data is


                       k3 = 2 . 9 6 ~ 1 0exp
                                          ~~              ,3        sec-l
                                                               mole-l                        (9)


      The standard deviation of In k3 is rt0.184, o r about 20 percent; the standard de-
      viation of the activation energy is l. 3 kilocalories. It is to be expected that errors
      in k3 a r e roughly double those for k2, since for mixture 3 the growth constants
      depend on the 0 . 4 power of k3, whereas for mixture 2 the growth constants a r e
      very nearly proportional to k2 (see sensitivities in table VIII-1).
           Rates calculated from equation (9) fall among other high temperature deter-
      minations (ref. 4); they a r e about 50 percent above the Leeds recommendation
      (ref. 4) which is somewhat outside their suggested e r r o r limit of *30 percent.
      (The Leeds recommendation appears to be based almost entirely on data from
      temperatures below 900 K.) On the other hand, equation (9) is only about 10 per-
      cent above an extrapolation of the more recent data of Westenberg and de Haas
      (ref. 11). The activation energy of 9 . 8 kilocalories appears reasonable since it
      lies between the recommendations of the Leeds group (9.45 kcal) and Westenberg
      and de Haas (10.2 kcal). As a consequence, equation (9) extrapolated to much
      lower temperatures predicts rate constants generally in accord with other experi-
      ments (ref. 4). Such an extrapolation is shown in figure VIII-4, which includes
      the data of Westenberg and de Haas (ref. 11).
           Rate constants for reaction I a r e plotted against reciprocal temperature in
      figure VIII-5. The solid least squares line through the data is




110
                      kl = 1.9x1Ol3 exp              cm3 mole-lsec-l


    The standard deviation of In kl is 1t0.41, o r about 40 percent; the standard devi-
    ation of the activation energy is l. 7 kilocalories.
         In the temperature range of the experimental data, 1100 to 1600 K, equa-
    tion (10) is in near-perfect accord with the Leeds recommendation (ref. 4). The
    activation energy is somewhat lower than the 5.15 kilocalories suggested by Leeds,
    so that equation (10) extrapolated to room temperature predicts rate constants
    about 50 percent too high; this extrapolation is shown in figure VIII-6. This can
    be rectified by including in the least squares analysis a recent value of kl =
    4.lxlO 9 at 300 K due to Greiner (ref. 12). This gives


                     k l = 2. lX1013 exp            cm3 mole-lsec-l


    The standard deviation of In kl remains rt0.41, but the standard deviation of the
    activation energy is reduced to 0 . 3 kilocalorie. Equation (11) is shown as dashed
    lines in figures VIII-5 and VIII-6. Equations (10) and (11) differ by less than
    4 percent in the experimental temperature range.
         Rate constants for reaction V are plotted in figure VIII-5. The solid least
    squares line through the data is


                     k5 = 1.0X1012 exp              cm3 mole-lsec-l


    The standard deviation of In k5 is io.28, or about 30 percent; the standard de-
    viation of the activation energy is l. 9 kilocalories. For the temperature range
    of 1300 to 1900 K, equation (12) gives rate constants 10 to 35 percent below the
    Leeds recommendation (ref. 6). The 3.7-kilocalorie activation energy is almost
.   certainly too large; recent low temperature studies (refs. 12 and 13) suggest
    0.2 to 1.0 kilocalories. As a consequence equation (12) extrapolated to room
    temperature predicts a rate two o r d e r s of magnitude smaller than Greiner
    (ref. 13) recent 300 K value of k5 = 8 . 6 ~ 1 10
                                                   0 (see fig. WI-6). By including
    Greiner's datum in the least squares analysis we obtain


                     k5 = 4. 2x1Ol1 exp              cm3 mole-l
                                                              sec-l




                                                                                          111
      The standard deviation of In k5 remains about the same, to. 29, but the standard
      deviation of the activation energy is only 0 . 2 kilocalorie. Equation (13) is shown
      as dashed lines in figures VfII-5 and Vm-6. T o the eye, equation (13) seems
      almost as good a representation of the data as equation (12). In the experimental
      temperature range equations (12) and (13) differ by at most 15 percent. Thus,
      equation (13) seems preferable.



                                    CONCLUDING REMARKS

           In this paper we have shown how to make systematic measurements so as to
      isolate the rates of individual bimolecular reaction steps in the complex of six
      reactions which describe the ignition behavior of the hydrogen - carbon monoxide -
      oxygen system.
           We have obtained what we believe are quite accurate measurements of the
                                    -
      rates of the reactions H + O2 OH + 0 and 0 + H2 OH c H. An essential has
                                                           -L


      been a proper accounting of the effects of boundary layer growth on the pressure,
      temperature, and residence time behind the shock wave. Our measurements of
                            -                        -
      the rates of OH + H2 H 2 0 + H and OH + CO C02 + H a r e less precise but are
      perhaps the most direct determinations of these rates for temperatures above
      1100 K (previous high temperature determinations of these rates have been based
      on flame sampling).



                                          REFERENCES

      1. Brokaw, Richard S . : Analytic Solutions to the Ignition Kinetics of the
          Hydrogen-Oxygen Reaction. Tenth Symposium (International) on Combustion.
          Combustion Inst., 1965, pp. 269-278.
      2. Brokaw, Richard S. : Ignition Kinetics of the Carbon Monoxide-Oxygen Reac-
          tion. Eleventh Symposium (International) on Combustion. Combustion Inst. ,
          1967, pp. 106'3-1073.
      3. Clyne, M. A. A. ; and Thrush, B. A. : Mechanism of Chemiluminescent
          Combination Reactions Involving Oxygen Atoms. Proc. Roy. SOC. (London),
          ser. A, vol. 269, no. 1338, Sept. 25, 1962, pp. 404-418.
      4. Baulch, D. L. ; Drysdale, D. D. ; q d Lloyd, A. C. : Critical Evaluation of
          Rate Data for Homogeneous, Gas-Phase Reactions of Interest in High-
          Temperature Systems. Rep. 2 , Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., Nov. 1968.




112




                    d
5. Baulch, D. L.; Drysdale, D. D.; and Lloyd, A. C.: Critical Evaluation of
    Rate Data f o r Homogeneous, Gas-Phase Reactions of Interest in High-
    Temperature Systems. Rep. 3, Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., Apr.
    1969.
6. Baulch, D. L . ; Drysdale, D. D.; and Lloyd, A. C.: HighTemperature
    Reaction Rate Data. Rep. 1, Dept. Phys. Chem., Leeds Univ., May 1968.
7. Youden, William J. : Statistical Methods for Chemists. John Wiley i3z Sons,
    Inc., 1951, p. 42.
8. Schott, G. L. : Chain-Branching and Initiation Rates Measured by Spatially
    Integrated Light Emission During Reflected Shock-Wave Ignition. Twelfth
    Symposium (International) on Combustion. Combustion Inst. , 1969,
    pp. 569-578.
9. Clyne, M. A. A. ; and Thrush, B. A. : Rates of Elementary Processes in
    the Chain Reaction Between Hydrogen and Oxygen. I. Reactions of Oxygen
    Atoms. Proc. Roy. SOC. (London), ser. A, vol. 275, no. 1363, Oct. 29,
    1963, pp. 544-558.
10. Kaufman, F. ; and Del Greco, F. P. : Fast Reactions of OH Radicals. Ninth
     Symposium (International) on Combustion. W. G. Berl, ed. , Academic
     P r e s s , 1963, pp. 659-668.
11. Westenberg, A. A. ; and deHaas, N. : Reinvestigation of the Rate Coefficients
     for O c H 2 and O + CH4. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 50, no. 6, Mar. 15, 1969,
     pp. 2512-2516.
12. Greiner, N. R. : Hydroxyl Radical Kinetics by Kinetic Spectroscopy. V.
     Reactions with H2 and 60 in the Range 300 - 500 K. J. Chem. Phys. ,
     vol. 51, no. 11, Dec. 1, 1969, pp. 5049-5051.
13. Wong, Edgar L. ; and Belles, Frank E. : Activation Energies for Reactions
     of Hydroxl Radicals with Hydrogen and Carbon Monoxide. NASA TN D-5707,
     1970.




                                                                                    113
               TABLE VIII-1.           - MIXTURE COMPOSITIONS AND
                      GROWTH CONSTANT SENSITIVITIES

                             I                     Mixture                  I
                             .        1       2              3       5


      I
                             II                   Reaction                  II
                                  OH+H2* H + 0 2 -     O + H 2 - OH+CO-

      I                       Mixture composition, percent                  I
               H2                    0.21    5           0.1046    0.1035
               co                     .ll    6          10.0       6.01
               02                   10.0     0.5         0.503    10.0
               CO2
                                     5.0     ----        4.99      5.0




      L
          a In h / a In v1          0.34     0.01        0.0      0.07
          a In x/a In v2             .33     1.00         .64      .21
          a In h/a In v3              .48     .06         .39      .49
          a In h/a In v4             -. 17   -.07        -. 06    -. 06
          a In x/a In v5              .02     *   00      -04      .29




114
              /
          /




 I-"
US
GI-   N

 0
 0




                  zi

          /
            /I    0
                  +
                  0
                  t
                  0
                  "
                  +
                  z
                  Y-
                  Y




                  a
                  Y

                  2
                  I




                       115
                 c
                 3
                 B




                 E
                 .4
                 s
                 c1


                 k
                 k
                 8




      I    I

          co
                 f
          0
          .-.I




      0


116
        3
        P
        4



        k
        w
        0

U
0




0
0
M




    0




            117
118



      J
        IX.    K I N E T I C S OF T H E D I S S O C I A T I O N OF B R O M I N E
                                  M a r v i n Warshay

     The development of the modern shock-tube technique has enabled chemical
kineticists to conduct quite a number of fruitful investigations. Over the last
dozen years, the shock-tube method has been of special value for measuring the
rates of dissociation of diatomic molecules. These experimental results have
heightened interest i n the theory of dissociation-recombination. A number of
theoretical models have been proposed which attempt to describe the mechanism
of dissociation and recombination, o r in other words to understand the reactions
from a microscopic -molecular viewpoint.
     However, proper evaluation of these models and further progress in these
areas have been hampered by two problems: (1) Insufficient data are available.
(2) Shock-tube measurements of rate constants have often been imprecise. This
second problem is illustrated in figure IX-1. This Arrhenius plot includes data
from several early shock-tube investigations of bromine (Bra) dissociation in
argon (Ar).
     First, as shown in figure Tx-1, the data are scattered. Second, there is a
lack of close agreement among the investigators. One illustration of the latter
aspect of the problem is the 40-percent difference between the dotted and the
solid lines. These curves represent the results of two experiments made by the
same principal investigator in the same laboratory only a few years apart (see
refs. 1 and 2).
     The present investigator has measured the dissociation rates of B r 2 in the
presence of high concentrations of noble gases. The experimental effort has
achieved two aims: (1) improvement in the reliability of the shock-tube results,
and (2) broadening the scope of the investigation of B r 2 dissociation.
     Improvement in the Br2 results was achieved by plain struggle coupled with
great attention to experimental details. Avoidance of bromine -metal contact,
design of a stable photomultiplier, and achieving a stable light source beam were
essential features of this effort. The present work, of course, relied heavily on
the pioneering Br2 investigations. Those by Palmer and Hornig (ref. 3) and
Britton and Davidson (ref. 4) were of particular value.
     This is the first investigation of B r 2 (or any diatom for that matter) in the
presence of all five nonradioactive noble gases. In conducting the experiments




                                                                                       119
      with helium (He) through xenon (Xe), the m a s s range 4 to 131 was covered.
           Bromine dissociation was selected for theoretical interest - not for direct
      commercial o r space applications. Reliable experimental measurements of
      Bra dissociation help further our general understanding of diatomic dissociation-
      recombination. In the case of theoretical models, establishing in what ways a
      model successfully predicts the rates of the elementary case (diatomic, for ex-
      ample) aids in the development of models which will be able to accurately predict
      the more complex case.
           Studying the dissociation in the presence of high concentrations of five noble
      gases provides useful information on the influence of the collision partner in the
      dissociation reaction. Similar experimental studies have been reported in the
      literature on halogen recombination. Most of these studies were performed at
      room temperature. Recently, Ip and Burns (ref. 5) extended the recombination
      measurements to higher temperatures.
           Collision-partner efficiencies in dissociation and recombination have been
      predicted by several theoretical models. These predictions are examined later.
           Bromine, in many respects, is a convenient substance to work with. It is
      homonuclear; consequently, complicating side reactions a r e avoided. Also, it
      dissociates at relatively low temperatures, and it absorbs light strongly in the
      visible region, which provides a good means of following the course of reaction.



                                            RESULTS

           The B r a - noble gas mixture results a r e plotted in figures E - 2 to E - 6 .
      The scatter of the data is much lower than that of the past investigations (see
      fig. IX-1). In these Arrhenius coordinates the data for all five mixtures display
      linear trends and are correlated quite well by the simple collisional form of the
      rate constant equation AT 1/2, -Ea/RT
           After correcting the data for boundary layer buildup in the shock tube and
      for the contribution to dissociation due to Br2-Bra collisions, the following rate
      constant equations were obtained:




120
       kD, Kr
                = 3. 32X108 T112 exp   (-   32.8
                                                   RT
                                                                       liters/mole -sec




The Br2-Br2 contribution was obtained by comparing the dissociation rate in a
3-percent Bra - 97-percent Xe mixture with the rate in the l-percent B r 2 -
99 -percent Xe mixture.



                      DESCRIPTION OF THEORETICAL MODELS

                                                                         -
    Our understanding of the apparently simple reaction, A2 A + A, has prog-
ressed from the initial breakthrough of explaining how the unimolecular reaction
gets its energy for dissociation, the Lindemann-Hishelwood mechanism:

                         ’    A2 c M z Af + M           (activation)


                                 A;--A+A                (reaction)


                             A2 + M   -A + + A     M    (overall)


Today, there a r e many sophisticated descriptions of the collision mechanism,
involving A2 plus M, accompanied by mathematical predictions of the rate of
dissociation o r of the r e v e r s e process (the rate of recombination).
     Various theoretical models have been proposed for dissociation-recombination.
Some important examples are given in figure M-7. The analysis was limited to
those models with which calculations of absolute reaction rates could b e made.
Those models which expressed their rate constants in t e r m s of unknown param-
eters could not be considered.
     Two classical models were considered first. The nonadiabatic collision model
of Nielsen and Bak can be thought of as hard spheres colliding. Collision of the
molecule with a fast-moving atom transfers energy from the atom to the molecule,




                                                                                          121
      energy necessary for dissociating the molecule.
           In the adiabatic collision model of Light, the spheres are not hard. In fact,
      interaction between the atom and the molecule occurs while they are a consider-
      able distance apart. Unless dissociation occurs during the rather long duration
      of collision, the molecule returns all of the energy that it got from the atom. In
      this case, there is no net energy transfer; that is, the process is adiabatic.
           The third model is Bunker and Davidson's complex formation mechanism,
      which is a recombination model. In the first step the atom A reacts with the
      third body M to produce the complex AM*, a species which has enough energy
      to redissociate. This excess energy is removed from the complex by another
      third body in the second step. Finally, the collision complex reacts with another
      atom to form the diatomic molecule A2.
           The energy transfer mechanism of Benson, Fueno, and Berend is also a
      recombination model. However, in this case no collision complex is formed.
      The first step consists of A plus A forming Ai, a highly energetic species
      which will redissociate unless it can give up some of its energy. It does this by
      transferring energy to third bodies in a series of steps. In their model, this
      transfer occurs essentially one quantum at a time (like one would normally
      descend the rungs of a ladder) until the ground state molecule is formed.
           The theoretical treatment of Keck and Carrier reduces to equations which
      are analogous to thermal diffusion. They describe the rate at which A2 plus M
      cross the phase space boundary to become the dissociated atoms A plus A.



                                    EVALUATION OF MODELS

           Now each of the theories claims to shed some light on the problems of
      (1) describing the mechanism of dissociation-recombination and of (2) being able
      to predict reaction rates. An important difficulty in evaluating the various theo-
      ries is that developers of a theory seldom select that type of experiment result
      which will make their theory look bad. For example, if their theory predicts a
      negative temperature coefficient in recombination (a well-known characteristic
      of recombination), then they will use the "ability to predict negative temperature
      coefficient in recombination" as the criterion of 'Tgoodness of prediction". Other
      criteria will receive minimum attention o r be ignored completely. This is
      human nature.
           The experimental Br2 dissociation results presented in this paper have been
      used as the basis for a n evaluation of the five previously discussed theoretical
      models. Three models are essentially dissociation models (Nielson and Bak,




122
Light, and Keck and Carrier), while two are essentially recombination models
(Bunker and Davidson, and Benson, Fueno, and Berend). All five models are
compared as to how well they (1) predict the measured dissociation rate con-
stants, (2) predict the effect of temperature on the rate constants, that is, the
activation energy, and (3) predict the efficiencies of the noble gas collision part-
ners.
     We will soon discover that no model excels in all three of these categories
of evaluation. The next few figures illustrate this threefold evaluation.
     Figure M-8 is a comparison of the experimental rate constant line for the
Br2-Ar case with the predictions of the five models. To make the comparison
easier, the experimental dissociation rate constants were converted to recom-
bination rate constants by dividing by the equilibrium constant at the proper tem-
peratures. This is an application of the law of microscopic reversibility or de-
tailed balancing as it is also known.
     Four of the predictions come within an order of magnitude of the experi-
mental result. The Keck-Carrier prediction overshoots by more than an order
of magnitude. However, one obvious flaw which all five models have is the in-
ability to match the experimental slope, the temperature coefficient, which is
related to the activation energy of the dissociation reaction. There is a growing
body of experimental support for the activation energy not being equal to the dis-
sociation energy. This has been found to be the case in polyatomic as well as in
diatomic dissociation.
     An indication of the relative efficiencies of the noble gas collision partners
in B r a dissociation can be gained from figure M-9. Here all five experimental
lines, corresponding to equations (1)to (5), are plotted. The lines fan out at the
low temperature end and tend to converge and cross at higher temperatures. It
 could be said that as a rough first-order statement there are no great differences
among the efficiencies of the five noble gases - that is, nothing like an order of
magnitude difference.


       'During the discussion following the presentation of this paper, Professor John P.
Appleton (M. I. T ) reported that the Keck-Carrier paper contained e r r o r s which were respon-
sible for its prediction of the B r 2 dissociation r a t e s being much too high. He reported further
that correcting these e r r o r s brought the prediction a s close to experiment a s the predictions
of the other four models. Subsequently, in a letter, Professor Appleton states that the Keck-
C a r r i e r paper contained two e r r o r s . The first error was algebraic in nature (see footnote (17)
in ref. 12). The second error was not including the additional statistical correction factor
which accounts for r e c r o s s i n g s of the phase space boundary (see ref. 13). T h i s new calcu-
lation of Br2 dissociation r a t e s in the presence of A r is soon to be published in a detailed
paper by Ven H. Shui, John P. Appleton, and J a m e s C Keck.




                                                                                                             123
           The bar graph in figure M-10 compares the predicted against experimental
      efficiencies of the noble gas collision partners. The comparison is at 1500 K, a
      midrange temperature. The solid b a r s represent the predicted relative efficien-
      cies, while the open bars a r e the experimental efficiencies. Efficiency is ex-
      pressed as a ratio of rate constants. For ease of comparison with each model,
      the experimental efficiency bars are repeated all the way across.
           The best prediction is by the Keck-Carrier model - the worst by the Bunker
      and Davidson model. The Bunker and Davidson model predicts a marked m a s s
      effect, very small for the lightest noble gas, He, and very large for the heaviest
      noble gas, Xe. This is obviously not the case.
           The other three models rank somewhere in between these two extremes. If
      it were not for He, Light's model would rank higher. In fairness, it ought to b e
      said that in h i s published paper Light stated that the adiabatic assumption prob-
      ably does not apply to He.



                                SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

           An investigation of the dissociation rates of B r 2 in the presence of all five
      noble gases has been carried out. The experimental shock tube results were
      sufficiently precise to use as a basis for evaluating five recent theoretical
      dissociation-recombination models. The general conclusions are as follows:
           1. All predictions of the absolute rate constants, except for the Keck-Carrier
      model, were within an order of magnitude of the experimental rate.
           2. One common flaw which all five models had was predicting the wrong tem-
      perature coefficient of kD, that is, the activation energy. In every case, the pre-
      dicted activation energy for dissociation was higher than the experimental value.
           3. Since the measured relative efficiencies of the five noble gases did not vary
      to a great extent, the model which predicted no variation, the Keck-Carrier model,
      came closest. Models such as those of Bunker and Davidson, which predicted a
      marked collision partner effect related to mass, were very far off.
           Certainly diatomic collisions with inert atoms are not the whole story of
      dissociation-recombination. However, these results and the analysis made with
      them should aid the development of theoretical models and lead to a better under-
      standing of dissociation and recombination.




124



                  d
                                   REFERENCES

1. Britton, Doyle: Shock Waves in Chemical Kinetics: Further Studies in the
    Rate of Dissociation of Bromine. J. Phys. Chem., vol. 64, no. 6, J
     1960, pp. 742-745.
2. Johnson, Charles D. ; and Britton, Doyle: Shock Waves i n Chemical Kinetics:
     The U s e of Reflected Shock Waves. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 38, no. 7,
     Apr. 1, 1963, pp. 1455-1462.
3. Palmer, H. B. ; and Hornig, D. F. : Rate of Dissociation of Bromine in
    Shock Waves. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 26, no. 1, Jan. 1957, pp. 98-105.
4. Britton, Doyle; and Davidson, Norman: Shock Waves in Chemical Kinetics.
    Rate of Dissociation of Molecular Bromine. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 25,
    no. 5, Nov. 1956, pp. 810-813.
5. Ip, J. K. K. ; and Burns, George: Recombination of B r Atoms by Flash
     Photolysis Over a Wide Temperature Range. 11. Br2 in He, Ne, Ar, Kr,
     N2, andQ2. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 51, no. 8, Qct. 15, 1969, pp. 3414-
     3424.
6. Nielsen, Svend Erik; and Bak, Thor A. : Hard-Sphere Model for Dissociation
    of Diatomic Molecules. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 41, no. 3, Aug. 1, 1964,
    pp. 665-674.
7. Light, John C . : Dissociation of Gaseous Diatomic Molecules: Classical
     Adiabatic Scattering Approach. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 36, no. 4, Feb. 15,
     1962, pp. 1016-1030.
8. Bunker, Don L. ; and Davidson, Norman: On the Interpretation of Halogen
    Atom RecombinationRates. J. Am. Chem. Soc., vol. 80, no. 19, Oct. 5,
     1958, pp. 5090-5096.
9. Benson, Sidney W. ; and Fueno, Takayuki: Mechanism of Atom Recombination
    by Consecutive Vibrational Deactivations. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 36, no. 6,
    Mar. 15, 1962, pp. 1597-1607.
10. Benson, Sidney W. ; and Berend, George C. : Vibrational Energy Exchange of
     Highly Excited Anharmonic Oscillators. J. Chem.       s . , vol. 40, no. 5,
     Mar. 1, 1964, pp. 1289-1298.
11. Keck, James; and C a r r i e r , George: Diffusion Theory of Nioneqr;liJ.ibrium
     DissociationandRecombination. J. Chem. Phys., vol. 43, no. 7, Oct. 1,
      1965, pp. 2284-2298.




                                                                                      125
      12. Appleton, J. P. ; Steinberg, M. ; and Liquornik, D. J. : Shock-Tube Study of
           Nitrogen Dissociation using Vacuum-Ultraviolet Light Absorption. J. Chem.
           Phys. , vol. 48, no. 2, Jan. 15, 1968, pp. 599-608.
      13. Shui, Ven H. ; Appleton, John P. ; and Keck, J a m e s 6. : The Dissociation
           and Recombination of Nitrogen; A Comparison Between Theory and Ex-
            periment. Publ. No. 70-2, FluidMech. Lab., Dept. Mech. Eng., Mass.
            Inst. Tech., Feb. 1970.




126
                                               0     BRITTON AND DAVIDSON (REF. 4)
                                               0     PALMER AND HORNIG (REF. 3)
                                            ---      BRITTON(REF. 1)
                                                     BRITTON AND JOHNSON (REF. 2)

kD

                                                                          I




     104
                2oO01800 1600    1400              1200
                        TEMPERATURE, K                           CS-53301


Figure E-1.   - Reported results (refs. 1 to 4) of bromine dissociation rate constant in
  presence of argon. The experimental mixtures varied from 1 to 10 percent Br3.
  (Not all experimental data included for refs. 3 and 4 . )




              kD




                                    TEMPERATURE, K               CS-53302

               Figure E-2. - NASA results of bromine dissociation rate
                 constant in presence of argon (1 percent Bra - 99 per-
                 cent Ar) .




                                                                                           127
                 -
                 -
                 _.



           106   =
                 -
                 -
      kD         -
           105
                 -
                 -
                 -
                                                    1




                      m
                      180
                        0 1600         1400       1200
                            TEMPERATURE, K              CS-53298
           Figure IX-4. - Bromine dissociation rate constant in
                                              -
             presence of krypton (1 percent Br2 99 percent Kr),




128
kD




              2OOo 1800 1600   1400          1200
                      TEMPERATURE, K              CS-53297

                  -
     Figure M-5. Bromine dissociation rate constant
       in presence of xenon (1 percent Bra - 99 percent
       Xe).




                                              1200
                      TEMPERATURE, K                CS-53300

Figure M-6. - Bromine dissociation rate constant in pres-
  ence of helium (1 percent Br2 - 79 percent He - 20 per-
  cent Xe). Contribution of Br2-Xe collisions to overall
  dissociation was accounted for by knowing k,, xe. Xenon
  contribution was assumed to be directly related to its
  mole concentration.




                                                               129



     d
          CLASSICAL SCATTERING


          @ + e -QtQ
             1. NONADIABATIC COLLISIONS - IIELSEN-BnI
             2. ADIABATIC COLLISIONS - LIGHT
          COMPLEX FORMATION
                 A t M Z AM’:c
                 AM::; .+ M    AM+M
                 A M + A + A2 + M

             3. BUNKER-DAVIDSON
                                                          CS-5 3 3 0 5


          ENERGY TRANSFER MECHANISM
                                           A + A F A$      L

                                           A $ + M S A (N)
                                                       2 +M

                                           A2( n) + M          A2(n-1)   +




                                            n = 1, 2,   . . ., N
                 4. LADDER DESCENDING - BENSON-FUENO-BEREND
          DIFFUSIONAL THEORY
                            /
                                /   _-PHASE SPACE
                                      BOUNDARY
           A2 + M          A+A+M



                5. KECK-CARRIER                                     -
                                                                 CS 5 330 3


              Figure M-7. - Dissociation-recombination models.




130



      d
    .4x1010


                                                    r WARSHAY (EXPERIMENTAL)
    .l-                                         I
   .08 -                                                           N-FUENO-BEREND


                                                    -
kR .06-
         -
   .04                                        e         BUNKER-DAVIDSON

   .02 -                                      --     NIELSEN-BAK

   .01
             2000 1800 1600           1400              1200
                   TEMPERATURE, K                           CS- 5 32 9 6

         Figure M-8.- Rate constant predictions against experiment.




                 lo7   €                      M = He, Ne, Ar, Kr, AND Xe




     kD, M




                 -_AI       l    lI      II              I H e '   \A I
                 lov '      I                            I

                           2000 1800 1600
                                      TEMPERATURE, K                      CS- 5 3 2 9 4

             Figure E-9. - Dissociation rate constants in noble gases.




                                                                                          13 1
                                   0     EXPERIMENTAL             CALCULATED

      EFFlC IENCY            KEC K-      NlELSEN-      BENSON-        LIGHT      BUNKER-
      (1500 K)              CARRIER        BAK         FUENO-                   DAVIDSON
                                                       BEREND
                    2.0 -
        kD He
        A
        kD, A r     loo:
                      0
                              [I            0
                                                          [II                       ai
        kD, AKr     l=0 ~:
                    2.0 -
                              m              m
        kDJXe       1.0 -
        kD, A r
                      0-      d             d
                                                                              CS-53306
        Figure IX-10. - Collision partner efficiencies (predicted against experimental).




132
            X.    CHEMICAL KINETIC COMPUTATIONS IN
                          M U L T l R E A C T 1 ON S Y S T E M S
                                   David A. Bittker

     The previous papers have shown that the changes occurring in a complex
reacting gas are the result of many individual chemical reactions occurring at
the same time. Recently there has been considerable interest in being able to
calculate accurately the time history of these complicated reactions. If we
want to do this without neglecting some of the less important steps, we will have
to solve a system of differential equations, usually on a digital computer. This
type of exact kinetic calculation is useful in many types of problems. Two dif-
ferent approaches can b e used: First, reliable experimental data can be used
to study the details of a reaction mechanism and to determine individual rate
constant values. This is done by studying
     (1) Kinetics behind a shock wave
     (2) Kinetics of reaction in a complex static system
     On the other hand, known o r estimated rate constants can be used to cal-
culate practical things such as
     (1) Kinetic rocket performance
     (2) Ignition delays in combustible mixtures
     (3) Ignition lengths and nozzle performance in supersonic flow
An example of each of these approaches is given later.



                          THEORY AND PRACTICAL PROBLEMS

     The fundamental equations of kinetics, thermodynamics, and fluid flow are
well known. The m a s s continuity equations for each individual species are ob-
tained from the chemical kinetics equations. As a typical example, consider a
system containing the species H2,02, 0,H, and OH.
     The following three reversible reactions can occur:

                                           kA
                                  H+02     Z OH+O
                                            -A




                                                                                    133



                      d
                                    O + H 2 Z OH+H
                                            -B

                                             kc
                                   H2tOH     Z H20+H
                                              -C

           Each forward rate constant can be expressed by a three constant equation as
      a function of temperature T:

                                                  -E,/RT
                                      ki = ATne                                      (1)

      where A is the preexponential factor, n the temperature exponent, Ea the a c -
      tivation energy, and R the universal gas constant. The law of detailed balancing
      is used to express the relation between forward and reverse rate constant as




      where K      is the equilibrium constant. From reactions A, B, and C the species
               eq
      continuity equation for production of H2 at any time is




      where the brackets indicate molar concentrations of the different species. Similar
      equations are written for each species present. For each reaction we define the
      net reaction rate Xi as the difference between the forward and the reverse rate.
      For reaction B,




      Each Xi is useful as a first estimate of the importance of a single reaction
      among the many occurring in a reacting gas.
          In practice, the species continuity equations are combined with the momentum
      and energy continuity equations and the equation of state for the gas mixture. The




134
result is a set of differential equations that must be integrated numerically.
     The major practical problem in this work is finding an integration technique
that will not only give good answers but give them efficiently in all experimental
situations (ref. 1). The most difficult conditions to handle are the extremes of
either very slow o r very fast reaction. An example of slow reaction is an ignition
process with a long delay. The near-equilibrium flow in a rocket nozzle is a
good example of fast reaction.



                           EXAMPLES OF COMPUTATIONS

               Using Experimental Data to Study Single Reactions

    As a first application of exact kinetic calculations, we used some recently
published experimental data to study the detailed mechanism of the hydrogen-
oxygen reaction. Shown in figure X-1 a r e the data of Baldwin and his coworkers
(ref. 2) giving H202production and pressure change during the reaction of hy-
drogen and oxygen. The reaction took place in a static system at constant vol-
ume. The gas temperature was held constant at 500' C y and the starting mix-
ture contained an excess of H2 (86 mole percent). Baldwin used an approximate
kinetic analysis to predict only the maximum peroxide concentration that would
occur in any single experiment. This is much easier than calculating the com-
plete H202concentration and pressure change against time curves. We per -
formed computations to find out whether, indeed, both the curves shown in fig-
ure X-1 could be calculated for the experiment using a single set of reaction
rate constants.
     Table X-1 shows the complete reaction mechanism used to describe this
reacting mixture. Of the 12 listed, reactions 11, III, and N have rate constants
which a r e quite accurately known. They have been discussed in the earlier
paper by Brabbs. Our first calculations showed that there are only five reac-
tions which really have a significant effect on the observed results. These have
been marked with an asterisk in table X-1. The reaction

                                  Ha + O2 z OH + OH                                        I

is the initiation step that provides the f r e e radicals which participate in a branch-
ing chain mechanism. This is the same mechanism described in the previous




                                                                                               135
      paper by Belles. The resulting radicals a r e used in the following reactions which
      control H202 production and pressure change:

                                     H + 0 2 + M zHOZ + M                                 V




                                    H202 c M =OH +OH + M                                VII


                                    H02 + H02 t H202 + 0 2                              VIII


      The rate constants f o r these reactions are not accurately known, so that they may
      be changed within limits if necessary.
           Figure X-2(a) shows our first attempt to calculate, independently, both the
      experimental curves in figure X-1. For these calculations the best available lit-
      erature rate constants were used for all the reactions in table X-1. The agree-
      ment between calculated and experimental curves is quite poor for both H202 mole
      fraction and the pressure change Ap. We then made many repeat calculations of
      these two curves, using each time a different set of changed rate constants for the
      five reactions just listed as important. We must emphasize that the rate constad
      changes were always within the uncertainty limits given in the literature. A mod-
      ified set of rate constants was finally found which gave much better agreement be-
      tween calculation and experiment. The comparison for this new set of rate con-
      stants is shown in figure X-2(b).
           The necessary percentage change f o r each rate constant is shown in table X-2.
      That the largest change was needed f o r the H2 + O2 initiation step is not surprising,
      for no experimental value exists in the literature f o r its rate constant. Moreover,
      the estimates available are quite approximate. On the other hand, the peroxide
      decomposition rate constant was found to need no change at all after several trials.
      The rate constant given for this reaction W in the Leeds University rate constant
      survey was found to do the best job of reproducing the experimental results. This
      is a rather interesting coincidence, since the Leeds survey indicates a rather
      large uncertainty in this rate constant. Of course, a single reaction cannot really
      be isolated in this type of study. Therefore, in making any judgment interactions
      have t o be considered among all of the reactions I, V, W, Vm, and IX. No
      quantitative e r r o r analysis was used. We judged "goodness of fit" for each trial
      by inspection of very accurate graphs. One qualitative factor considered was how




136
well any calculated H202 concentration curve followed the shape of the experimen-
tal curve, especially near its maximum.
      In summary, what can be concluded? First, we are able to suggest small ad-
justments in the literature values of four rate constants to make a better f i t with
the overall results from one experiment. However, we recognize that the rough
fitting of two simple curves using five adjustable constants does not define these
constants with great precision. But if one o r two additional sets of experimental
data were added and the constants adjusted t o give a good f i t for the two o r three
overall reactions, then the several detailed kinetic rates could be established with
good precision. Therefore the importance of this work is to suggest that the back
calculation, by high speed computer methods, of detailed kinetic rates from two
or three careful experiments can be a very powerful tool in establishing these
rates precisely.



            Using Known Rate Constants for Practical Computations

     As mentioned before, rate constants can be used to calculate a quantity that
depends on them in a complicated way. As an example, we show how rocket per-
formance is calculated f o r a complicated propellant system, oxygen difluoride
(OF2) and diborane (B2Hs). The engine is shown schematically in figure X-3.
Propellants mix and react in the chamber, where the residence time (-10 msec)
is long enough for all reactions to reach equilibrium. Many high energy species,
atoms and f r e e radicals, are formed at the combustion temperature of 4143 K.
The combustion mixture is then expanded into the diverging nozzle section where
the gases a r e rapidly accelerated and cooled. Rocket performance is really meas-
ured simply by the velocity of the hot gas at the nozzle exit point. It is clear,
then, that the kinetic energy of the nozzle g a s must be kept as high as possible.
This kinetic energy is increased by the chemical recombination reactions which
occur in the nozzle. These reactions convert the high potential energy atoms and
free radicals into low energy stable molecules. Because residence time is very
short (-1 msec) in the nozzle, there may not be enough time for all the possible
 recombinations to take place. Therefore, to accurately calculate rocket perform-
ance we must know what chemical reactions occur and also the rate of each one.
     To see what important reactions occur in the nozzle we can look at the partial
gas compositions shown in table X-3. These two compositions are calculated for
the chamber and for the nozzle exit position at equilibrium conditions. Comparing
these two compositions shows two things. First, only seven o r eight species make
up at least 97 percent of the gas mixture, even in this complicated system. Second,




                                                                                         137



                    d
      there are only two important composition changes between chamber and nozzle exit:
      the H atoms are converted to H2 molecules and the BOF mole fraction increases.
           Table X-4 shows the important part of the reaction mechanism that was used
      in our kinetic performance calculations. Several of the minor species were used
      in these reactions so that no small effects would be neglected. For each reaction
      two importance rating factors were calculated. The first is the net reaction rate
      Xi illustrated in equation (4). This factor shows that the first two reactions a r e
      about equally important in controlling the results. We mentioned, however, that
      heat release is a n important factor to be considered in rocket performance. The
      heat of reaction AH has, therefore, been listed in table X-4 for each reaction.
      These values show that the three-body recombination reactions like H + H -I- M
      have much larger heats of reaction than the bimolecular shuffle reactions such as
      BO -I- HF. We have used AH to calculate a second rating factor, the energy
       release rate. This factor is proportional to the product of the net reaction rate
      and A H for each reaction, and it is a much more realistic performa.nce rating
      factor. It is given on a percentage basis in table X-4.
           Using the energy release rate significantly changes the quantitative ranking
      of the first two reactions in the table. Now the H + H + M recombination clearly
      predominates over all other reactions. It accounts for half of the total heat r e -
      lease into the expanding gases. This is a very fortunate thing because the rate
       constant for this reaction is the best known of any of the reactions listed. A few
       calculations showed that most of the other rate constants for the reactions of
      table X-4 had t o be known only to order of magnitude accuracy for our present
      purposes.
           The results of these performance calculations a r e shown in figure X-4 plotted
      as vacuum specific impulse against oxidant-fuel ratio. The top curve shows the
      best performance obtainable from the OF2 -B2H6combination. This calculation
       assumes fast reaction rates in the nozzle, s o equilibrium is maintained. The bot-
      tom curve assumes that all reaction rates are z e r o in the nozzle. The gas com-
       position stays the same as it was in the chamber. The kinetic curve is closer to
      the equilibrium line, but still well below it. The data points shown a r e unpublished
       experimental measurements obtained by the Rocketdyne Laboratory under NASA
       contract. They have been corrected for various losses including friction and heat
      transfer losses in the nozzle and combustion inefficiencies in the chamber. The
       nozzle corrections are those calculated by U. A. C. Research Laboratories (ref. 3),
      while the combustion inefficiencies are the experimental values measured by
       Rocketdyne. The experimental data agree with the kinetically calculated curve to
       about 1 percent o r four to six impulse points. The discrepancy may be due to ex-
       perimental e r r o r in the combustion efficiency measurement's as well as computa-




138



                     c
tion uncertainties. The important result is that we have been able to predict rocket
performance fairly accurately for this one system. The ability to predict specific
impulse accurately is important to rocket designers. Especially in upper stage
vehicles, useful payload depends very strongly on specific impulse.
     This example shows that a complex reaction can sometimes b e studied without
knowing all the rate constants involved. This can be done when only one or two
reactions are controlling and when these rate constants a r e accurately known.



                              COMPUTER PROGRAM

     A new computer program for general chemical kinetics computations has
been developed at the Lewis Research Center. This program can be used for the
following types of kinetics problem:
     (1)Reaction behind a shock wave
     (2) Ignition kinetics
     (3) Reacting one -dimensional flow
          (a) All subsonic
          (b) All supersonic
     (4) Reaction in a complex static mixture
     The program is designed for special convenience in performing shock kinetics
and ignition kinetics computations. A flow problem that this general kinetics pro-
gram will not handle is one in which the flow velocity changes from subsonic to
supersonic values. It will not, then, be useful for a complete rocket nozzle ex-
pansion through a sonic throat. We have a separate program specially made to
perform these rocket nozzle calculations.
     Next some of the special features of the general chemical kinetics program
will be described.



                                General Chemistry

    Any chemical system can be studied. The gas mixture may contain any
species with known thermodynamic properties. And any chemical reaction among
these species may be used, if the reaction's rate constant is known.




                                                                                       139
                                      Computation Efficiency

          A modified implicit integration technique was developed for this program by
      Vincent J. Scullin of the Lewis Research Center. It is designed to work effi-
      ciently for all reaction conditions, siow or fast.



                                            Area Profile

             Any one-dimensional area profile may b e assigned in a flow reaction. The
      u s e r may submit a list of individual a r e a against distance coordinates, or one
      of the two built-in a r e a equations may be used. These are, first, a cubic poly-
      nomial in distance, x:

                                     A = c0 + CIX + C ~ 2X+ c3x3


      Second, the special equation


                                           A=        1


                                                1-   ($J
      where L, and 17 a r e constants. This equation is used only in shock kinetics
      calculations. It applies the corrections for boundary layer buildup in the shock
      tube according to the theory of Mirels (refs. 4 and 5 ) .



                                       Optional Constraints

          In any reaction being studied, the temperature or volume o r both may b e
      held constant.



                                      Convenience Features

          We have made the program easy to use in several ways. Input data cards a r e
      simple to prepare. The user has a choice of three different sets of units for input
      and output. One of these is the System6 International. In addition, the program




140
performs equilibrium combustion and nonreacting shock computations. The pro -
gram has an option to use the results of these frozen shock calculations to start
a kinetic shock computation. Finally, the u s e r has a choice of integration v a r -
iable: Either time or distance may b e used as the fundamental integration variable
in any problem.



                                     SUMMARY

      We have shown the usefulness of exact chemical kinetic computations for
complex mixtures by illustrating two different approaches. These are (1) using
experimental data with the computations to evaluate individual rate constants in
a mechanism and (2) using known rate constants to compute practical things like
rocket performance. The need for a good integration technique for all conditions
w a s briefly mentioned and a computer program is described which performs
many types of kinetic calculation quite efficiently.



                                    REFERENCES

1. Lomax, Harvard; and Bailey, H a r r y E. : A Critical Analysis of Various
    Numerical Integration Methods for Computing the Flow of a Gas in Chemical
    Nonequilibrium. NASA TN D-4109, 1967.
2. Baldwin, R. R. ; Rossiter, B. N. ; and Walker, R. W. : Hydrogen Peroxide
    Yields in the Hydrogen c Oxygen Reaction. Trans. Faraday SOC., vol. 65,
    no. 556, Apr. 1969, pp. 1044-1050.
3 . Sarli, V. J.; Bender, L. S. ; Aceto, L. D.; and Burwell, W. G. : Kinetic
     Flow Performance in Nozzles. Rep. H910666-15, United Aircraft Corp.
     (NASACR-72600), Dec. 5, 1969, p. 14.
4. Mirels, H. : Flow Nonuniformity in Shock Tubes Operating at Maximum T e s t
    Times. Phys. Fluids, vol. 9, no. 10, Oct. 1966, pp. 1907-1912.
5. Mirels, Harold: Shock Tube T e s t Time Limitation Due to Turbulent-Wall
    Boundary Layer. AIAA J., vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 1964, pp. 84-93.




                                                                                        141
                        TABLE X-1.      - MECHANISM FOR
                        HYDROGEN-OXYGEN REACTION

                       Reactior:            Reaction
                       number

                         I
                                   *Ha + 0 2 t OH + OH
                         11         HZ + OH z H20 + H
                         111        H+02tOH+0
                         IV         0 + H2 z OH + H
                         V         *H + o2 + M t H O +  ~M
                         VI         H + H 0 2 = O H + OH
                         VII       * H ~ o+ ~M = O H + OH + h
                         VIII      *H02 + H02 t H202 + O2
                         IX        *H02 + H2 z H202 + H
                         X          H + H202 t H20 + OH
                         XI         OH + HZ02 z H 2 0 + HO2
                         XII        0 + H20 t OH + OH




      Reaction         Reaction              Rate constant at T = 500' C (CGSunits)
      number
                                              Literature Adjusted values       Percent
                                               values                          change

        I        H2 + O2 z OH + O H               23. 6            7.01            70
        V        H + O2 + M = H02 + M         3 . 0 5 ~ 1 0 ~ ~1 . 6 3 ~ 1 0 ~ ~   47
        VI1      H202 + M z OH + OH + M       1.61x1O4         1. 61x1O4            0
        VIII     HO2 + HO2 z H202 + 0 2       1. 8X101'        1. 3X101'           28
        M        H 0 2 + H2 z HZOZ + H        1. 58X106        1. 15X106           27




142
              TABLE X-3.     - GAS COM-
               POSITION FOR OF2-B2Hg

               ROCKETPROPELLANT

               [Mole fractions assuming
                 fast reactions. ]

               Species Chamber         Exit

                H        0.2910     0.0744
                HF        .2521      .2648
                BOF       .1955      .3049
                H2        .1417      .3281
                BF        .0423      .0168
                BO        .0258      .0007
                          .0152      . 0001
                          .0075     ' .oooo


      TABLE X-4.   - RANKING OF REACTIONS IN
               OF2-B2H6 MECHANISM

              [Equivalence ratio = 1.63. ]

                        (et reaction        AH,     Energy
                           rate,          <cal/mole release
                         percent                     rate,
                                                    per cent

H + H + M r H2 + M          32. 3             -104         53.1
BO + HF t BOF + H           26.8               -33         13.9
H + F + M t HF + M           5.1              -136         11.1
H +OH + M t H 2 0 + M        5.2              -119          9.8
B F 1- OH z BOF + H          3.9               -58          3.5
F + H2 t HF + H              4. 5              -32          2.3
HZ + OH t H20 + H            9.7                -15         2.3
B F + 0 t BO + F             9.3                 +8    ~    1.2
H + BFZ t HF + B F           2.4                -2 5        1.0
BO + F + M t BOF + M           .3             -169            .7
B F + 0 + M t BOF + M         .2              -160            .6
0 + H + M t OH + M             .3             -102            .5
   Total                   100.0                           100.0




                                                                   143
                                                                      PRESSURE
          H202                                                        CHANGE,
      MOLE FRACTION
                                                                       mmHg




                                                                  "
                        0      20   40 60 80          100   120
                                      TIME, SEC                   CS-53308

      Figure X-1. - Hydrogen-oxygen reaction at constant temperature and volume.
        Data from reference 2; temperature, 500' C; pressure, 500 millimeters
        of mercury; 86 mole percent Hz and 14 mole percent 02.




144



            d
                                                                PRESSURE
    H202                                                        CHANGE,
MOLE FRACTION                                                    mmHg




                  0      20     40 60 80          100 120
                                  TIME, SEC                  cs- 53309
                         (a) Literature rate constants.




                                                                 PRES S UR E
    H202                                                         CHANGE,
MOLE FRACTION                                                     mmHg




                  0       20    40 60' 80          100 120
                                  TIME, SEC                  cs -53307
                         (b) Adjusted rate constants.

  Figure X-2. - Calculated and experimental results for hydrogen-oxygen.
    Temperature, 500' C.




                                                                               145
       T = 4143 K                                                   T=2400K
       p = 100 PSlA                  T = 3933 K
                                     U = 4700 FTlSEC    ‘ I   U = 12 OOO FTISEC
       U-200 FllSEC                                    RESIDENCE TIME- 1MSEC

      RESIDENCE TIME, -10 MSEC


                                                                  CS- 53252

       Figure X-3. - Rocket engine conditions for OF2-B2H6 propellant.       Equiva-
         lence ratio, 1.63.




                          4r;n
                          450
                                 -                                     EQUlLlBRIUM
                                                                            C
                                                                       KINUIC


      VACUUM SPECIFIC 410
          IMPULSE,
          IMPUI
        LBF-SECILBM   390        t                                     FROZEN

                          370    t                      0 EXPERIMENTAL DATA
                                                            (CORRECTED)
                          350
                            2.0
                                 I        I
                                         2.4
                                                 I
                                               2.8
                                                      I
                                                     3.2
                                                             I
                                                           3.6
                                                                   I
                                                                  4.0
                                          OXIDANT-FUEL RATIO       CS- 5 3 3 10

      Figure X-4. - Performance of OF2-B2H6 rocket propellant.    Chamber pres-
        sure, 100 psia.




146                                                                    NASA-Langley, 1970 - 3 3   E-5596

