---
title: Estimated aerodynamics of all-body hypersonic aircraft configurations
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19710010231
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19710010231
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-17
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: ccb1ac9c3e09f629eee4f18753dc203235a8271913085c5b1ab1cef8cc38f0bf
pages: 39
words: 5866
cv_look_pages: 6
---

N A S A TECHNICAL.                      JiHP^Ki              NASA TM X-2091
           MEMORANDUM


CD
CM




as
                                    C
                                                        4'




ESTIMATED AERODYNAMICS OF ALL-BODY
HYPERSONIC AIRCRAFT CONFIGURATIONS

by Lams J. Williams
Office of Advanced Research and Technology          *
Mission Analysis Division
Moffett Field, Calif. 94035


NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION . WASHINGTON, D. C. - MARCH 1971
 1. Report No.                                      2. Government Accession No.                           3. Recipient's Catalog No.
       NASA TM X-2091
 4. Title and Subtitle                                                                                     5. Report Date
                                                                                                             March 1971
       ESTIMATED AERODYNAMICS OF                    All   ROHY HVPPR^OMIP
                                                                                                          6. Performing Organization Code
       AIRCRAFT CONFIGURATIONS

 7. Author(s)                                                                                             8. Performing Organization Report No.

       Louis J. Williams                                                                                      A-3637
                                                                                                          10. Work Unit No.
 9. Performing Organization Name and Address                                                                  789-50-01-01-15
       Office of Advanced Research and Technology
                                                                                                          11. Contract or Grant No.
       Mission Analysis Division
       Moffett Field, Calif. 94035
                                                                                                          13. Type of Report and Period Covered
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address                                                                        Technical Memorandum
       National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                                                                                          14. Sponsoring Agency Code
       Washington, D. C. 20546


15. Supplementary Notes




16. Abstract



                       The results of analyses for estimating the aerodynamics of a representative family of all-body
                 hypersonic aircraft configurations are presented. The configuration body shape is a delta planform
                 with an elliptical cone forebody and an elliptical cross-section afterbody. Semiempirical and
                 theoretical predictions of the aerodynamic characteristics of the forebody are compared with
                 available experimental data to show the reliability of the basic methods.

                       Results are presented for aerodynamic performance, surface temperatures, and static
                 longitudinal and directional stability. Aerodynamic perf&rmance of the all-body configurations is
                 presented in the form of th'e'effe'ct'pn co.mplete configuration maximum lift-to-drag ratio of Mach
                 number, configuration geometry, and maximum allowable leading-edge temperature. Variations in
                 the basic all-body shape were investigated using three independent;',-shape: parameters; body
                 leading-edge sweep, position of breakpoint between forebody and afterbody', and ratio of maximum
                 cross section to body planform area. The third shape parameter had the strongest influence on the
                 aerodynamic performance.

                       Studies of the radiation equilibrium surface temperature show that the temperatures on the
                 lower surface resulting from the inherent low lift loading of the all-body configuration are less than
                 would be expected for higher lift-loading configurations. A brief analysis of vehicle stability and
                 control showed that using a canard for trim instead of horizontal fins reduced trim drag penalties.




17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s))                                       18. Distribution Statement

      Aerodynamics
      All-Body Hypersonic Aircraft                                                                    Unclassified— Unlimited




19. Security Classif. (of this report)              20. Security Classif. (of this page)                   21. No. of Pages      22. Price"

                   Unclassified                                           Unclassified                             37                  $3.00



                             For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia      22151
                                     SYMBOLS


a       speed of sound, ft/sec

ao      speed of sound at sea level, ft/sec
n

u       major/minor axis ratio of fore body elliptical cross sections
                          span2
AR      aspect ratio,
                        plan area

bpiN    fin span, ft

Cj      coefficient multiplying sin a in CL expression

C2      coefficient multiplying sin2 a in CL expression

C£)RR   bluntness drag coefficient for body (nose)


Crjop   bluntness drag coefficient for fins (leading edges)


CDFR    friction drag coefficient for body

C-DpF   friction drag coefficient for fins

CD-     induced drag coefficient

Cn      zero-lift drag coefficient

C-DOR   zero-lift drag coefficient for body

C-DOF   zero-lift drag coefficient for fins

CD D    pressure drag coefficient for body

CD p    pressure drag coefficient for fins

CDY     drag coefficient of type X

CDY     drag coefficient of ty pe X for fins
             lift coefficient

c,           moment coefficient about body center of gravity

cp           pressure coefficient

     P? D    two-dimensional truncated base pressure coefficient

C            pressure coefficient on configuration afterbody
    PBASE

e            base of natural logarithms

h            altitude, ft

KM           Mach number coefficient for Crj. equation
             body length, ft

             forebody length, ft


                            lift
             maximum               ratio
                            drag
       MAX

_L
S            planform lift loading, lb/ft 2

M            Mach number

             mean aerodynamic chord of body, ft

(MAC)pIN     mean aerodynamic chord of fin, ft

M
     CRIT    critical Mach number for Mach cone intersection with forebody surface


                                                 i.o




M MAX        Mach number for maximum nose and fin leading-edge radiation equilibrium
                 temperature

M0           free-stream Mach number

MSA          Mach number for shock attachment to leading edge

IV
q             dynamic pressure, lb/ft 2

Re            Reynolds number
r             fin leading-edge radius, ft
    LE FIN

r
    NOSE      nose radius, ft

S             plan form area, ft2

STT           maximum cross-sectional area, ft2

S
    CA        canard planform area, ft2

S
        FIN   fin planform area, ft2

S
    HT        total horizontal fin planform area, ft2

S
        REF   reference area used in aerodynamic coefficients (body planform area), ft2

S
    VT        total vertical fin profile area, ft2

S
    WET       wetted surface area, ft2

(SWET)F]      wetted surface area of fin, ft2



(-1
\C/BODY
              thickness ratio of body



              thickness ratio of fin
V/FIN
    I         leading-edge radiation equilibrium temperature, °R
        LE
w,GTO         gross takeoff weight, lb

              length of boundary-layer run used in Re, ft

y             semispan station (length from centerline/semispan)
a

              angle of attack, deg
0          compressibility factor (|M2 — I I ) 1 ' 2

7          ratio of specific heats

5          deflection angle, deg

           canard deflection angle with respect to body (positive = leading edge up), deg

           horizontal fin deflection angle with respect to body (positive = leading edge up),
                deg

e          emissivity
e
    SKIN   surface emissivity

0g         included angle of body, deg

X          fin taper ratio

A          leading-edge sweep angle, measured from axis perpendicular to body centerline, deg

           fin leading-edge sweep angle, deg

           free-stream coefficient of viscosity, Ib sec/ft2

           density, slugs/ft3

           gross body density (gross takeoff weight/theoretical body volume), lb/ft 3

           free-stream air density, slugs/ft3

           sea-level air density, slugs/ft3


3Qn/-ip
—          partial derivative of Cmrr with respect to a, 1 /deg




VI
                 ESTIMATED AERODYNAMICS OF ALL-BODY HYPERSONIC

                                  AIRCRAFT CONFIGURATIONS

                                            Louis J. Williams

                             Office of Advanced Research and Technology
                                        Mission Analysis Division
                                    Moffett Field, California 94035


                                              SUMMARY


      The results of analyses for estimating the aerodynamics of a representative family of all-body
hypersonic aircraft configurations are presented. The configuration body shape is a delta planform
with an elliptical cone forebody and an elliptical cross-section afterbody. Semiempirical and
theoretical predictions of the aerodynamic chracteristics of the forebody are compared with available
experimental data to show the reliability of the basic methods. Areas in the aerodynamic analysis
lacking in proven analytical prediction methods or experimental data are noted.

       Results are presented for aerodynamic performance, surface temperatures, and static
longitudinal and directional stability. Aerodynamic performance of the all-body configurations is
presented in the form of the effect on complete configuration maximum lift-to-drag ratio of Mach
number, configuration geometry, and maximum allowable leading-edge temperature. The effect due to
configuration geometry, particularly the body shape, was most pronounced. Variations in the basic
all-body shape were investigated using three independent shape parameters; body leading-edge sweep,
position of breakpoint between forebody and afterbody, and ratio of maximum cross section to body
planform area. The third shape parameter had the strongest influence on the aerodynamic
performance.

       Studies of the radiation equilibrium surface temperature show that the temperatures on the
lower surface resulting from the inherent low lift loading of the all-body configuration are less than
would be expected for higher lift-loading configurations. Vehicle stability was analyzed briefly to
obtain nominal required horizontal and vertical fin sizes for the aerodynamic performance
calculations. This analysis also showed that using a canard for trim instead of horizontal fins reduced
trim drag penalties.


                                           INTRODUCTION


        Hypersonic aircraft powered by hydrogen-fueled scramjet propulsion systems have shown
potentially high performance for both cruise and boost missions. A characteristic of these aircraft is a
large-volume fuselage required for the low-density hydrogen fuel. Attempts to optimize these
configurations have resulted in various degrees of wing and fuselage blending. The limit of this blending
is a wingless configuration in which the fuselage provides all the lift.
       As part of a mission analysis of such all-body configurations, the estimation of their
aerodynamics was investigated. For the purposes of a parametric study, simplified aerodynamic
calculation methods and a simply defined configuration shape were used. The configurations are of
delta planform with an elliptical cone forebody and an elliptical cross-section afterbody. A given
configuration was specified by the values of three independent body shape parameters: the sweep-
back of the body leading edge; the position of the breakpoint between the forebody and afterbody;
and the ratio of the maximum cross section to body planform area. Results are presented in terms
of the maximum lift-to-drag ratio for complete configurations including fins.

       In conjunction with the aerodynamic analyses, the vehicle stability and surface temperatures at
hypersonic speed were studied. The important equations used in the aerodynamic calculations are
given in an appendix.


                                          CONFIGURATION


      Figure 1 compares an all-body configuration and a typical wing-body configuration. With the
simply defined, all-body configuration shown on the right in figure 1, shape changes are specified by
varying major shape parameters,1 thus facilitating the aerodynamic calculations.

        The nominal configuration studied is shown in figure 2. The body has a delta planform, with an
elliptical cone forebody and an elliptical cross-section afterbody that forms a smooth transition surface
from the end of the forebody to a straight-line trailing edge. The shape is specified by three
independent parameters: (1) The sweepback of the body leading edge, A; (2) the position of the
breakpoint between the forebody and afterbody, specified as the breakpoint length ratio, 1-^/1; and
(3) the fatness ratio specified as the ratio of the maximum cross-section area to the total planform
area S^/S. For l^jl values greater than 0.5 the longitudinal location of maximum cross-section area
and breakpoint coincide. The nominal vehicle shape shown in figure 2 (A =75°, 1^/1-0.661,
STT/S = 0.0935) does not represent an optimum or preferred configuration, but was selected as a base
point for the parametric studies.

       The fatness ratio parameter was chosen so that the effect of changes in sweep angle and
breakpoint length ratio would not be dominated by a change in the frontal area. The algebraic
relationship between the shape parameters chosen and the forebody cross-section ellipse ratio a/b is
shown in figure 3. For constant fatness ratio, the forebody ellipse ratio varies with the square of the
breakpoint length ratio and the cotangent of the sweep.

       In addition to variations of the shape parameters, parametric variations of the gross takeoff
weight, gross body density (defined as gross weight divided by theoretical body volume), maximum
allowable leading-edge radiation equilibrium temperature, and control surface size were performed.
The nominal gross weight was 500,000 pounds and the gross body density was 7.0 pounds per cubic
foot. This corresponds to a theoretical body volume of 71,400 cubic feet.
                          METHODS OF ESTIMATING AERODYNAMICS


                                                  lift

        The basic configuration aerodynamics were calculated using a computer program which
incorporated the equations outlined in the appendix. The lift (and induced drag) equations for the
basic body were estimated by means of nonlinear relations similar to those used in reference 1 for a
delta wing. These equations were developed by curve fitting data for low aspect ratio wings from
references 2, 3, and 4 and applying Gothert's rule or shock-expansion theory, where applicable. The
coefficients used in these equations were modified to account for the rounded leading edge of the
all-body configuration, which causes linear subsonic variation of the elliptic-cone lift coefficient as
opposed to the significant nonlinear variation present for the sharp leading edge of a delta wing. This
comparison is shown in figure 4 for a Mach number of 0.6; the effect of Mach number on the estimated
elliptic cone lift coefficient is also shown. These curves agreed well with experimental data from
reference 5. Figure 5 shows the effect of shape on the estimated lift coefficient; also shown are
experimental data from reference 6 which show agreement. At present, experimental data are available
only for the elliptical cone forebody. The estimation equations used depend only on planform shape,
but agree well with thick or thin elliptical cone shapes. Therefore, the effect of the body thickness
distribution of the all-body configuration on the lift curve is neglected.


                                             Induced Drag

       The induced drag relation used the equation for the sharp leading-edge delta wing modified by a
coefficient to account for the rounded leading edge of the elliptic cone, which resulted in lea ding-edge
suction subsonically. The effect of shape on the induced drag and a comparison with experimental data
are given in figure 6. The effect of Mach number on the induced drag is shown in figure 7. These curves
correlated well with experimental data.


                                          Zero- Lift Body Drag

      The zero-lift drag coefficient Cj)m of the basic body was obtained by adding the pressure (or
wave), skin friction, and nose bluntness drag components. The Mach number range determined the
method used to calculate each of these components.

       Body pressure drag— Subsonically (M<0.8), the pressure drag was assumed zero; normally
this term would be small and the hypersonic vehicle mission performance is relatively insensitive to
subsonic drag because of small loiter time subsonically. Transonically (0.8 < M < 1.2), the pressure
drag was assumed to vary linearly with Mach number.

       Supersonically (1.2 < M < M^j^jj), the wave drag was obtained by numerical integration of
the body pressure distribution. For M < MQ^J j (the critical Mach number for the intersection of
the Mach cone with the forebody surface), the forebody pressure distribution was calculated by the
second-order elliptic cone equations developed by Van Dyke (ref. 7). The resulting forebody
pressure distributions for elliptic cones with two values of a/b are compared in figure 8 with
experimental data from reference 6. The cross section of each elliptic cone is shown above the
corresponding data. The agreement with experimental data is excellent. The afterbody pressure
distribution was estimated by assuming a Prandtl-Meyer expansion from the forebody pressures at
the breakpoint. As indicated in figure 9, the expansion angle was determined from cross sections
taken along rays emanating from the body nose. Note that xy is a straight line along the afterbody;
this follows because the afterbody is composed of elliptic cross sections whose major and minor
axes vary linearly with body length. The pressure distribution on the afterbody was obtained by
calculating the Prandtl-Meyer expansion of the forebody pressure through the appropriate
expansion angle 5 at the breakpoint of each ray.

        Hypersonically (M > 1 2), the forebody pressure distribution was obtained using pure
Newtonian theory. The afterbody pressure distribution was obtained in the same manner as in the
supersonic calculations. The Mach numbers of the forebody flow were estimated from the
free-stream conditions and forebody Newtonian pressures using the oblique shock relations.
Between the regions of applicability of the previously described supersonic and hypersonic methods
^CRIT < M < 1 2), the forebody pressure coefficient was assumed to vary as the square of the
Mach number from the Van Dyke (M = M^RJ-T;) value to the Newtonian (M = 1 2) value.

       Body base drag— Normally, the afterbody pressure drag was computed using the pressure
distribution obtained by the Prandtl-Meyer expansion technique previously described. However,
each pressure coefficient on the afterbody was checked with the separated flow, turbulent
boundary layer, two-dimensional base pressure coefficient obtained from reference 8. If the
Prandtl-Meyer pressure coefficient was lower, the flow was assumed to separate over that portion of
the afterbody and the two-dimensional pressure coefficient was used. To facilitate programming, an
equation was obtained by curve fitting the data for two-dimensional base pressures. This equation is
given in the appendix.

       Body friction drag— Subsonically (M<0.8), the friction drag of the body was calculated
using a relation previously developed for the delta wing (ref. 9), which is based on turbulent
boundary layer, flat-plate skin friction and contains an empirical correction for thickness induced
pressure fields. The basic equation is Frankl and Voishel's extension of Von Karman's mixing-length
hypothesis to compressible flow, and the empirical correction for thickness-induced pressure fields
is the result of a correlation in reference 10 of a large amount of data.

        Transonically (0.8<M<1.2), the skin friction was assumed to vary linearly with Mach
n u m b e r f r o m the subsonic value at M = 0.8 to the M = 1 . 2 value. Supersonically and
hypersonically (M > 1.2), the skin friction was obtained by numerical integration of the local
skin-friction coefficient distribution. The local skin- friction coefficients were obtained using
Eckert's reference enthalpy technique (ref. 11) for turbulent flow.

       Figure 10 compares experimental data from reference 6 with the above methods for pressure
and friction drag. Experimental data were available only for the elliptic cone forebody. There are no
experimental data with which to verify the afterbody aerodynamic estimates. Because of the large
transonic drag of the all-body configurations the acquisition of this type of experimental data is
highly desirable. For purposes of comparison theoretical estimates were calculated for the forebody
alone based on the flow parameters of the experiment. The experimental pressure drag was
determined from surface pressure measurements. The total forebody drag was obtained
experimentally from axial-force balance measurements with the base drag (computed from base
pressure measurements) subtracted.
4
       Body bluntness drag— The body nose was hemispherical with the radius calculated for a
specified maximum radiation equilibrium temperature. An emissivity of 0.8 was assumed for all
surface temperature calculations. The nominal nose maximum temperature was 4350° F.
Subsonically (0<M<0.8) the bluntness drag was assumed to be zero. Transonically
(0.8 < M < 1.0) it was assumed to increase linearly, with respect to Mach number, from zero to its
supersonic value. At all supersonic Mach numbers (M > 1.0) the bluntness drag was estimated using
the Newtonian flow approximation given in reference 12.


                                          Zero-Lift Fin Drag

       The zero-lift fin drag was added to the zero-lift drag of the body to obtain the total vehicle
zero-lift drag coefficient. The fin drag was estimated by adding the pressure (or wave), friction, and
leading-edge bluntness drag components. No trim drag penalties, vertical fin toe-in, or body-fin flow
field interactions were included in the vehicle aerodynamics. All fin airfoils were hexagonal with the
maximum thickness extending from the 30-percent chord location to the 70-percent chord location.
The horizontal fin and canard dimensions were fixed by specifying the ratio of total fin area to
body planform area. The vertical fin dimensions were fixed by specifying the ratio of total fin area
to body profile area. The effect of changes in fin size was investigated in the parametric study. The
nominal fin leading-edge sweeps, aspect ratios, taper ratios, and thickness ratios used correspond to
the fin shapes shown in figure 2 for the nominal configuration. The values used are listed in table 1.

                                 TABLE 1.- GEOMETRY OF FINS
      Fin shape parameter             Horizontal fins           Vertical fins           Canard
      Leading- edge sweep                  55°                  .    60°                50°
      Aspect ratio                          0.933                     1.200              1.675
      Taper ratio                            .200                      .400               .200
      Thickness ratio                        .040                      .040               .040

       Fin wave drag— The wave drag of each fin (horizontals, verticals, and canard) was calculated
using the same set of equations. Subsonically (M<0.8) the fin wave drag was assumed zero.
Transonically (0.8 < M < 1.0), it was assumed to increase linearly, with respect to Mach number,
from zero to its computed value at Mach number 1. The v/ave drag of the fin at Mach number 1 was
estimated by means of an empirical equation from reference 10 obtained by correlation of a wide
variety of wing data. At Mach numbers between 1 and that for shock attachment to the fin leading
edge, the wave drag was found by linear interpolation, with respect to Mach number. At Mach
numbers equal to or greater than the shock attachment Mach number, the wave drag was estimated
by linear supersonic theory.

       Fin friction drag— The fin skin-friction drag was obtained from a relationship for turbulent
boundary layer, flat-plate skin friction corrected for the effects of pressure gradients. This equation,
used for the fin friction drag over the entire Mach number range, is of the same form as that used to
estimate the subsonic body friction drag. (The derivation of this equation was discussed previously
in the section on body friction drag.)
      Fin bluntness drag— The fin leading edges were cylindrical with the radius calculated for a
nominal radiation equilibrium temperature of 4350° R at the specified leading-edge sweep.
Subsonically (0<M<0.8), the bluntness drag was assumed to be zero. Transonically
(0.8 < M < 1,0), it was assumed to increase linearly, with respect to Mach number, from zero to its
supersonic value. At all Mach numbers greater than or equal to 1, the bluntness drag was estimated
from the Newtonian flow approximation (ref. 12).


                                     Zero-Lift Drag Breakdown

       Figure 11 shows the breakdown of zero-lift drag versus Mach number for a typical body
shape. At transonic and low supersonic Mach numbers the pressure drag of the body, particularly
the afterbody component, is the dominant drag contributor. At higher Mach numbers, this
contribution diminishes until, at hypersonic speeds, the body drag due to pressure and skin friction
essentially equals that from fin and bluntness drag.

       The drag in the transonic region estimated by fairing from Mach 0.8 to 1.2 was compared
with data calculated by the supersonic area rule program, which computes the wave drag of an
equivalent body using the method of Eminton and Lord (ref. 13). Within the constraints of the
specified body shape coordinates, the program determines the optimum area distribution for which
the wave drag is a minimum. The wave drag calculations from this program were added to the
friction drag calculated by the present method. The all-body shape was input to this program as a
wing by specifying airfoil coordinates at chord locations along the span. In figure 11, the circles
shown are for a more precisely specified wing shape than the squares. Assuming some optimization
of the body shape for transonic drag, the squares show good agreement with the theoretical
estimation based on the present methods. In particular, the maximum level of transonic drag
estimated by fairing to Mach 1.2 appears reasonable.


                                    AERODYNAMIC RESULTS


       The all-body aerodynamic estimates are presented in terms of the maximum lift-to-drag ratio
(L/D)MAX- This (L/D)MAX was computed for each Mach number at the altitude where lift was
equal to gross takeoff weight minus the centrifugal force. The variation of (L/D)]y[AX with Mach
number for the nominal configuration is shown in figure 12. The shape of this curve is typical for all
the all-body configurations. The following parametric studies consider the change in (L/D)]yj^x at
Mach numbers of 1.2, 6.0, and 12.0. The corresponding values of (L/D)]y[^x f°r the nominal
configuration are shown by tick marks, which are also used to show the nominal values in
subsequent figures.


                                        Effect of Body Shape

      The effects of the body shape parameters — sweep, fatness ratio, and breakpoint length
ratio — were investigated parametrically. The change in (L/D)jy[AX with body shape is the result of
a tradeoff between lift-curve slope, zero-lift drag, and induced drag. In each figure the primary
factor causing the change in (L/D>MAX will be explained. As an aid to visualizing the changes in
body shape that result from changes in each parameter, the corresponding forebody ellipse ratio will
also be noted.

      The effect of body leading-edge sweep is shown in figure 13. In the transonic region at a
Mach number of 1.2 the (L/D)j^AX decreases with increasing sweep primarily because of the
decreasing lift-curve slope. At a Mach number of 6.0 the (L/D)]yiAX increases with increasing sweep
because of the decreasing forebody wave drag. However, at the higher sweeps (A>83°) the
decrease in wave drag is less significant, and the (L/D)j^ AX fa^s °^ because of the more dominant
decrease in lift-curve slope. At a Mach number of 12.0 the (L/D)MAX increases with increasing
sweep due to the decreasing forebody wave drag.

       Figure 14 shows the effect of fatness ratio. The fatness ratio, ratio of the maximum body
cross-section area to planform area, translates directly into the ratio of drag-producing frontal area
to lift-producing planform area. Hence, for all Mach numbers, increasing fatness ratio results in
increasing zero-lift drag and drastically decreasing (L/D)MAX-

       The effect of breakpoint length ratio is shown in figure 15. For all Mach numbers, increasing
the breakpoint length ratio results in decreasing forebody wave drag and increasing afterbody
pressure drag. Because the afterbody pressure drag is a larger percentage of the overall drag at the
lower Mach numbers, the increase in (L/D)j^AX with increasing breakpoint length ratio is not as
rapid as for the higher Mach numbers.


                                        Effect of Vehicle Size

       The effect of vehicle takeoff weight is shown in figure 16 for the nominal configuration
geometry with a fixed gross body density of 7 pounds per cubic foot. For reference, the
corresponding vehicle length is also shown. The (L/D)MAX increases with increasing gross takeoff
weight because the skin-friction drag coefficient decreases with increasing Reynolds number. The
change is less significant at the lower Mach numbers where the skin friction is a smaller percentage
of the overall drag. The effect of size is also strongest for small vehicles (less than 500,000 pounds
gross takeoff weight) where the assumption of completely turbulent skin friction (which penalizes
the smaller vehicle) is less reasonable. This consideration would be of importance only for research
vehicles.

       The effect of gross body density for the nominal vehicle at the fixed nominal gross takeoff
weight of 500,000 pounds is shown in figure 17. Again, the corresponding vehicle length is shown
for reference. The (L/D)MAX decreases slightly with increasing body density because the
skin-friction drag coefficient increases with decreasing Reynolds number. Unique to the all-body
configuration is the interdependence of gross takeoff weight, gross body density, and planform lift
loading (or wing loading). Hence, for a given gross body density and body shape, the wing loading
will change with changes in gross takeoff weight.
                             Effect of Maximum Allowable Temperature

       The effect of maximum allowable leading edge and nose radiation equilibrium temperature is
shown in figure 18. The temperature shown is the specified maximum temperature for sizing the
body nose, horizontal fin leading edge, vertical fin leading edge, and canard leading-edge radii. For
reference, the corresponding nose radius is also shown. The increase in (L/E))MAX with increasing
allowable temperature is the result of decreasing bluntness drag (radius). The bluntness drag is a
more significant proportion of the overall drag at the higher Mach numbers.


                                          Effect of Fin Sizes

       The nominal sizes for the horizontal fins, vertical fins, and canard were estimated to provide
adequate stability and control as discussed in a later section. As mentioned previously, only the
zero-lift drag (wave, friction, and bluntness) of the fins was included in the (L/D)jyjy\x calculations.
No trim drag or vertical fin toe-in penalties were included. The effect of horizontal fin, vertical fin,
and canard size on configuration (L/D)^AX *s shown in figures 19 to 21, respectively. The fin
planform and shape parameters are included on each figure for reference. Each figure shows the loss
in (L/D)fyiAX incurred for larger fin sizes.


                                    SURFACE TEMPERATURES


      A brief analysis of the vehicle surface radiation equilibrium temperatures was performed in
conjunction with the study of configuration aerodynamics. The surface temperature distribution, at
zero angle of attack, and the effects of Mach number, lift loading, and altitude on the surface
temperature were investigated.


                                  Surface Temperature Distribution

       The surface radiation equilibrium temperature distribution was calculated at zero angle of
attack only using the pressure distribution obtained for the zero-lift drag computation. The
temperatures were estimated using Eckert's reference enthalpy technique for a turbulent boundary
layer. The planform temperature contours for a typical configuration are shown in figure 22. The
case shown is for a Mach number of 12 and an altitude of 115,000 feet. The configuration shape
parameters and length are shown for reference.


                                   Surface Temperature Variations

       The effect of planform lift loading on surface radiation equilibrium temperature was
estimated from calculations for a wedge with the same included angle as the forebody at the
centerline of the all-body configuration. The upper and lower surface temperatures were calculated
for the wedge angle of attack that resulted in the same planform lift loading as the all-body
configuration. These temperatures were estimated using the reference enthalpy method and are

8
assumed to represent the average spanwise temperature of the configuration. The planform lift
loading of the configuration and the wedge were matched using computed values of surface
pressures. The pressure on the wedge lower surface was computed by Newtonian theory and the
corresponding Mach number was obtained by the oblique shock relations. The pressure on the
wedge upper surface was computed using Newtonian theory when inclined toward the flow or a
Prandtl-Meyer expansion when inclined away from the flow.

       The upper and lower surface radiation equilibrium temperatures 25 feet aft of the wedge
leading edge are shown versus Mach number in figure 23. The curves represent conditions for the
nominal vehicle, which has a forebody wedge included angle of 7.65°. Curves are shown for several
values of lift loading computed at a constant dynamic pressure of 1000 lb/ft 2 . A typical value of lift
loading is 30 lb/ft 2 , corresponding to the nominal configuration in cruise. The reduction in lower
surface temperature achieved by lower lift loadings is accompanied by a corresponding increase in
upper surface temperature. Figure 24 shows the effects of cruise altitude and lift loading for a
constant Mach number. Lift loading, rather than angle of attack, is used as a parameter because
equilibrium cruise flight requires a given value of lift loading, which, to a first order, is independent
of cruise altitude; whereas the angle of attack for equilibrium cruise flight varies widely with cruise
altitude. The trends in the figure, however, can best be understood as the result of a tradeoff
between altitude and angle of attack. For a fixed angle of attack increasing altitude causes
decreasing surface temperature. This effect is most apparent for a lift loading of zero, where the
lower surface angle to the free stream remains at 3.83°. For a fixed altitude, increasing angle of
attack (or, equivalently, increasing the lift loading) causes increasing surface temperature. This
effect is also shown in the figure for any of the constant altitude lines. At the lower altitudes, the
angle of attack required to produce a lift loading of 40 lb/ft 2 is smaller (less than 1° at 80,000 ft)
than at the higher altitudes (almost 15° at 160,000ft). Hence, the effect of changes in the lift
loading on surface temperature is greater at the higher altitudes. It is also significant that at the
higher values of lift loading and altitude the lower surface temperature is virtually insensitive to
altitude changes. At these conditions the upper surface pressure is essentially a vacuum and the
lower surface pressure is approximately equal to the lift loading regardless of altitude. Since, at a
constant flight Mach number, the heat-transfer rate to the lower surface is primarily a function of
the lower surface pressure, the result is a nearly constant lower surface temperature independent of
cruise altitude.

       The foregoing discussion is based on the assumption that the wedge temperatures computed
by the lift-loading analogy are representative of the average spanwise distribution of the all-body
surface temperatures.


                                              STABILITY


       A preliminary stability analysis was performed to estimate the static longitudinal and
directional stability at hypersonic speed. The moment coefficients were referenced about the body
center of gravity with the body mean aerodynamic chord as the reference length. The body
center-of-gravity location was determined by assuming constant body density. This appears to be a
good assumption for a hydrogen-fueled vehicle since the gross density of the hydrogen tankage and
the passenger compartment are both about 5 lb/ft 3 . During a mission it may be advantageous to
sequence the fuel tank usage to obtain the best center-of-gravity location corresponding to flight
conditions. The body lift and drag were calculated using the methods previously described and were
assumed to act through the planform center of area. The accuracy of this assumption depends on
the configuration and flight conditions. For a thick (low a/b ratio) configuration at low angles of
attack, the forebody may provide most of the aerodynamic forces, and hence, the center of pressure
may act closer to the forebody planform center of area. Because of the lack of experimental or
analytical data this effect was neglected for the present study. The lift and drag of the fins were
estimated by Newtonian theory neglecting any effects of the body flow field (i.e., no interference
forces were considered).


                                       Longitudinal Stability

       The longitudinal stability for the nominal configuration at a Mach number of 12 is shown in
figure 25. The increase in stability due to the horizontal fins and canard is shown. Nominally, the
canard was designed as a floating canard (the angle of attack of the canard remained fixed with
respect to the free stream for all configuration angles of attack). The decrease in stability that
results from a fixed canard is also shown. These data show that the configuration would maintain
positive stability if the canard were to become locked.


                                       Control Effectiveness

       The control power of the horizontal fins is shown in figure 26 for the nominal horizontal fin
size, which is 12.5 percent of the body plan area. Because of the relatively short moment arm
between the horizontal fin location and the configuration center of gravity, the horizontal fin
effectiveness for trim is impaired. The canard location is slightly more advantageous. Figure 27
shows the control power of the floating canard for the nominal canard size, corresponding to
4 percent of the body plan area. The floating canard possesses the ability to trim the configuration
at the desired angle of attack while adding a positive lift increment to the configuration
aerodynamics. The nominal configuration can be trimmed at (L/D)]yiAX with the floating canard at
15.6° angle of attack with respect to the free stream. To trim with the horizontal fins requires
—9.5° fin angle of attack with respect to the free stream (5j^j = — 18.5°). The use of the canard for
trim results in a 0.37 percent decrease in untrimmed (L/D)MAX at cruise as compared to a
13.25 percent decrease when the horizontal fins are used.


                                       Effect of Body Shape

       Under the assumption of constant body density the body center-of-gravity location depends
on the configuration breakpoint-length ratio and is independent on the sweep and fatness ratios.
The center of gravity moves rearward with increasing breakpoint-length ratio. The effect of this
shift in center-of-gravity location on the basic body longitudinal stability at hypersonic speeds is
shown in figure 28. At the higher values of breakpoint-length ratio the center of gravity is behind
the aerodynamic center (assumed at the planform center of area) and the basic body is unstable.
The rearward center-of-gravity shift also results in a shorter moment arm for control with the
horizontal fins. Therefore, configurations with higher values of breakpoint-length ratio may require



10
larger horizontal fins to provide adequate longitudinal stability and control. However, engine forces,
flow-field effects, and the actual location of the body center of pressure must be considered in a
complete stability analysis.


                                         Directional Stability

       A preliminary directional stability analysis was performed for hypersonic speeds to estimate
the required vertical fin size. To approximate the body contribution a representative analytical
model, as shown in figure 29, was used. This model has a flat-sided body with one-half the included
planform angle of the original configuration as shown by the dashed lines in the figure. (Note that
this corresponds to a new body sweep angle equal to 45° plus one-half the original sweep.) The flat
sided area of the model is equal to the cross-section area obtained by cutting the original body in
the vertical plane at the new body sweep angle. Body side forces and vertical fin forces on the
model were estimated by simple Newtonian theory. The computations indicated that the nominal
configuration (with the nominal vertical fin size) was directionally stable hypersonically for a
vertical fin flare of 5° included angle. This vertical fin flare results in a negligible (less than
0.5 percent) decrease in the configuration (L/D)j^AX at Mach 12. Directional stability, for the
nominal configuration, can also be obtained by a vertical fin toe-in of 5°; however, this results in a
larger (approximately 1 percent) decrease in configuration (L/D)jyjAX a* a Mach number of 12.


                                    CONCLUDING REMARKS


         The results of semiempirical and theoretical predictions of the aerodynamic characteristics of
the forebody of all-body configurations have been compared with available experimental data. The
good agreement obtained lends credence to the application of the basic analysis techniques to the
entire all-body configuration. The degree to which these estimates represent the physical facts must
await experimental data on the configurations studied. Such data will also be helpful in providing
i m p r o v e m e n t s in semiempirical and, perhaps, analytical prediction methods. Additional
configuration studies are required with different geometric shapes to analyze the effect of the
rounded leading edge and the forebody-afterbody ridge line of the present configuration family.
Several critical problem areas requiring improved analytical techniques or experimental data include
the pressure distribution at angle of attack, the high transonic drag, and the flow interaction effects
on stability.


National Aeronautics and Space Administration
      Moffett Field, California, 94035, April 23,1970




                                                                                                    11
                                            APPENDIX


                                    AERODYNAMICS EQUATIONS


                                               LIFT


                                           sin a + €     sin2 a

where

                    Cl   =           - 0.355
        M < 1.0
                    Co = 0


                             irAR
        M > 1.0                      - 0.153 BAR2

                    C2 = linear interpolation with respect to           3 from
                                  C2 = 0 at 3=0          to
                                           [0.955-O.35/M)]         __
                                  Co = e                      at   AR


        M > 1.0                       - 0.13
        6
        6 > ±
          - AR      , _ Ft).955-0*.35/M)]
                    ,2 - e


                                           INDUCED    DRAG


                                     CDi = %CL tan a

where
        M
            < 3.0 j KM = 0.25 (1 + M)

        M * 3.0 j KM = 1.0


                                    ZERO-LIFT BODY DRAG


                              C
                               DOB = CDPB + CDFB + CDBB

 12
                                        Body Pressure Drag

        M < 0.8 { CDpB = 0




   0.8 < M < 1.2         CDJpB
                             R = linear interpolation with respect to M from
                                   Cn „B = 0 at M = 0.8 to
                                     P
                                       CD                              M =l
                                            pB                                '


        M ^ 1.2 | CDR = CDR from numerical integration of pressure
               I        distribution on body

                                             Body Base Drag

  CpRAep = Cp from Prandtl-Meyer expansion of forebody pressure distribution
Unless Cp < Cp2          when,

                                                                          1
                     C
                     PBASE " C?2-D                     0.91 M      2
                                                                        - 0.20 M + 1.51
(From fig. 5, p. 34, ref. 8)

                                        Body Friction Drag


                                                       1   4- ?l       1
                                                                              / S WET\
                                                                                  S
                                                                   *C/BODY. \ REF/
        M < 0'.8 i       fn
                              FB
                                   - 0 455
                                                                                  Y - iJ- M 2 \10 . ^4 6 7
                                                 (logio Re) 2 - 5 8 (l 4              2    * *o y
where

              Re = P0M0a0
                                     (MAC) BODY
                                                       and
                                                             (I)       BODY
                                                                                      2(.ZTt/Z)
                                                                                             i A




                                                                                                             13
  0.8 < M < 1.2      CD_R    = linear interpolation with respect to    M   from
                                 CDFB = cDpB at M = o.s to
                                 CDFB = CDFB at M = 1.2




        M * 1.2 {
                1    CD™ = CD™         from numerical integration of local skin-
                       re       rt>
                                 friction coefficients on body


                                 Body Bluntness Drag

        M < 0.8      CDBB = o




   0.8 < M < 1.0 I   CDRR
                       RR = linear interpolation with respect to       M   from
                              CDBB =0   at M = 0.8 to
                                 CDL>D
                                   RR = CDRR
                                          DP
                                                   at M = 1.0




                               irr.NOSE
        M > 1.0      CD BB      SREF




where
                                             1/2

                       ,0.5
                                 1820     ±-\ '"MAX "''"   -4-.3.15
                                                         810

                        NOSE
                                                   (.
                                           'SKIN \1000



 14
                                 ZERO-LIFT FIN DRAG


                                                             CD
                                 F                                BF
where

           CDXcF = CDX
                         HORIZONTAL FINS              VERTICAL FINS    CANARD

computed separately by the following equations.


                                  Fin Pressure Drag

         M < 0.8 { CD F = 0




   0.8 < M < 1.0       CD p = linear interpolation with respect to M            from
                         p
                                CD p = 0 at M = 0.8 to

                                 CD
                                     pF = C°pF       at   M =1
                                                             '°


                                        5/3
                                             FIN
         M = 1.0       CuD   = 3.4 -,            cosz A FIN
                          pF      \c/T,TV. cS
                                        FIN    REF




   1.0 < M < MSA   •   CD p = linear interpolation with respect to         M    from
                         P
                                CDpp = CDpF at M = 1.0 to
                                              CDpp    at M = MSA




                                          !_ aFIN
           > MSA       CD
                                      FIN e SREF


                                                                                       15
                                Fin Friction Drag


                                           1 +2-
                                                                     REF .
                     CDpF = 0.455
                                                                         0.467
                                                2 258
                                    (loglo R e )- - (l

where
                                               (MAC) FIN
                               Re = P Mna,
                                     o °°        y,




                               Fin Bluntness Drag


          M < 0.8 j CDBF = o




     0.8 < M < 1.0   CDJBF.
                        RC = linear interpolation with respect to M              from
                               CnDr
                                 Df
                                   , = 0 at M = 0.8 to

                               CDBF = CDBF at M = i.o




                                                        FIN

where

                                              1 2
                      r
                      r              725 ccos
                                    -'^    os  -
                                                              NOSE




16
                                          REFERENCES


 1. Gregory, Thomas J.; Petersen, Richard H.; and Wyss, John A.: Performance Tradeoffs and
      Research Problems for Hypersonic Transports. J. Aircraft, vol. 2,1965, pp. 266—271.

 2. DeYoung, John; and Harper, Charles W.: Theoretical Symmetric Span Loading at Subsonic
      Speeds for Wings Having Arbitrary Plan Form. NACA Rep. 921, 1948.

 3. Lawrence, H. R.: The Lift Distribution on Low Aspect Ratio Wings at Subsonic Speeds.
      J. Aero. Sci., vol. 18, no. 10, Oct. 1951, pp. 683-695.

 4. Puckett, A. E.; and Steward, H. J.: Aerodynamic Performance of Delta Wings at Supersonic
      Speeds. J. Aero. Sci., vol. 14, no. 10, Oct. 1947, pp. 567-578.

 5. McDevitt John B.; Rakich, John V.: irFlieSA'ero'd.ynamic Characteristics .of, .Several Thick Delta
      Wings at Mach Numbers to 6 and Angles of Attack to 50. NASA TM XM 62,1960.

 6. Jorgensen, Leland H.: Elliptic Cones Alone and With Wings at Supersonic Speeds. NACA
       Rep. 1376, 1958.

 7. Van Dyke, Milton D.: The Slender Elliptic Cone as a Model for Nonlinear Supersonic Flow
      Theory. J. Fluid Mech., vol. 1, May 1956, pp. 1—15.

 8. Love, Eugene S.: Base Pressure at Supersonic Speeds on Two-Dimensional Airfoils and on
      Bodies of Revolution With and Without Fins Having Turbulent Boundary Layers. NACA
      TN3819, 1957.

 9. Shapiro, Asher: The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid Flow. The Ronald
      Press Co., N. Y., 1954.

10. Koelle, Heinz Hermann: Handbook of Astronautical Engineering. McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
      Inc., 1961.

11. Eckert, Ersnt R. G.: Survey of Heat Transfer at High Speeds. ARL Rep. 189, Aeronaut. Res.
      Lab., Office of Aerosp. Res., Wright—Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, Dec. 1961.

12. Truitt, Robert Wesley: Hypersonic Aerodynamics. The Ronald Press Co., N. Y., 1959.

13. Eminton, E.; and Lord, W. T.: Note on the Numerical Evaluation of the Wave Drag of Smooth
      Slender Bodies Using Optimum Area Distributions for Minimum Wave Drag. J. Roy. Aero.
      Sco., Jan. 1956, pp. 61-63.




                                                                                                  17
                    Figure 1.- Aircraft configurations,




            A= 75°
         5^/5 = 0.0935
         2^/2=0.667
          WGTO=500,0001 b




Figure 2.- Nominal configuration; all body cross sections are elliptical.




                                                                            19
     Figure 3.-
                    Body shape parameters




         A=75
                °          ESTIMATE   MACH

                                       0.6
                                        1.3
                                       5.0
                                      0-6 (SHARP
                                      LEADING EDGE)




                                      lift.

20
                                        DATA
                                      (REF. 6)   ESTIMATE    SHAPE

                                         o                           0
 .4
                                         D

                                         A
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
 .3


 .2




         j     I      I        i
               8      12      16        20
                a, deg


      Figure 5.- Effect of shape on lift; M = 1.97.



                             DATA
                           (REF. 6)    ESTIMATE      SHAPE

                              O
                                                            0
                              D
                                                            o
                                                            o




Figure 6.- Effect of shape on induced drag; M = 1.97.




                                                                         21
                                                            ESTIMATE           MACH
                                      A =75°                                    0.6
                     <] 0          d/b = 2.0                                    1.3
                                                                                5.0
                              .4


                              .3


                              .2




                                            .05            .10        .15
                                           C     C
                                               D~ D(BASE)



           Figure 7.- Effect of Mach number on induced drag.


                 O   DATA (REF.6)
                     THEORY (VAN DYKE)


                     CROSS SECTION                                          CROSS SECTION

           .16
                 d/b = 6, A = 7I.6                                          = 3, A=76.7°
           .12
      Cp
           .08
                                  _GL-00.
           .04


                     .25    .50      .75             1.0         0      .25      .50       .75   1.0
                                     y/a, SEMISPAN                   STATION


     Figure 8.- Forebody pressure distribution; M = 1.97, a = Oe




22
                                                           ^
                                               ^8,     DEFLECTION ANGLE
                                                       ^ %/ (EXPANSION)
                            SECTION    A-A


              Figure 9.- Afterbody-pressure-calculation geometry.




                        O   DATA (REF.6)              M=l,97
                            ESTIMATE                  REYNOLDS NUMBER = 8 x I06
                .12                                   ALTITUDE = 13,000 ft
                                                      A = TAN'1 [7.34(a/b)~' / 2]
                .10

                .08

                .06
                        FOREBODY      PRESSURE DRAG
                .04

                .02
                      TURBULENT SKIN FRICTION DRAG
                          i    i    i    i    i    i
                          I    2    3    4      5
                         ELLIPSE AXIS RATIO   (a/b)



Figure 10.- Comparison of forebody zero-lift drag with experiment; no base drag
             is included; CD is based on cross-section area.




                                                                                    23
                       TYPICAL FLIGHT PATH                   NOMINAL CONFIGURATION
                    (1000 q PATH ABOVE M = 2)                   (WITH Z = 100 ft)


              .10                   PRESENT ESTIMATE
                           O        AREA RULE WAVE DRAG (WING APPROX~20 STATIONS)
                                                        (+BODY SKIN FRICTION)
             .08
                           n        AREA RULE WAVE DRAG(WING APPROX-10 STATIONS)
                                                        (+BODY SKIN FRICTION)
             .06
                                     FIN AND BLUNTNESS
                                     AFTERBODY PRESSURE
             .04                     FOREBODY PRESSURE
                                     BODY SKIN FRICTION

             .02



               0                         4         6     8             10
                                                 MACH NUMBER



 Figure 11.- Zero-lift drag versus Mach number; CD . is based on theoretical
                                 body plan area.


                               12    \                        NOMINAL CONFIGURATION
                                                                A = 75°
                               10                               STT-/S = 0.0935
                                                                ITT/I- 0.667
                               8                                WGTO = 500,000 Ib
                (L/D) MAX                                              PQ = 7.0'lb/ft 3




                                    •[
                                                               .
                                6

                               4             y                     '                      —i

                                2

                                                 1    1            1        1       i      i
                               0                 2    4        6            8      10      12
                                                          MACH NUMBER



               Figure 12.- Effect of Mach number on CL/D)MAX-




24
  (L/D) MAX


                                                                        1.2
                                                       = 0.0935
                                                  ITT/I = 0.667



                        60       65    70      75   80    85
                                  SWEEP (A), deg
                      i       i   i
                      9       8     7 6    5     4 3   2    1
                              FOREBODY ELLIPSE RATIO, Q/b



    Figure 13.- Effect of body sweep on (L/D)MAX-


              8r




(L/D)
        MAX

                   A = 75°

                   f'=° 667

                     .02       .04    .06   .08      .10     .12       .14
                                 FATNESS RATIO, S-^/S
                             I      |   i    i     i               |
                             12    8    6   5     4                3
                                FOREBODY ELLIPSE RATIO,     d/b


 Figure 14.- Effect of fatness ratio on (L/D)MAX-




                                                                              25
               (L/D) MAX
                                 A =75°
                                if =0.0935
                                 O




                                      .4    .5    .6   .7     .8       .9
                                     BREAKPOINT LENGTH RATIO,   l^/l

                                          2     3    4    5   6    7
                                          FOREBODY ELLIPSE RATIO, d/b


          Figure 15.- Effect of breakpoint length ratio on (L/D)MAX-




               (L/D) MAX




                           0            400       800        1200    1600
                                  GROSS TAKEOFF WEIGHT (WGTO), 1000 Ib
                                i     i  i
                               100 150 175 200     225      250    275
                                            BODY LENGTH, ft


 Figure 16.- Effect of gross takeoff weight on (L/D)MAX; gross body density
                                    7.0 lb/ft 3 .



26
             (L/D) MAX
                                                        GROSS TAKEOFF WEIGHT
                           -   GROSS BODY DENSITY =
                                                       THEORETICAL BODY VOLUME




                                                                               I
                                246                8    10   12    14         16
                                 GROSS BODY DENSITY (p G ), Ib/ft 3
                             i i i
                           400 250        200     175             150
                                        BODY LENGTH, ft


Figure 17.- Effect of gross body density on (L/D)MAX> gross takeoff weight
                                 500,000 Ib.




           (L/D) MAX




                           A     I      I      I       |     |          |          |
                           V
                       0       3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 6000
                               RADIATION EQUILIBRIUM TEMPERATURE, °R
                                15.0   5.0 2.0 1.0 .50 .25              .10
                                          BODY NOSE RADIUS, ft

    Figure 18.- Effect of maximum allowable leading-edge temperature.




                                                                                       27
                               ALE -55«                  PLANFORM
                               AR     = 0.933
                               X      = 0.200
                               t/C    = 0.040
                         5r



           (L/D) MAX




                         t
                      0      .05   .10   .15   .20
                   HORIZONTAL FIN AREA/BODY PLAN AREA


 Figure 19.- Effect of horizontal fin size on (L/D)MAXJ maximum leading-edge
                            temperature = 4350° R.




                               A LE   = 60°        PROFILE
                               AR     = 1.200
                               X      = 0.400
                               t/C    = 0.040
                         5 r




           (L/D)
                   MAX




                         i
                      0      0.5   1.0   1.5    2.0
                   VERTICAL FIN AREA/BODY PROFILE AREA


 Figure 20.- Effect of vertical fin size on                  maximum leading-edge
                            temperature = 4350° R.




28
                                    A L E = 50°             pLAr
                                    AR        = 1.675
                                    X         = 0.200
                                    t/C       = 0.040
                      5r

                                                            MACH
                      4 _EZTT            i—                ^-6.0
                                                             12.0
          (L/D) MAX

                      3 -



                      0     .025  .050  .075  .100
                       CANARD AREA/BODY PLAN AREA



Figure 21.- Effect of canard size on         maximum leading-edge
                      temperature = 4350° R.



                                                1500
                                                 1600       M=I2.0
                                                  1700      h= 115,000 ft
                                                   1800     0=0°
                                                    2000


                                                                            2500




                                                    NOMINAL CONFIGURATION
                                                            A = 75°
                                X
                                                              = 0.0935
                                 500                          = 0.667
                                N
                                IOOO
                              X
                               I500                          £=180 ft
                            X
                             2000


          Figure 22.- Planform temperature contours, °F.




                                                                                   29
               2800       LOWER SURFACE
                          UPPER SURFACE
               2400


          '. 2000
          LJ
          OL

               1600
         QL
         LJ
         Q.
                                                                              40
               1200
                                           q = 1000 Ib/ft 2
               800                         e = 0.8
                      T                    TURBULENT BOUNDARY LAYER
                      a                    WEDGE, 8B = 7.65°
               400

                                 10   12      14        16    18   20   22   24
                                      MACH     NUMBER



Figure 23.- Surface radiation equilibrium temperature; 25 feet aft of leading
                                      edge.


                      2800
                                                         ALTITUDE, 1000 ft
                      2400


                      2000


                      1600
                                             M = 12.0
                      1200                   X = 25 ft
                                             € = 0.8
                                             TURBULENT BOUNDARY LAYER
                       800
                                             WEDGE, 0B = 7.65°
                          f
                                 10     20         30        40
                             LIFT LOADING (L/S), Ib/fr


Figure 24.- Effect of altitude and lift loading on lower surface temperature.




30
 .01r    T                                M = I2
                                          ALTITUDE = I40.0OO ft
                                          NOMINAL CONFIGURATION




                                                   BASIC BODY
-.02 -
             BASIC BODY                            BASIC BODY
             + HORIZONTAL FINS                     + HORIZONTAL FINS
-.03 -                                                  SHT=O°
             + FLOATING CANARD                     +FIXED CANARD
-.04 -
                  3
                      CA = -a


.05 L                     i      i    i       i
   -5    0               10     15   20      25
                      a, deg

          Figure 25.- Longitudinal stability.




                                            M = I2
                      'MAX                  ALTITUDE = 140,000 ft
                                            NOMINAL CONFIGURATION
                                              (FLOATING CANARD)




    Figure 26.- Horizontal fin control power.



                                                                       31
           -.01 -
     "CG

           -.02-

                                    M = I2
           -.03-                    ALTITUDE = 140,000 ft
                                    NOMINAL CONFIGURATION
                                     (FLOATING HORIZONTAL FINS)
           -.04 -


            .05 L                           I     I       I             I
               -5                          10     15     20         25
                                         a.deg

              Figure 27.- Floating canard control power.



                    .002
                                                          M=I2
                                                          ALTITUDE = 119,200 ft
                     .001                                     a = 10°

                            ~^T-\          >
             "CG


                    -.001
                                                              A = 75°
                                                              STT/S = 0.0935
                    -.002                                     WGTO = 500,000 Ib


                    -.003
                                    .4                   .7         .8      .9
                                    BREAKPOINT LENGTH   RATIO,



             Figure 28.- tffect of body shape on stability.




32
                      CONFIGURATION                    ANALYTICAL MODEL




                                                   I          I




                        Figure 29.- Directional stability model.




\-Langley, 1971   1   A-3637                                              33
NATIONAL AERONAiifics ANB SPACE ADMINISTRATION
           WASHINGTON, IXC 20546
               OFFICIAL BUSINESS                                    FIRST CLASS MAIL
                                                                                                              POSTAGE AND PEES RAI
                                                                                                            NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
                                                                                                              SPACE ADM!NISTRATK»




                                                                                                 JPOSTMASTER:   If UnddiveraMe (Section 1
                                                                                                                Postal Manual > Do Not Re
                                                                                                                 ?      -     •     •   I



                                 f
                                 *Ihe aetowutiml ta$ sp$ee aGtwittes of;tbe United States $kall be
                              conducted so as to contribute . , . to the expansion of human knowl-
                              edge of'phenomena in^the atmosphere and *:fpace. The Administration
                              shall provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dmemmatioa
                              of infomnation cornering Ms aetfaitien and the remits thereof,"   4

       •:'*
                                               —^NA-f ONAJ. AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ACT OF 1958

                          SOB]>raFlC                               f EGHNICAL
               TECHNICAL R1PORTS: Scientific arad .                   TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: tofommtiott
               technical information considered important,            published in a foreign language considered
               complete, and a lasting contribution to existing       to merit NASA distribution in English. *
               knowledge.
                                                                      SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS: Information
               TECHNICAL NOTES: Information less broad                derived from or of value to NASA activities.
               in scope but nevertheless of importance as a           Publications include conference procecuJitigi,
               contribution, to existing knowledge.                   monographs, data compilations, handbookf,
                                                                      sourcebooks, and special bibliographies.
               TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS:
               Information receiving limited distribution             TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION
               because of preliminary data, security classifica-      PUBLICATIONS: Information on technology
               tion, or other reasons.                                used by NASA that may be of particular
                                                                      interest in commercial and other no«*aerospace
               CONTRACTOR REPORTS: Scientific and                     applications. Publications include Tech Briefs,
               technical information generated under a NASA           Technology Utilization Reports and
               contract or grant and considered an important
                                                                      Technology Surveys.
               contribution to existing knowledge.

                               Details on the availability of these publications may fee obtained from:

                              SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION OFFICE

                NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                                                       Washington, D.C. 20546

