---
title: Apollo Service Propulsion System Rocket Engine Bipropellant Valve Improvement Program
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19710025470
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19710025470
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONTRACTOR_REPORT
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: eab803f2e8082390bfeafd704612b186d567952d3658608a408995416378a2b1
pages: 15
words: 2493
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                                    General Disclaimer

    One or more of the Following Statements may affect this Document



      This document has been reproduced from the best copy furnished by the
      organizational source. It is being released in the interest of making available as
      much information as possible.



      This document may contain data, which exceeds the sheet parameters. It was
      furnished in this condition by the organizational source and is the best copy
      available.



      This document may contain tone-on-tone or color graphs, charts and/or pictures,
      which have been reproduced in black and white.



      This document is paginated as submitted by the original source.



      Portions of this document are not fully legible due to the historical nature of some
      of the material. However, it is the best reproduction available from the original
      submission.




Produced by the NASA Center for Aerospace Information (CASI)
                          SUMMARY REPORT

       AP(110 SERVICE PROPlI.S I<W SYSTEM ROCKET ENGINE
           BIPROPELLANT VALVE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
•
                            Prepa red Under
                          Contract NAS 9-8317

                                     For
                    MANNED SPACECRAA CENTER
           National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                           Houston, Texas
                                                                                   .'

    Report NASA Ifm578                                                March 1971




•
          AEROJET LIQUID ROCKET COMP'I'e   • DIVISIO_ 0' .E.OJET·GE_E • • L
                     ,   SACNAMKNTO.      CALI~ONNIA



                   ti;;,-!tW" '-
                     (ACctSSlON NUMI£R)                     (THRU)
                           JA                               G~



l                                                        (CATEGORy)
REPORT NASA 108578                                          MARCH 1971




                             SUMMARY REPORT
           APOLLO SERVICE PROPULSION SYSTEM ROCKET ENGINE
               BIPROPELLANT VALVE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM




                             PREPARED UNDER
                          CONTRACT NAS 9-8317


                                  FOR


                      MANNED SPACECRAFT CENTER
           NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                           HOUSTON, TEXAS




                     AEROJET LIQUID ROCKET COMPANY
                     A DIVISION OF AEROJET-GENERAL
                         SACRAMENTO, CALIFORNIA
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS




    I.      INTRODUCTION                                         1

    II.     STUDY OBJECTIVES                                     1

    Ill.    RELATIONSHIPS TO OTH~R NASA EFFORTS                  1

    IV.     METHOD OF APPROACH AND PRINCIPAL ASSUMPTIONS         2

    V.      BASIC DATA GENERATED AND SIGNIFICANT RESULTS         6

    VI.     LIMITATIONS                                          7

    VII.    IMPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH                             8

    VIII.   SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL RESEARCH                        8




                                   FIGURES
                                                           Figure Number

            VALVE ASSEMBLY                                       1

            AJ-8 WORKHORSE VALVE ASSEMBLY                        2



•
    I.       INTRODUCTION



             This report summarizes the work accomplished under Contract
    NAS 9-8317, the Apollo Service Propulsion System (SPS) Rocket Engine
    Bipropellant Valve Improvement Program.


             Phase I of the program was directec toward the improvement of
    the Apollo SPS engine bipropellant valve.     This phase started in July 1968
•
    and ended in December 1969.


             Phase II was concerned with Oxygen-Hydrogen technology.     Two
    workhorse type valves were fabricated and tested with two types of seals
    at cryogenic temperatures.    This phase started in July 1970 and ended in
    February 1971.



    II.      STUDY OBJECTIVES


             The primary objective of Phase I was to improve upon the existing
    SPS bipropellant valve.     A secondary objective was the publication of a
    valve design guide.


             Phase II effort was directed toward Oxygen-Hydrogen technology
    with the objective of evaluating both static and dynamic va1~e seals at
    cryogenic temperatures.



    III.     RELATIONSHIPS TO OTHER NASA EFFORTS
•
             The Phase I portion of the contract had a direct relationship with
•   Contract NAS 9-150 under which the Service Module was procured.     This
    relationship existed because the ultimate objective of the program was to
    provide an improved valve to replace the existing SPS valve.     Consequently,
    much of the design criteria was based on previous SPS experience or require-
    ments.



                                          -1-
III, Relationships to Other NASA Efforts (continued)


         Phase II utilized remaining contract funding to develop Oxygen-
Hydrogen technology.   To obtain this technology, two propellant valves were
designed and fabricated.   These valves were designed with a dual objective:
(1) to serve as a tool to evaluate seal configurations in laboratory type
tests; and (2) to be capable of being used in hot fire tests in conjunction
with the injector and combustion chamber developed under Contract NAS 9-8285.



IV.      METHOD OF APPROACH AND PRINCIPAL ASSUMPTIONS


         The function of the SPS bipropellant valve is to control the flow
of propellants [N 0 and AeroZINE 50 (50/50 UDMH-Hydrazine)] to the engine.
                 2 4
Because of the critical nature of the Apollo mission, the valve was designed
with parallel and redundant features which resulted in the valve really
being two valves in ~ne assembly.


         Each pair of fuel and oxidizer flow passages is controlled by a
separate and independent pneumdtic actuation system.     Each flow passage
has two ball valves, each of which has two seals.


         The SPS valve has experienced two major problem areas.     These are
marginal life cycle characteristics, i.e., exces~ive leakage after cycling,
and complicated assembly and repair procedures.


         The primary objective of Phase I of the Contract NAS 9-8317 was to
improve upon the undesirable features of the existing valve design.     Phase I
started during the first week of July 1968.


         Related experience was r~iewed and tradeoff studies were conducted
to establish the basic valve concept.     The selected concept retained the
basic SPS dual propellant passages with redundant dual seal ball valves,
but departed signifi~antly from the SPS in other design areas:     (1) the




                                    -2-
IV, Method of Approach and Principal Assumptions (continued)


valve assembly was completely modular, i.e., individual, interchangeable
ball and seal assemblies, housings, actuators, and actuation systems for
ease of maintenance; (2) the ball seals were lifted free of the ball in
the first few degrees of motion to reduce the wiping action and improve
cycle life; (3) the drive mechanism incorporated idler gears to ensure
that the bores of the fuel and oxidizer balls were parallel to the housing
bores when in the full open position; and (4) the return spring of the
actuators was positioned external to the actuation cavity.     The pneumatic
actuation control was retained, although it was recognized that an elec-
trical system would offer some advantages.    Figure 1 shows the basic design
concept.

           First priority was assigned to the valve cartridge, i.e., the
module which contains one ball, liftoff cams, and the upstream and down-
stream seals.    As soon as the drawing status permitted a good approximation
of the final configuration, a test assembly composed of obsolete SPS components
was fabricated to test the feasibility of the concept.    The results of these
tests showed excellent seal life and unsatisfactory cam cycle life.     Consequently,
the prototype design was modified to increase the cam bearing width.

           Prototype cartridge dry cycle testing started during the latter
part of May 1969. The results of these tests demonstrated the concept to
be completely satisfactory.


           Assembly of the two-bore valve started in September 1969.   This
assembly consisted of one fuel bore and one oxidizer bore, i.e., one half
of a prototype design.    The results indicated that although some minor
problems were yet to be solved, the valve demonstrated a definite potential
for improvement over the existing SPS valve design, and further, a cycle
life of 20,000 cycles with an attendant maximum leakage rate of approximately
50scc/hr could be realized.




                                      -3-
IV, Method of Approach and Principal Assumptions (continued)


          Phase II, the cryogenic propellant portion of the program. started
in June 1970.    The objective of this program was to support related injector
and chamber studies being conducted on another NASA sponsored contract at
ALRC (Contract NAS 9-8285).

          Two workhorse type valves were designed and fabricated.       The valves
were designed with a dual objective:     (1) to have the capability of being
test fired with the injector chamber combination available from NAS 9-8285;
and (2) to have enough design flexibility to support laboratory seal testing.
Consequently, the valves were overdesigned in that wide allowance was made
to provide stock to machine grooves for various types of seals.

          The initial study effort was directed toward a bipropellant valve
design.   However, after a review of potential engine configurations and
available bipropellant valve designs. it was decided that a single valve
concept would be more appropriate.     A single valve offers more versatility
with respect to lead-lag, mixture ratio control, and engine interface.

          The preferred valve concept selected was a pneumatically actuated,
angled poppet valve.   The poppet configuration was chosen because of its
high cycle life, minimum seal wear, and adaptability to size requirements.
A pneumatic actuation system was selected over hydraulic and electric systems
because of intended test stand usage.        This actuation method affords a fail-
~afe   capability, ability to vary valve response time without redesign, and
to minimize the temperature effect on the actuation media.        See Figure 2.

          The primary objective of the test program was to evaluate the cryogenic
performance of the polymeric dynamic shaft and piston seals and the poppet
seal material.    In addition. Kw versus valve position. ~P at the design flow-
rate. and minimum achievable poppet travel time were determined.

          The valve configuration for the first test series of 10.000 cycles
was with RACO shaft and piston seals and the Kel-F molded poppet.        An
                                                                                     i
                                                                                     I
additional 10.000 cycle test was conducted with Delta dynamic seals and a



                                       -4-
    IV, Method of Approach and Principal Assumptions (continued)


    partially encapsulated Teflon poppet.     Primary design criteria and min/max
    leakage data from the test series are as follows:


                               Leakage Rate, SCC/HR GHe

•                                          30 Psig               700 PsiS
                                      ~         Max.          Min.      Max.

    Actuator Piston Seals
               RACO                    0           8,010      6,888      882,000
               Delta                   0              30          0       48,000


    Rear Shaft Seal
               RACO                    0           2,244        960      184,000
               Delta                   0             125          0       14,400


    Front Shaft Seal
    (Toward Poppet)
               RACO                    0          12,000          0       96,000
               Delta                   0              45         90        4,002


    Poppet
              Kel-F                    0               0          0            0
              Teflon                   0          90,000          0       10,410


    NOTE:    The above data are the minimum and maximum leakage rates noted
•            throughout each of the 10,000 LN2 cycle tests.


              A minimum cycle life of 10,000 cycles at liquid nitrogen temperature
    was desired with leakage rates within the design criteria. The Kel-F poppet
    configura~ion achieved this goal; however, neither the RACO nor Delta dynamic
    seals remained within the design limits at low temperature.       During the luw




                                            -5-
IV, Method of Approach and Principal Assumptions (continued)


pressure leakage tests, 30 psig GHe, the maximum Delta seal leakage was
125 scc/hr as compared to 2,244 scc/hr with a RACO seal in the same
location.    The maximum Delta seal leakage at the higher test pressure,
700 psig, GHe, was 48,000 scc/hr as compared to 882,000 scc/hr with a
RACO seal.     Dynamic seal leakage, in the RACO and Delta configurations,
is attributed to seal shrinkage away from the sealing surface.     This is
confirmed by the leakage rates being within limits at ambient temperature
both before the start of the 10,000 LN2 cycles and at the conclusion.
Indications are that the Delta dynamic seals are superior to RACO seals
in cryogenic temperature applications; however, further effort would be
required to verify that the seals could be brought within acceptable
leakage limitations.



V.      BASIC DATA GENERATED AND SIGNIFICANT RESULTS

        PHASE I

        The basic output of this contract was the design of an Apollo SPS
bipropellant valve with parallel redundant design features for high relia-
bility.

        The significant design features of this component are:

                           A.   Modular construction
                           B.   Cam actuated lift-off seals
                           C.   Gear train drive
        Tests of the valve demonstrated a significant improvement in both
cycle life and leakage rates, e.g., after 20,000 N 0 cycles, leakage rates
                                                   2 4
of GN 2 at 175 psig were 100 cc/hr on the upstream seal and 0 in the down-
stream seal.




                                     -6-
V, Basic Data Generated and Significant Results


             PHASE II

             During Phase II, two workhorse propellant valves were fabricated
and two types of poppet materials and t~o dynamic seal configurations were
tested at cryogenic temperatures for 10,000 cycles.     The results of these
tests constituted the basic data generated.

             The results showed that leakage past the shaft and piston seals
(RACO and Delta) were excessive for flight applications although the Delta
configuration was superior to the RACO.     (800,000 vs. 50,000 scc/hr GHe at
700 psig).

             The Kel-F compression-moulded poppet did not leak during any
portion of the test program; however, the Teflon poppet configuration would
not be adequate in this application because of seat/~oppet loading due to
material cold flow.




VI.          LIMITATIONS

             PHASE I

             Before the desiJn developed during Phase I of the contract could
be incorporated in the SPS engine, it would, of course, have to be subjected
to a complete qualification test series which l10uld include a number of
conditions not evaluated in this program, e.g., high and low temperature,
vibration, shock, etc.     In addition, some work is also required in the area
of assembly and cam run-in procedures and/or lubrication, especially in the
fuel circuit.




                                      -7-
    VI, Limitations (continued)


              PHASE II

              There are no limitations with respect to the comparative results
•   obtained on the leakage rates of the types vf seals tested.     In the event
    additional testing is conducted. the most promising candidates will be
    tested in their intended propellant rather than the -290°F nitrogen used
    in testing.



    VII.      IMPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH

              PHASE I

              Improved leakage rates and cycle life could be obtained for the
    SPS bipropellant valve.

              The inherent susceptability to damage of conventional ball seals
    due to wiping action and contaminaUon can be materially reduced by lifting
    the seals off the ball surface wit~ carns.


              PHASE II

              The use of polymeric poppet ~~als for cryogenic service is well
    within existing state-of-the-art.

              Dynamic peals for cryogenic service continue to be a problem
    although the Delta configuration showed promise.



    VIII.     ~GGESTED   ADDITIONAL RESEARCH

              PHASE I

              No basic research, the results of which would be applicable to all
    designs. is apparent.     Additional effort which would relate to the design



                                           -8-
VIII, Suggested Additional Rpsear ch (continued)


developed under the ~usp jc e 5 of thi s contract include:


           a.     A series of tests to establish seal life with
                  respect to cam lift-off angle.       The cams developed
                  under this contract lifted the geals free of the
                  ball in the first 6° of motion.       This angle was
                  arbitrar y and it is entirely possible that the
                  cam angle could be increas ed wi th no significant
                  decrease in seal life.       Any increase in the
                  allowable cam angle will lower the stress level
                  within t le cams.


           b.     A test program with the objective of developing
                  cam wear-in p ~ocedures and/or lubrication.


           PHASE II

           Additional data should be obtained on the molded Kel-F poppet and
the method of seat loading with Belleville spring washers.           Also to be
determined would be the minimum load required to effect an adequate seal and
load variation, if any, with increasing cycles and low temperatures.              Additional
testing shoul d also be conducted to determine the life cycle of the Kel-F
poppet at cryogenic temperatures.     An upper limit in excess of 100,000 cycles
does not appear unreasonable from the available te~~ data.

           The poppet shaft and actuator piston Delta seals should be evaluated
further.   Prior to this evaluat·on, the design criteria for each seal application
would be analyzed with respect to seal material, surface finishes of mating
parts, amount of shrinkage at cryogenic temperature, velocity of moving parts,
amount of load required (axial and radial) to effect a gc~d seal, and seal
material hardness at low t emperature.     The edge angle of the Delta seal assembly
would be changed accordingly to compensate for anticipated material property
changes encountered at cryogenic temperatures.



                                         -9-
                        VALVE BODY




                                      RACK

                                     ~_   ACTUATION
                                          GAS CAVITY

 CARTRIDGE                                     SPRING
  ASSY                                         CAVITY

 PURGE & DRA IN
    BOSSES




     BALL DRIVE SHAFT



.'
               AJ-8   WORKHORSE       VALVE     ASSEMBLY




                      - - - DYNAMIC SEALS           ACTUATION CAVITY




REMOVABLE POPPET            BEllVillE SPRI NG        LINEAR POTENTIOMETER
 & SEAT ASSEMBLY

