---
title: A cooled telescope for infrared balloon astronomy
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19750004672
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19750004672
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONFERENCE_PAPER
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2016-06-06
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 3a199b1f689d2037e0346cc95b4cc9db7e62ead77a3554c12bdedc16c63f4dd2
pages: 10
words: 1757
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                                              N75 12744
                            PAPER 2.3

       A COOLED TELESCOPE FOR INFRARED BALLOON ASTRONOMY
                          Carl Frederick
                       Michael R. Jacobson
                           Martin Harwit
                        Cornell University
                            ABSTRACT
     A 16 in. liquid helium cooled Cassegrain telescope with
vibrating secondary mirror is being constructed for far infrared
astronomical observations. The system will be capable of housing
several different detectors for multicolor photometry. This
instrument will be flown jointly with Dr. William F. Hoffmann in
a gondola that has been used by him in previous flights.
     For several years now, the Goddard Institute for Space
Studies gondola has been obtaining data on H II regions in the
Galaxy. Some of the more recent results are described elsewhere
in these proceedings. The system has been flown 6 to 8 times a
year. The Gondola consists of a 12" Newtonian telescope with a
vibrating secondary chopper. The beam feeds into a liquid helium
dewar containing a bolometer and filter system which transmits in
the region around 100|i. The gondola is fully steerable and in
addition has a programmable scanning mode.
     Mechanically, the gondola was built in three separate sec-
tions (Figure 1). The middle unit is the structural support,
and houses the orientation machinery. The system is magnetometer
stabilized to about 5' of arc. An inertial wheel provides the
reaction mass against which the gondola stabilizes. In addition,
there is an active bearing which transmits excess angular momen-
tum to the balloon. In a sense the middle unit alone should be
called "the gondola". The right hand unit, which is simply bolted
on to the gondola, is the telescope, detector and preamp section.
The left hand unit is a box containing batteries, control elec-
tronics, and the telemetry, telecommand system. This unit co-
rotates with the telescope. The 2 boxes hanging below the package
are N.C.A.R. transmitters, batteries and ballast hopper. These
boxes are cut away (onto a long nylon cable) before landing so
that the package may land horizontally on the three crash pads
shown. A typical flight lasts about l6 hours. The flight config-
uration of the system has changed in the course of the program
as shown in Figure 2.
     The success of the 12" balloon borne telescope has prompted
us to build a more sensitive instrument.   The 12" telescope has
discovered approximately 100 objects along about half of the
galactic plane. Two thirds of these have been identified clearly
with H II regions or infrared stars. The survey was carried out
with an uncooled telescope and helium cooled bolometer with a
sensitivity of 10~2^ w/m^Hz at lOOp.. The sensitivity of the
telescope is fundamentally limited by the thermal flux falling


                               81
on the detector due to the telescope and sky emission. They sky
emission at lOOu. at 100,000 feet is ~ 0.7 percent at the ambient
temperature of -65°C. The instrumental emission within the
aperture of the telescope is effectively 25 to 50 percent due to
mirror emlsslvity, dewar window emisslvity, warm baffles, and
diffracted rays reaching the side walls of the telescope tube.
At least an order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity can be
obl;n inert if tho o ff<:c:1, i vo toloucopo om.isuiv.Hy .i :*. reduced to a
VJiluo comparable; to or lour, than the atmoi'.phori.c CMII i..';:;.i vity.
This can best bo obtained by the u:;c of a cryoccnlcally cooled
telescope where the emissivity of the mirrors, telescope tube
walls, and baffles is reduced by the lower temperature.
       One of the principal designers of the gondola (William
Hoffmann) is now at the University of Arizona, as is the gondola.
The other designer (Carl Frederick) is now at Cornell. The cur-
rent effort is a collaboration of two groups: William Hoffmann,
Murray Campbell and Paul Harvey in Arizona, and Carl Frederick,
Martin Harwit, and Mike Jacobson at Cornell. The paper describes
principally the Cornell section of the collaboration, !_. e. the
design and construction of a 16", liquid helium cooled, iTasse-
grainian telescope for the gondola.
       The telescope is outlined in Figure 3.            It may be described
as three distinct units: 1) the dewar, 2) the telescope, J>] the
baffle and membrane. In addition, there are two more units not
shown in the diagram: 4) the collar and lid, and 5) the external
frame and balance mechanism.
       We shall briefly describe each unit.
1) The dewar:
       The dewar (Figure 4) is an 18" aperture, 48" deep, and 52"
over all length aluminum and fiberglass double can, made for us by
Cryogenic Associates. Within the dewar walls are radiation
shields and superinsulation.           It is not liquid nitrogen jacketed.
There are mounting flanges welded to the inside of the dewar.
The only access to the inside of the dewar is through the 18"
aperture, _i. e. there are no feed throughs or other holes through
the dewar." Two aluminum rings are welded to the outside wall of
the dewar for mounting to the external frame.
2) The telescope:
       The telescope is a 16" diameter Cassegrainian system. The
primary is fl.7 and the overall system is f5. The primary and
secondary are made of aluminum coated with electroless Qickel.
The surfaces are polished to within 2 wavelengths (5461A) to a
spherical configuration, and are overcoated with aluminum and
silicon monoxide. The circle of confusion is less than 2.4'.
The on axis spot size is about 1.3mm. The mirrors v/ere fabricated
for us by Muffoletto Optical Company.
       Behind the primary mirror is the detector block, which
accomodates 4 detector units. The units are interchangeable.
Each unit contains a detector and its associated post optics and
filters. There are two types of detectors useable in our system:
photoconductors and bolometers. The post optics for the photo-
conductors consists of an off axis segment of a parabola which
effectively results in a virtual detector diameter of .34".
                                  2.>-2
                                    82
The bolometer post optics is a spherical cavity at the focus of
which the bolometer is suspended. The four units will be fil-
tered so that 4 overlapping regions in the range anywhere from
10 to 500 microns may be observed. The field of view of each
detector is about 1/3°.
     In the center of the detector array, there is a fiber
optics bundle leading out of the detector block, up the inside
wall of the dcwar and out. An eyepiece is put on the end so that
the telescope m;iy be Ml.i.^ned with the gondola. After alignment,
the eyepiece is replaced with a detector for the visual region
of the spectrum. Signals from this detector will be the prin-
cipal method of determination of the positions of the infrared
sources with respect to the visual stars.
     A 4 arm spider connects the mounting disc to the secondary
mirror/chopper assembly. The design of the chopper was motivated
by the necessity of minimizing vibration and heat loading in
the cool telescope environment.
     The chopper is a coil-driven resonant system. The chopping
is thus sinusoidal rather than square wave. The calculated
chopper efficiency is greater than 80 percent of that of a perfect
square wave system. However, the high Q, of the resonant system
allows the system to run with very little power (less than one
tenth watt). To minimize vibration, the drive coils are mounted
to a movable plate so that when the secondary mirror rotates in
one direction, the coil plate moves in the other, so that to
first order, the angular momentum of the system is zero. The
chopper resonates at about l6Hz. A sensing coil, magnet combi-
nation provides the chopper reference for synchronous detection.
     Underneath the telescope proper is mounted the helium can.
It is shaped roughly like a bunt cake pan. It is so shaped so
that it entirely surrounds the detector block. The can" is filled
with steel wool to keep the 25 liters of liquid helium from
sloshing about. The expected hold time aloft is of the order of
a day.
     All elements of the telescope, OL-£-tne primary mirror,
the Cassegrain baffle, the spider, the detector block, and the
helium can are mounted to an aluminum disc which is itself mounted
at its periphery to the dewar.
3) -The baffle:
     Within the dewar is a thin wall stainless steel baffle with
a polyethylene membrane accross it some 10 inches from the front
end. The baffle O.D. is 1/4" less than the dewar I.D. The
helium gas which is forced up the sides of the dewar efficiently
cools the dewar. Above the level of the membrane, vents in the
baffle channel the escaping gas over the front surface of the
membrane to prevent water vapour frosting. There is a little
hole in the membrane above the chopper in order that some of the
gas will escape around the chopper, thus providing additional
cooling for it. The baffle also contains knife edge rings to
prevent grazing light rays from reaching the primary.
4) The collar and lid:


                               83
     Above the front of the dewar, a 1 1/2" high collar has been
mounted (Figure 4).   The collar contains the wiring feed through
connectors, and it supports the lid mechanism (Figure 5).
     The motor-driven lid is made of foam (presently styrofoam,
soon to be replaced with thurane) interspaced with foil reflecting
layers. A liquid nitrogen compartment will be added to the lid
to increase the hold time on the ground. The nitrogen will be
blown off before flight.
5) The frame and balance mechanism:
     The dewar is mounted within an aluminum and stainless steel
protective frame. The frame is bolted to the gondola. On top
of the frame, a balancing mechanism is mounted. It is a way of
moving a 10 pound weight up and down the telescope length. It
is used to compensate for the weight loss during flight of the
liquid helium. This compensation is required because the tele-
scope is a scanning instrument which is very sensitive to weight
imbalance.
     Figure 5 shows the gondola during preliminary integration of
the system at Arizona in January, 197^.  The overall system has
been modified so that the electronics side no longer co-rotates
with the telescope.
     The first two flights of the system are currently scheduled
for June of 1974.




                              2.3-4
                               84
Figure 1,

 2.3-5

   85
4 1               --   !
      Figure 2.

        2.3-6

          86
               0>
             Q>
             >s
o           -C
•o          "£ •_
 o           >» E
 o
     0)
  .
CQ.
          fl
          !         to
                    I
                    •H
                    U.
          2.3-7
          87
Figure 4.

 2.3-8

   88
        Irt
        0>
        I-
        •H
        U,
2.3-9
  89
                        DISCUSSION SIM1ARY - PAPER 2.3


    This telescope is expected to have a ten to one increase in signal-to-
noise ratio over a similar warm version. There will be a polyethylene diaphram
operated at a temperature below the dew point near the entrance to the tele-
scope. It is expected that frosting of this diaphram will be no problem
because it will have helium boil off gas blown over it and because this has
not been a problem in another telescope of 12-inch diameter.
    These expectations were contrasted with the experience of the North Ameri-
can Rockwell group.
    The Cornell group expects that the ten inches of baffle height outside
the membrane will protect the system from frosting.
    Experience by F. Low and W. Potete, using a cryogenic telescope aboard a
Lear jet were summarized. One outstanding problem was noise introduced by
motion of the thin mylar diaphram used on the airborne telescope. This mem-
brane was three to four microns thick.
    It is hoped that the quieter balloon environment in conjunction with the
membrane being very cold in the Cornell telescope will minimize this problem.




                                   2.3-10
                                     90

