---
title: A balloon-borne 1 meter telescope for far-infrared astronomy
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19750004668
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19750004668
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONFERENCE_PAPER
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-19
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: e8a27b84f5ea77ed2659a5f2e8145f7e2d71c10623b01f066b4532f6e991cd2e
pages: 13
words: 4136
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                                      PAPER 1.5       !         N75 12740
  A BALLOON-BORNE 1-METER TELESCOPE FOR FAtt-uXi'KARED ASTRONOMY
                                   G. G. Fazio
                                D. E. Kleinmann
                                  R. W. Noyes
                                  E. L. Wright
                             Center for Astrophysics
      Harvard College Observatory and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
                        Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                          and
                                      F. J. Low
                          Lunar and Planetary Laboratory
                    University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721
                                      ABSTRACT

     The Harvard College Observatory, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory,
and the University of Arizona have been engaged in a cooperative program to develop
a balloon-borne 1-m telescope for infrared astronomy in the wavelength interval 40 to
250 (a. The first successful flight of the telescope occurred in February p!974 from
Palestine, Texas. During 5.5 hr at float altitude, the gyro-stabilized telescope
mapped the intensity of far-infrared radiation from NGC 7538, Mars, the Orion
Nebula, and W3 with a resolution of 1' and from selected regions of these sources
with a resolution of 30". Use of an N-slit photometer and a star-field camera will
permit absolute positions of the sources to be determined to <30". Numerous* weak
sources were also observed.
     The infrared detection system consisted of an array of four gallium-doped
germanium bolometers3 cooled to 1.8 K. Preliminary results indicate that sources
with an intensity of 10 f.u. were easily detectable.
     This paper is concerned primarily with the description of the 1-m telescope and
its instrumentation, orientation system, and modes of observation.
                                   INTRODUCTION

     In early 1971, a group of scientists at the Harvard College Observatory (HCO)
and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) initiated a new research pro-
gram in the promising field of far-infrared astronomy. The primary observational
instrument was to be a balloon-borne telescope that could accomplish unique meas-
urements with at least an order-of-magnitude increase in sensitivity and angular
resolution over previous experiments in aircraft and high-altitude balloons. The
University of Arizona agreed to collaborate and contributed the primary and secon-
dary mirrors and the infrared detectors. Thus, a 1-m balloon-borne far-infrared
telescope was designed and constructed that was capable of high-resolution (=£!')
mapping in the 40- to 250-jj region and of absolute position determination to =£30",
with at least a factor-of-10 increase in sensitivity (<103 f.u.) over previous experi-
ments.




                                         1.5-1

                                           38


402-041
                                INSTRUMENTATION

Telescope Optics
     Figure 1 shows the optical arrangement of the f/13. 5 Cassegrain telescope. The
1-m primary mirror is spherical (f/2) and constructed of an aluminum alloy, and the
18-cm secondary mirror, made of pyrex, is figured to match the primary mirror.
The Cassegrain focus occurs behind the primary mirror, yielding a scale in the focal
plane of 15'.'2/mm. At a wavelength of 100 jj, the diffraction limit of the telescope
is 25". Forward of the focal plane, the infrared beam is reflected by a dichroic




              N-SLIT




                Figure 1. Optical arrangement of the 1-m telescope.
beam splitter that passes visible light. A second beam splitter directs half the
optical light onto an N-slit mask at a second focal plane. Light passing through the
mask is focused onto a photomultiplier tube. A removable eyepiece, mounted in the
focal plane behind the second beam splitter, serves to aid in the optical alignment

                                        1.5-2
                                         39
and testing of the telescope. The secondary mirror is mounted by means of a cen-
tral bolt to a solenoid-driven chopper mechanism that causes the mirror to oscillate
in the azimuthal direction in a square-wave motion of 20-Hz frequency. This beam-
switching technique cancels out the background radiation from the sky and the mirror
by subtracting the contribution from two fields of view separated by 5'. The chopper
mechanism is further mounted on a commandable-focus drive. The whole secondary
system is supported by four sheet-metal spiders to the external support ring and then
through conventional tubular trusses to the central telescope ring. The weight of the
telescope assembly out to the elevation axis, including optics and instrumentation, is
~400 kg.
Infrared Detectors
     The infrared detection system consists of four gallium-doped germanium bolom-
eters, cooled to 1. 8 K in a liquid helium dewar vented to ambient atmospheric pres-
sure. The ambient pressure at the flight altitude of 29 km is 10.5 torr. As shown
in Figure 2, three of the detectors are arranged in a linear array, with each subtend-
ing an angle of 115 in elevation by 1' in azimuth; the fourth detector, with a circular
field of 0! 5, is located immediately adjacent to the central detector in the linear




                           4.5
                        arc min



                                     1arc
                                     min
               Figure 2. Arrangement of the infrared-detector beams.
array. The cooled optics, all at 1. 8 K, consists of a sandwich of 0. 86-mm crystal-
line quartz and 1-mm calcium flouride with one surface coated with diamond dust
plus four silicon field lenses. The field of view in the sky is determined by the
aperture of the silicon lenses. All the cooled elements are antireflection-coated for
maximum transmission at 65 |j. The dewar vacuum window, of 1-mm high-density
polyethylene, is coated on the inner surface with diamond dust to reject radiation
less than 5 \i and is at a temperature of ~250 K. The passband of the system has a
sharp cuton at 40 |j, a peak transmission at 65 |j, and a long wavelength cutoff defined
primarily by diffraction. For the three larger detectors, this cutoff is ~250 ji; for
the small detector, it is ~125 p.
     Each of the four bolometer signals is amplified by an AC-coupled voltage pre-
amplifier, with a gain of 10^, followed by postamplifiers with gains of 0. 5, 10, and
                                          1.5-3
                                            40
30. The 12 signal lines are then connected directly to the telemetry system through
teflon coaxial cables. The signals are digitized at a sampling rate of 128 s~* and
transmitted to the ground station by PCM telemetry. Phase-sensitive demodulation
and further processing are done at the ground station by using the telemetered
chopper-coil current signal as a phase reference. The onboard signal amplifiers are
made immune to external electrical noise by individual batteries and by ground isola-
tion from the gondola.
                           ORIENTATION OF THE TELESCOPE
Stabilization
     The telescope is mounted in a rectangular aluminum-frame gondola (Figures 3
and 4) 5.1 m high and 3.4 X 2.9 m wide. The entire system weighs approximately
1814 kg. Of primary, importance are the heavy structural elements used throughout
the central portion of the gondola to maintain the integrity of the telescope tube, the
elevation and azimuth axes, and the payload electronics. The telescope is stabilized
and pointed by means of positional servo controls on the elevation and azimuth axes.
The entire gondola moves in azimuth, but the telescope motion in the elevation direc-
tion is with respect to the gondola frame. The driving element for each axis is a DC
torque motor mounted directly on the axis without gearing. In elevation, the reaction
mass is the main frame of the suspended gondola. Reaction forces for the azimuth
position control are provided by a large reaction wheel mounted on the gondola center
line below the telescope. Complications are introduced, however, by the needs to
control the reaction-wheel speed and to isolate the gondola from random and rapid
balloon rotations. These needs are met through the use of a "momentum dump"
device — a bearing, supporting the shaft passing up to the balloon, whose outer race
is driven in sinusoidal excursions of about 2° at a frequency of 5 Hz. Under normal
conditions, this motion is symmetrical and yields no net torque, nor momentum
transfer, to the balloon, thereby providing some isolation of the payload. If, how-
ever, energy accumulates in the reaction wheel so that its angular velocity exceeds
1 rad s , the sinusoidal bearing drive is proportionally biased to permit momentum
transfer to the balloon. This enables the reaction wheel to slow to a near-zero con-
trol speed.
Pointing and Acquisition
      Positioning the telescope optical line of sight is accomplished in two modes:
first, an acquisition mode, determined with respect to the horizontal component of
the earth's magnetic field in azimuth and with respect to the local vertical in eleva-
tion, to an accuracy of 0°1; and second, an inertial mode, determined by a two-axis
gyroscope system mounted on the telescope tube, which gives stability in inertial
space to ~1'. For the acquisition mode, a null magnetometer is mounted on a table
and servo-driven in azimuth so as to remain fixed to local magnetic north. The
angular position of the magnetometer with respect to the gondola is determined by a
13-bit shaft encoder (smallest bit equals 216). An azimuth position command, in the
form of a digital word, is transmitted to the gondola and stored in a onboard register.
The encoder output is compared with the stored azimuth position command, and the
difference signal drives the azimuth servo system. The azimuth position stability is
~6'. In the elevation axis, the telescope angle referenced to the gondola is deter-
mined by a potentiometer and compared with the analog equivalent of a 12-bit elevation

                                         1.5-4

                                          41
      .      •   -
                     . -:
•   7 -*^'       .          .       • --   r                            :'.:


                                Figure 3. Payload just before launch.


                                                1.5-5
                                      1
SS2SSWS                                          42
command stored in another register. As in azimuth, the difference is used to drive
the servo motor. The smallest bit in elevation is 113, and the stability is of the
order of 1'.




               Figure 4. Back assembly of the payload.
     To avoid major perturbations in the acquisition pointing mode, the rate of change
of position is limited to 0.°5 s"1.
     In the inertial pointing mode, position information is obtained from two rate-
integrating gyros mounted on the telescope base ring. One senses motions about the
elevation axis directly, while the other senses motions about an axis perpendicular to
both the elevation axis and the telescope line of sight. In combination with a

                                        1.5-6
                                          43
potentiometer-derived secant function, of the elevation angle, this latter output con-
trols the gondola azimuth. At higher elevation angles, the "azimuth" gyro becomes
increasingly sensitive to gondola motion about the roll axis, and this places a maxi-
mum limit on the useful elevation    angle of about 35°. The gyros have random drift
rates of the order of 3' hr"1; however, the    present electronic circuitry has limited
the drift rate to the order of ~0! 5 min"-1. A much larger drift rate in azimuth was
observed during the flight.
     By exciting torquing coils on the gyro axes, the gyros can be processed, and when
they are coupled to the pointing control system, controls can, in effect, be imposed
on angular rates in azimuth and elevation on the telescope. Provision has been made
for "manual" scan rates of ±1' s"1 about both axes; these rates are selected inde-
pendently from the ground with durations controlled by the operator in real time.
Further, and most important, an onboard raster-pattern generator can be com-
manded to control the gyro torquers so as to produce a raster-like scan of the tele-
scope over a large field of view. Two sizes of raster patterns, each with 32 lines
per pattern, are available by command: One set has a line scan rate of 1' s"-1 and
2125 spacing between lines, yielding a scanned field of about 30' in azimuth and 1° in
elevation in about 18 min; the second set has the above values multiplied by a factor
of 3, yielding a 155 X 3° field in the same time. The raster scan can be aborted at
any time.
                  OBSERVATIONAL TECHNIQUES DURING FLIGHT

      During the payload flight, the observational method consists of a series of
 operations performed in turn for each object to be observed. First, the expected
 azimuth and elevation positions for the object are computed on the ground for an
 appropriate future time and given payload latitude and longitude. An HP9810A pro-
 gramable calculator computes the magnetic deviation and applies corrections from
 the magnetic azimuth and elevation calibrations. The printed output contains the
 azimuth and elevation commands to be executed, as well as the expected values of
the elevation position potentiometer and the output voltages from a crossed pair of
 magnetometers on the payload. The azimuth and elevation commands are telemetered
 in advance to the payload, which, on receipt of an "execute" command, moves the
telescope slowly to the desired position and maintains it. At the predetermined time,
 the gyros are uncaged, activating the inertial mode; the telescope then tracks the
point in the sky to which it has been positioned. In most cases, the desired object is
 not in the field of view — primarily owing to uncertainty in magnetic-azimuth position —
 and a search pattern must be initiated. The type of search pattern employed depends
 on the celestial object. For an infrared source without an associated bright object,
 a large raster scan is initiated. When the source is observed with the infrared detec-
tors, the raster is aborted, the telescope is manually scanned to a new position, and
 a small raster is initiated to remap the object. If no object is found, the raster goes
through 10 lines and then is aborted. A new position in the acquisition mode is
calculated and the above process repeated. For an infrared object that is also
optically bright, the search mode involves the use of the optical N-slit with a field of
 20'; a spiral pattern is generated by manual scans in azimuth and elevation in the
inertial mode until the object is found. Typically, an area 3° in azimuth and 1° in
elevation can be covered in approximately 4 min. When the object is discovered, the
telescope is repositioned and a small raster pattern is initiated. Again, if no object
is discovered, the spiral scan is stopped after three azimuth scans and the position
reacquired in the acquisition mode.

                                         1.5-7
                                            44
      When an infrared object is being mapped with the telescope in the inertial mode,
it is extremely important to know, in real time, the relative position of the telescope
axis with respect to the object. Otherwise, valuable time can be lost if it is assumed
that the telescope is carrying out a given command when actually the wrong command
was sent or the command was not received. To avoid these difficulties, a series of
payload-status lights, actuated only by commands received and executed by the pay-
load, are displayed at the ground station. They indicate such functions as inertial
mode, azimuth or elevation direction, rastering, and direction of raster line. In
addition, the same signals drive an X-Y recorder, which displays the motion of the
telescope. Superimposed on the Y axis of the recorder is the output of the N-slit
photometer (Figure 5). By observing the X-Y recorder, the telescope can be posi-
tioned for mapping by rasters.




Figure 5. X-Y recorder output during a large raster scan of the telescope, The
          output of the N-slit optical photometer is added in the Y direction.
     A number of other means are also available for calculating the position of the
telescope. Some provide data for real-time determination, others, a postflight
record.
     The pointing control system generates telemetry readouts of the elevation and
azimuth positions: In elevation it is an analog voltage, and in azimuth it is an analog
voltage indicating the difference between the commanded position and the instantaneous
pointed position. Both these readouts provide a sensitivity sufficient to monitor fine-
pointing control performance.

                                         1.5-8
                                          45
     An additional determination of magnetic azimuth is provided by a pair of crossed
magnetometers mounted on the gondola.
     The most useful device for fine-position determination is the N-slit photometer,
discussed earlier. Star transits across the three branches of the N mask, telemetered
to the ground, indicate with high precision the elevation and azimuth of the optical
object with respect to the star field during scanning activities. The photometer out-
put is AC-coupled to reduce its sensitivity to scattered light. The photometer is
effective for stars down to 9th magnitude.
     An independent device for postflight pointing verification is the star-field camera,
a 35-mm-sequence camera mounted on the telescope, which provides an effective field
of view of about 15°. The camera photographs star images and records a projected
reticle pattern, along with data indicating frame number, time, and status of the pay-
load. In addition to taking pictures on command from the ground, the camera is
automatically triggered during the various payload scanning functions.
                             BACKUP CONTROL SYSTEM
     In the event of failure of one or more major systems in the primary operation of
the telescope pointing, a simple backup control system can be activated by tone com-
mands. This system serves two functions: automatic stow of the telescope and crude
pointing control of the telescope in azimuth and elevation.
     The telescope is normally stowed by commanding it to point vertically, placing it
in a position such that a commandable motor-driven pin can capture a lug mounted on
the telescope for this purpose. Should this primary technique fail owing to loss of
battery power or to excessive telemetry range, an independent system, after a preset
time and on descent through a particular altitude, will engage the elevation axis and
drive the telescope to the vertical position by utilizing its own battery power. In
doing so, it also turns off the main payload. Associated with this is a pneumatically
actuated capture device that, although locked out during launch, will thereafter retain
the telescope in the vertical position on its descent through 9.2-km altitude.
     If the primary azimuth or elevation command servo systems should fail, an inde-
pendent system can be actuated to drive the telescope in elevation by using the same
motor as in the emergency stow procedure described above. An independent elevation
potentiometer is also provided. The motion in azimuth is achieved by directly driv-
ing the motor in the momentum-dump system in either direction. Azimuth position is
determined from the cross magnetometers and the N-slit photometer.
                    POWER, TELEMETRY AND TELECOMMAND

     The main power for the payload (except for the telemetry and telecommand sys-
tems) is supplied by a silver zinc battery pack with a capacity of 400 amp hr, loaned
by NASA Johnson Space Center. The nominal voltage is 28.5 V. With all systems
operating, the battery current varies between 17 and 20 amp.
     The telemetry system, provided by the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF),
consisted of a PCM system with 48 analog inputs and 4 digital words and a bit rate of
40. 96 kbits s . After decommutation at the ground station, the data were processed
by a PDP-11 computer and digitally recorded on tape. Real-time output of the data
could also be obtained on a teletypewriter, where all analog and digital words could
be printed in sequence or selected words could be printed on command. Thirty
digital-to-analog converters were also available. Any 4 of the 12 infrared data lines
from the digital-to-analog converters could be switch-selected, processed by the
phase-sensitive amplifiers, and displayed on a strip-chart recorder.
                                         1.5-9
                                          46
    Thirteen analog channels of FM/FM telemetry also provide redundancy for the
most important data.
     The telecommand equipment, supplied by NSBF, comprises a PCM command
system, of which 30 momentary commands are used. Because of the number of com-
mands required for this payload, the PCM system is used to address and execute
commands within a more elaborate command matrix in the payload. Seven tone com-
mands are also employed.
                 TESTING AND FLIGHT HISTORY OF THE PAYLOAD

     Design of the 1-m telescope began in August 1971, funded from the internal budgets
of SAO and HCO, with the hope that the equipment would be ready for flight in a year.
Payload construction was completed in August 1972, and the experiment was moved to
the NSBF in Palestine, Texas. Operational testing, payload debugging, and other
improvements continued into October, at which time the first flight took place. How-
ever, it failed shortly after reaching float altitude owing to a short circuit on one of
the principal voltage reference lines, probably caused by a spiral metal chip.
     A second flight, in April 1973, also failed, this time before reaching float alti-
tude. The failure again occurred in the electronic systems because of a shorted
transistor in the elevation motor drive system.
     Following the second failure, extensive payload refurbishment was undertaken,
particularly in the electronics system, from July through September 1973. Thermal-
vacuum tests of the entire payload were then conducted, with assistance from NASA
Johnson Space Center. Three simulated flights were performed, by matching tem-
perature and pressure profiles of an actual flight as closely as possible. During the
tests, a 3' infrared source was positioned in the chamber, and one wall of the cham-
ber was cooled to 70 K.
     The thermal-vacuum tests offered many benefits at relatively low cost. First,
the payload design was qualified under conditions it was to experience in flight.
Second, valuable data were obtained on the infrared detection system. The sensitiv-
ities of the detectors were measured and the noise background evaluated. Third,
the differing thermal environments of the three tests provided enough data to allow
us to cope with the expected seasonal atmospheric variations for flight at any time of
the year. Fourth, the tests gave us the opportunity to build up operational experience
with the payload while virtually eliminating any chance of damage that might occur
during actual flight and recovery.
     A third flight was launched in December 1973, but the balloon burst during ascent.
The telescope was stowed while the parachute descended and was recovered with no
damage to the payload. For the brief period of ascent, all systems appeared to func-
tion properly.
     The fourth flight, in February 1974, was a complete success. After an ascent of
2 hr to 28.4 km, the flight lasted 5.5 hr, limited only by telemetry range. The pay-
load was recovered without damage.
                        PRELIMINARY SCIENTIFIC RESULTS

     The data from the February flight are still in an early stage of analysis. How-
ever, some preliminary results can be quoted from real-time records.
     During the 5. 5 hr at float altitude, data were obtained that will permit the genera-
tion of infrared maps of NGC 7538, Mars, Orion A, and W3. Angular resolution of 1'
was achieved for these maps, and selected scans were accurate to 30" resolution

                                         1.5-10
                                           47
(Figure 6). The sensitivity was such that sources with an intensity of 10 f.u. are
easily identifiable. Scans along the galactic plane indicated numerous weak sources.
The number of stars detected in the N-slit photometer are sufficient for absolute posi-
tions of the infrared sources to be determined.




Figure 6. Infrared detector outputs during a raster scan of W3. The top three traces
are from the 1' detectors; the bottom trace is from the 30" detector. The chart speed
          was 0.5 mm s~l, and the telescope scan rate, 3' s~* in azimuth.
    The pointing stability of the payload was excellent during the flight.
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

    The payload was designed and constructed by the Solar Satellite Engineering
Group, Harvard College Observatory. Details of the payload attitude and command
control systems are presented in a paper at this symposium by N. Hazen, L. Coyle,
and S. Diamond.
                                         1.5-11
                                            48
     M. Zeilik assisted in the flight preparation.
     We had several very valuable suggestions on payload design and construction from
Dr. W. Hoffman, University of Arizona.
     We are most grateful to NASA Johnson Space Center, Space Environment Test
Division and, in particular, to Mr. E. E. Peck, for assistance in the thermal-
vacuum tests.
     The National Scientific Balloon Facility was responsible for the launch, tracking,
and recovery of the experiment and contributed all the onboard telemetry, as well as
the data-processing equipment at the ground station. Without their assistance, this
flight would have been impossible.
     This work was supported in part by funds from the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration under grant NCR 22-007-270.




                                        1.5-12

                                          49
                        DISCUSSION SUMMARY - PAPER 1.5

     It is expected that it will be possible to fly this system two to four
flights each year. There is very little damage to the system on landing.
Most of the impact is taken by aluminum rings around the system. They have
not experienced misalignment of the gimbals. In order to avoid fouling of
motors and bearings, these parts are disassembled and cleaned after each flight.
This is the most time-consuming task between launches.
     Telemetry is provided by the NCAR system available at Palestine. It
provides 48 analog words and four digital words at a 40 kilobit rate. A
350-mile telemetry range has been realized. In addition, the NCAR PDP-11
computer is used to provide digital tapes of the data.
     Telescope suspension is through a universal joint to the momentum dump
system which includes ball bearings. Stabilization in two axes instead of
three was used as a cost savings approach. No problems are encountered for
observations below 40°; at 40° oscillations in roll set in.
     The primary mirror provided by the University of Arizona is aluminum
and weighs 250 pounds. It has a one-arcsecond image when warm and a
15-arcsecond image when cold.




                                    1.5-13

                                     50

