---
title: Infrared Astronomy
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19810013452
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19810013452
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONTRACTOR_REPORT
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 2e070baa7d95c0990edf04ea07ea8572d44b9f30956dc4017402f72a8563cb47
pages: 24
words: 5253
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                    NOTICE



    THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRODUCED FROM
    MICROFICHE. ALTHOUGH IT IS RECOGNIZED THAT
CERTAIN PORTIONS ARE ILLEGIBLE, IT IS BEING RELEASED
   IN THE INTEREST OF MAKING AVAILABLE AS MUCH
              INFORMATION AS POSSIBLE
    c
1             .




                                                                 SEMI ANNUAL STATUS REPORT

                                                                 NASA GRANT NGL 05- 002-207

                                                     California Institute of Technology

                                                           1 October 7980 - 31 March 1981
                                                                                                                                                           n31,r`
                                                                                                                                                           ^'        At'R 1381
                                                                                                                                                                    RECEIV$D,
                                                                     INFRARED ASTRONOMY
                                              G. Neugebauer, f. T. Soifer, and K. Matthews
                                                                                                                                                           l NA
                                                                                                                                                             ,A
                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                  D1^
                                                                                                                                                                         6E 1




                                        The present report covers the latter half of the eighteenth

                                 year of operation of an observational program in infrared astronomy

                                 under NASA Grant NGL 05-002-207. The program supported by this grant

                                 is currently carrying out wozk in two broad wavelength ranges, the

                                 near infrared (1 - 10 um) an& the millimeter.



                                 A. Near Infrared Studies

                                        The near infrared work concentrates largely on the use of the 5 m

                                 Hale telescopz in spectroscopic and photometric studies of extragalactic

                                 sources. The photometric studies are characterized by being long range

                                 and a-Ztempting to measure unbiased and large samples of objects in order
                                                                                                                                                                                           d

                                 to understand statistical trends. In particular, in collaboration with

                                 R. Green, we have measured all the quasars found by Green on the basis of

                                 purely optical discriminators. So far we have measured the total sample:

                                 of > 100 quasars at 1.2, 1.6 and 2.2 um. A subset has been observed at

                                 3.5 and 10 un. During the last six months ve have put all the visual and

                                 infrared data into a computer so the processing of this sample can be

                                 carried out on a large scale. Thin chore is now completed and analysis

                             should start soon.                                                                                                                                            i

                            (NASA— CH-164174) ZHFRARED ASTRONOMY                                                                                           :N81-21982
    `                       Semiannual Status .Report, 1 Oct. 1980 - 31
                            Mar. 1981 (California Inst. of Tech..) 22 p
                            HC A 02/MF AO I                                                                     CSCL 03A G3     Unclas
                                                                                                                         10/89 42015
          _

        4.zrVJN ,it-.   .    _                i   ..: ..   ..-     -... ,.. ._...._.,,y....i.:.•.rA.   _w......r-......—.`ru:dyi...:r,: ^c16....:..: ./!                        -.   _..
                                        2



       In another related program in collaboration with B. Margon and

G. 0hanan, we bava measured the infrared properties of X-ray quasars
             in
discovered        the study of serendipitous sources found in Einstein Observa-

tory observations of other sources. Thus far we have obtained JHK pho-

tometry of ,.30 such quasars. Figure 1 shows the visual to 2.2 pm spectral

index of these sources, compared to that of an optically selected sample
                      on
of quasars. Based          a preliminary analysis of these data, it seems that
                                                            in
the X-ray selected quasars do not differ substantially           their Infrared

properties from the optically selected quasars.

       One of the most puzzling observations relating to quasars is tha

discrepant values of the ratios of hydrogen emission line strengths.

Previously, this group added significant data in studies of hydrogen lines

in quasars which have been redsh,-,feed to the infrared. We have now ex-

tended these observationo by making nearly simultaneous measurements of

Pa, Ila, and HO for 18 Seyfert galaxies; in addition La was detected in

eight of these galaxies. The data are shown in figure 2. In contrast to

QSOs, the Pa/lIo/110 line flux, ratios of Seyferts are in most cases consistent

with reddened case B recombination spectra. Four galaxies have QSO-like

spectra. with Fa/HR vcase B and Ha/Ha > case B. No clear intermediate cases

are seen. LG/HO ic always less than 35. In some casea, it is consistent

with the reddening derived from P4/H(3 or Ra/HO. In others it falls below

the reddening curve. Extinction by dust external or internal to the emis-

sion, line regions can explain most of the observed rsAtios, although the

reddening determined from the hydrogen lines does not correlate well with

that determined in other ways.



                                                                                  k.




                                                                                  ji
                                                                                  j1d
                  N


                       E
                  r                                           E
                                                         1•

                       ZL                                     In
                       L

                                                         0.   lf'.
                  i Ow                                   j 0
                                                                 w

                       E                                       E
                  t
                  O N                                    O
                                                         ^    N

                    N                                         N

                    tl                                   O
                                                               tl

                  O

                                                         LO
                  to
                                                         O
                  O

cG   d'       N               d'   O   w   N   GD   d'
                                  NN
          Z                                Z




                       Figure 1
    F6



                             4




i
E
           0.(
                      K




           0.4



           0.'



                                 P       C"
           0.2                       1        ^
                     D

0.15                 SI N        Ic



                                     - 109
         0.10
                            r^r4X09
         0.08    L
                             ^ C
         0.06                            is

                                                  Pa/H^3 =0.^ 8   l
         0.0 4



         0.03
x



                                        5




           In -addition to the large snale 5 m programs, several smaller sci-

    entific programs have been carried out, largely under the auspices of

    graduate students.



    Pascben a Line Profile in 3C273

           Analysis of the Pa line profile in the low redshif: quasar is

    making progress. This hydrogen emission line, redshffted into the 2 pm

    atmospheric window, was measured with — 800 km s -1 velocity resolution,,

    using a Fabry-Perot spectrometer. The purpose of this observation was to

    provide a better understanding of ve broad line emission regions in

    quasars, and particularly of the anomalous hydrogen line ratios observed

    in these objects. Current models explaining these line ratios fall into

    two groups, one attributing the observed line ratios to reddening by dust,

    and the other producing the emission lines in dense, optically thick clouds

    within the broad line region. If dust produces the anomalous line ratios,

    a comparison of the :lines profiles of Pa, which is little affected by dust,

    and HS should yield information on the distribution of the dust within the

    quasar. If instead the line ratios are due to radiative transfer and

    optical depth effects, and the velocity of the clouds is due to systematic

    inflow or outflow, one might expect assymetrics between the red and 'blue

    portions of the lines, as one sees either the side of the cloud illumi-

    nated by the central energy source or not. Since HO is optically thick

    In these cloud models, while Pa is more optically thin, differences in

    the transfer of optically thin and thick lines within the clouds could

    produce differences in the amount of red/blue assymetry between Pa and HO.
                                           6



             The results of laboratory and telescope testing of the Fabry-Perot

      spectrometer have led to an understanding of the characteristics of the

      instrument, allowing a final reduction of the 3C 273 data,

      The final 'best spectrum is shown in Figure 3. A first comparison of

      the Pa line profile with the HR profile published by Bok-senberg et al.

      (M.r.R.A.S. 172, 289, 1975) shows the two to be very similar. Work is

      -proceeding on a -more detailed comparison, and on an investigation into

      what predictions would be made by cloud models for the magnitude of line
      }profile diffeTeuces due to radiative transfer and optical depth effects.


      X-Ray Burster Observations

             Puring the last summer an extensive observational program searching

      for in3cr4red bursts was carried out in coordination with X-ray satellite

      observations and it rared ground based observations from Hawaii. X-ray

      bursts are well known, and infrared bursts have been reported previously

      by .several groups, but infrared bursts have never been seen simultaneously
      with X-ray bursts or by two infrared groups. The purpose of our measure-

      ments was both to validate the presence of infrared bursts and to learn

      about the relationship between infrared and X-ray bursts to understand

      about the physics of the bursters.

             During the program, 27 nights were logged at Mt. Wilson observing

      the globular cluster Liller I which contains the rapid burster MXB 1730-335.
      Around half of these were in common with X-ray measurements. Kulkorn et al.

      (1979 Nature 280, 819) have reported infrared bursts from this object as
      have Jones et al. (1980, Nature 283, 550). During the period of our




6:i
^^
                                                        1•;

iy
+F'                                                     i
y>
R'    a                     ^
                                                        r




                                                   _J




                                                   a




                                      •            /
               •



O
                   L.                        ^O

                                             .•-
          ^-
          N    ^-^                         I ov,
          C.^► .   c        ----.,           ^
                   J




                        _       ,.,   ,^           p
F



                                     8



    observations, however, no bursts greater than 5 x 10 -Z6 J M-2 Hz 1

    were found, a limit well below previously reported bursts. The ob-

    servations are now being prepared for publication. This program

    will be resumed the coming summer if unusual X-ray activity of the

    object is reported.



    Reflection Nebula

           A program has been recently begun by a graduate student, K.

    Sellgren, of measuring the near infrared radiation from reflection

    nebulae. By measuring the spatial distribution of reflected light at

    1.2, 1.6, and 2.2 um, information may be deduced about the scattering

    properties of dust grains in the near infrared. Theoretical predic-

    tions of the albedo and assymetr• `actor g are difficult to make in

    the near infrared due to uncertainties in the size distribution of

    the grains and even the appropriate values of the optical constants

    for typical grain materials. An observational determination of the

    albedo and g will be of great ease, both for radiative transfer calcu-

    lations which depend on these quantities, and for the information it

    will provide on the composition and size of the grains.

         Observations at 2.2 pm of the reflection nebula NGC 7023, in

    collaboration with S. E. Whitcomb of Caltech, have already been com-

    pleted. Observations of NGC 7023 at 1.2 and 1.6 um are planned for

    this summer, and observations at 1.2, 1.6, and 2.2 um were begun this

    winter on several new reflection nebulae, including NGC 2023 and

    NGC 2068. Preliminary results for NGC 7023 are that the albedo at




                                                                                   a



                                                                             _4i
r




                                          9




        2.2 pm is probably   greater than 0.7. A spectrum of the nebulosity

        from 1.4 to 2.4 Um, with 51 resolution, shows no spectral features,

        and also shows that the albedo in the near infrared rises with wave-

        length. This would imply that the albedo drops from visual wavelengths

        to 1.4 Um, then rises again to 2.4 um. Further analysis of these ob-

        servations is in progress.

            One observational problem that is also being pursued is the con-

        tribution of faint field stars to the observed extended emission asso-

        ciated with reflection nebula. Scans at 2.2 um have been made of

        several of the reflection nebulae to search for the brighter field

        stars, and the observed nebulosity has been corrected for their con-

        tribution. More work needs to be done to determine the number of stars

        below the scan detection limit. If there are significant numbers of

        these fainter stars, the observed value of the 2.2 Um albedo could be

        lowered by their contribution to the observed nebular emission.



        Infrared Studies of Cataclysmic Variables

             Cataclysmic variable stars are binary stars having orbital periods

        of several hours. They consist of a late type dwarf that fills its

        critical Roche surface and transfers matter to a white dwarf. The

        transferred matter forms a thin disc around the white dwarf; the disc

        lies in the orbital plane of the binary. The continuum of the disc is

        blue and dominates the visual spectrum of these systems.

             Although the transfer of material between the components of binary

        stars is commonplace, the c:nly such stars in which the light of 01-9




    .
                                         10
k   r




        transferred matter dominates the luminosity of the systems are the

        cataclysmic systems. A study of these stars is thus of special impor-

        tance in the study of the dynamics of mass transfer in binary stars.

             G. Berriman, a graduate student in astronomy has been studying

        cataclysmic variable stars in the infrared throughout the past year.

        The results of this research can be summarized as follows:

             i) Observations of U Gem

             U Gem, an eclipsing system of period 4 h 10 M , is a unique cataclysmic

        star in that the radiation of the red star dominates the red and

        infrared luminosity of the system. The properties of the red star in

        U Gem (hereafter called U Gem B) can thus be readily studied.

             V'arlations arise because U Gem B is ellipsoidal in shape.

        This gives rise to a light curve that is doubly sinusoidal in shape.

        A, comparison of the observed variations with those calculated for a

        star filling its Roche lobe provides a test of the hypothesis that

        U Gem B lose'. mass to the white dwarf by this mechanism. The infrared

        observations of U Gem (made on the UKIRT by I. Gatley) reveal that the

        infrared light curves at J, H, and K are double humped at each

        wavelength.                                                                    y
             In order to model the ellipsoidal variations of red stars in

        cataclysmic binaries, Berriman in collaboration with Dr. S. Mochnachi

        (University of British Columbia) developed a computational technique

        to simulate the variations. A simplified model of a cataclysmic

        binary in which the white dwarf and the accretion disc are each
                                11



regarded as point sources radiating iootrop ca.11y et the surface of

the-white dwarf has been used. They find that the observed variation

are consistent with those expected of a star iliolined at 65 0 which

fills its Roche lobe. The observations thus represent the first direct

evidence of the hypothesis that the red star in a cataclysmic system

fills its Roche lobe.

     ii) Observations of Non- eclipsing Systems

     Berriman and P. Szkody (University of Washington.,, Seattle) have

conducted a short survey of non-eclipsing catacli:smic stars at J, R,

and K with the 60-inch telescope at Mount Wilson. The following

stars have been studied: KT Per, RX And,TT Ari, TZ Per, SS Aur,

YZ Cnc, Z Cam, SY Cnc, EX Hya, AH Her, V603 Aql, AE Agr, SS Cyg,

AB Dra, RW Tri and EM Cyg.

     The purpose of the ttp-vey was to study the spectral types of the

red stars which radiate the bulk of their luminosities in the infrared.

A knowledge of the spectral types of the red stars permits a determina-

tion of the distances to the systems and, from this, one can estimate

the luminosities of the accretion discs and, consequently, the site Of

mass transfer from the red star to the white dwarf: this rate depends

critically on the luminosity of the disc. An estimate of the rate of

mass transfer is crucial to a thorough understanding of the properties

of accretion discs, for it determines the density of, and optical depth

of, each element of the disc.

     Berriman and Szkody found that the spectral types of red stars in

the above systems differ widely, but that the infrared colors of each
     F



                                              12



          system can be adequately represented as the composition in wavelength

          of a main-sequence star and free-free emission from a plasma of emission
                                   5.57
          integral 1 Ne2 dV - 10          cm-3 , (T - 104 K) The latter component of

          the infrared radiation most probably arises in the outer regions of the

t        disc. The spectral types of the xed stars vary from K4 (13 subclasses)
F'
          in AH Her to 145 (12 subclasses) in YZ Cnc and ELK Hya.

               The systems also exhibit a large range of distances: AE Aqr is

          at 75 pc, whereas TT Ari lies at 400 pc. These results disagree with

          the previously determined estimates of tha distances, based on the

          assumption that the accretion discs of cataclysmic variables have the

          same absolute visual magnitudes which produced distance estimates of

         — 100-200 pc to nearly all the cataclysmic stars. The estimates based

          on the infrared data (although accurate to N 30%) are more reliable

          because the properties of red stars are better 'knowm than those of

          discs. In fact, the discrepancy between ours and the previous estimates

          imply that discs exhibit a wide range is absolute visual luminosity.



          Instrumenta l Develokment


              A major portion of the effort supported by this grant in the last

         year has been devoted to the development of a new single element InSb

         photometric system for the 5 m telescope. This new system is now

         background photon noise limited in all near infrared photometric bands,

         and incorporates several features that allow for extremely versatile

         operation. These include:
                                          13
t

    (1) Multiple feedback resistors spanning a range of Sreater than 104

    in resistance (10 8 to 2 x 10 12 ohms) to permit observations over a

    dynamic range of > 1010 , and under conditions ranging from the very

    low backgrounds at 1.2 µm, to the extremely high background in the

    5 4m atmospheric window.

    (2) A fast ( f/0,.7),23 mm diameter achromatic field lens system that

    allows fields of view of up to 12 are seconds to be imaged onto a 1/4 mm

    InSb detector. The large field of view is required for the programs

    involving the studies of galaxies at large redshifts, and so that on

    nights of relatively poor seeing, i.e. > 4 11 , we can continue to observe.

    Ths use of the 1%4 mm InSb detectors decreases the capacitance of the

    detector roughly by the area; when the limiting noise is the voltage

    noise of the input JFET the signal to noise ratio is inversely prop-

    portional to the capacitance at the input of the preamp. The JFET

    noise is minimized by heating it to a temperature of — 120 K.

    (3) Dual remotely operated filterwheels having the capability of 20

    filter slots for a wide variety of observational programs.

         The performance of the system is excellent; Table 1 shows this

    performance, as measured on the 5 m telescope with a 6 are second

    aperture, in March and April of 1961. These results represent improve-

    ments of factors of roughly 4, % and 2 in sensitivity over our previous

    system at 1.2 Am, 1.6 Am, and 2.2 µm. Much of this improvement is due to

    improved trana^,ission of the optical elements, while some improvement

    comes from the improved noise performance of the system. From the

    measured noise under zero background and the measured responsivity of

    the system on the telescope, the detector NEP at 2 gm is 1 x 10 -16 W/Hz1/2.

    For constant detector quantum efficiency this 'would correspond to a low

    background NEP of 4 x 10 - 17 W/Hz 1 /2 at 5 am.
                                 13.1




                                 TABLE .1




Photometric Perforiunce of New Calteeb InSb Dewar System on 5 m Telescope


                      1. 2 jkm              1. 6 4m           2. 2 j^m


                      0. 3 Am               0, 3 pm           0. 4 4m

la noise, 1 hour     217.8                  204              20'.2
  integration
(in magnitudes)
(In AJy)              2.9                   2.7               5.2
                                             14



         B. Millimeter Wavelength Observations

                The second major thrust of the Caltech infrared program involves

         millimeter continuum observations with the 5 meter Hale Telescope. Many

         of the observations are, however, coordinated with the near infrared

         program. One of these areas I s in the monitoring of extragalactic

         objects. The dual millimetre / dear infrared observations are providing

         us a base lire of almost a decade to study variability in these objects.

                A second example of this joint effort comes in observations of

         the compact r4,dic source 1415+135 which has been studiad at wavelengths

         from 1 pm to 1 mm using 'Unth the Palomar 5 m telescope and the NASA

         3m telescope at Mauna Kea. 1413+135 and a number of other flat spectrum

         radio sources have been found by Rieke, Lebofsky and Kinman (1979,

         A^ J. (Letters), 232, L151) to be characterized by a very steep near-

         infrared to optical spectral index, a z -3. Our observations have shown

         that 1413+135 has the following properties: 1) an energy distribution

         that f lattens to a a -, 1.5 at wavelengths between 2 and 10 um; 2) a spectrum

         in the 1 - 2 pm region that is devoid of emission lines; 3) brightness

         variations on a month - to-month timescale; 4) a lack of variations in the

         shape of the energy distribu^ ; ion_; 5) very strong 1 mm continuum emissior.i

         roughly 1/4 as intense as that from 3C 273. The near infrared spectra

         are sufficient to rule out the possibility that 1413 +135 is a quasar

         with normal H^ + 0111 emission lines at redshifts < 1.3. The overall

         shape of the energy distribution of 1413+135 from centimeter radio wave-

         lengths, through the infrared and into X-rays, the lack of spectral




    ,i




a    .
                                  15



features and the brightness variations all suggest that 1413+135 is at

the extreme red end of the distribution of BL Lac objects.

       The reason for the extreme redness of this source is not yet

known. One possibility is simply a lack of sufficiently energetic

electrons capable of producing emission at visual wavelengths. A second

possibility is that dust local to 1413+135 obscures an intrinsically less

steep optical spectrum. This latter alternative will be tested this spring

by a measurement of 1413+135 at 100 pm using the NASA C 141 in collabora-

tion with Dr. Paul Harvey (University of Texas). The energy absorbed by

the dust in the visual has to be re-radiated at far infrared wavelengths.

A limit of 1 Jy will permit one to set a sensitive limit to the amount of

dust toward the source.



Dust in 2uasars

       It has been observed (see above) that the spectra of many quasars

exhibit hydrogen emission lines with intensities considerably lower than

the predictions of standard recombination theory. As an explanation for

this discrepancy, it has been proposed that there is dust associated with

these quasars which reddens the emission. Observations at infrared wave-

lengths are relevant to the hypothesis that dust is in quasars since the

dust would thermally reradiate in the infrared all the power absorbed from

the quasar unitraviolet continuum. Infrared measurements should be able

to constrain the dust temperature or, equivalently, the distance of the

dust grains from the UV continuum source.
                                 lu



     With these ideas as motivation, nne millimeter continuum observations

of the high redshift quasars B2 1225+31, Ton 490, and PHL 957 were

carried out by graduate student D. Ennis. The emission line spectrum

of each of these quasars exhibits a La/Ha emission line ratio in dis-

agreement by an order of magnitude with the predictions of Case B

recombination theory. Due to the improvements in detector sensitivity

realized over the last few years, meaningful upper limits to the 1 mm

flux density from these quasars: were obtained. The upper limit to the

power emitted by these quasars at an observed wavelength of one millimeter

is typically half the power continuum at La. If it is assumed that

an isothermal dust shell is reddening the quasar line and continuum

emission by an amount of dust consistent with observed hydrogen line

strengths, it is found that temperatures between 25 K and 50 to 95 K

(depending on the quasars are ruled out by the present data. For tempera-

tures within this range a dust shell: emitting the requisite total

luminosity would produce a I mm flux density greater than the measured

upper limit. Con.rerting from dust temperature to distance of the dust

grains from the central heating source, it is found that the average

dust shell radius cannot be between 70 kpc and 1 Mpc. This result

represents the first meaningful constraint on the location along the

line of sight of the proposed dust reddening the radiation from quasars.



Millimeter Wavelength Observations of Galactic Sources

     During the winter 1980-81 observing season, 1 mm continuum measure-

merits were made of dust emission from a number of galactic molecular
                                  17



clouds using the 5 m telescope at Palomar Mountain. A high resolution

map was made of the Orion M qlecular Cloud (OIIC-l) which, in conjunction

with da`-- from the Owens Valley 10 m telescope, shows that OMC l

breaks up into two distinct sources, each slightly extended on a scale

of 30 1 " and separatel by 75". As different molecular lines peak in

different parts of OMC 1, the data obtained in the continuum where

the dust emission is optically thin, help to unravel the density structure

of OMC 1. Knowing the density structure will help deconvolve density

effects from variations in temperature and chemical abundance in

interpreting spectral line observations.

     Maps with 60" resolution were also made toward a number of smaller,

simpler clouds such as S140, S255, Cep A and S235. These clouds have

been well studied in millimeter spectral lines. A comparison of the

dust and gas column densities will allow one to monitor the gas to dust

ratio within these clouds and to investigate the importance of various

gas depletion mechanisms that have been proposed to explain varying

molecular abundances inferred from line observations.



Millimeter Instrumental Work

     The bulk of instrumental work on the millimeter program has been

in the development, together with JPL, of monolithic silicon bolometers.

Germanium, the standard material used for cryogenic temperature the y

                                                                        -mistors, is itself a po r absorber in the m -region; hence the "composite"

bolometers use a substrate, typically of bismuth-coated sapphire, that

efficiently absorbs the radiation, and a germanium thermistor to sense

the thermal energy. So far, the best composite 3H bolometers have
F
r                                             18
f
                        JI



4



    achieved an NEP of — 5 x 10 -15 , and at this level, the major component

    of the noise is thought to be junction noise from the (epoxy -bonded)

    substrate - thermistor interface. This noise sets an absolute Limit on

    the performance of composite bolometers.

         The fact that monolithic bolometers are not subject to this limiting

    junction - noise is one of several advantages they have over composites.
     On the other hand, by adapting a monolithic design and these fabrica-

     tion techniques, we do not lose the advantage of the composite

     bolometer because: our material is silicon, whose absorption efficiency

     is far higher than that of germanium, and comparable to that of

     bismuth coated sapphire. This absorption efficiency is independent
    of impurity concentration because the ionization energy of the impurities'

    ! °extra" electrons and holes is much greater_ than the thermal energy at

    L He temperature. Hence, the task of optimizing the detectors for

    3H temperatures is simplified by not having to worry about degrading

    the absorption when the doping is altered.

         In the last six months the following work on the monolithic bolometer

    project has been done by graduate student, E. Grossman:

         (i) Tested the noise and responsivity of a 5 mm bolometer, both

    with and without radiation striking it. Its (optical) NEP was
               -14           -1/2                                               15
    4-5 x 10         W/Hz           at 1.75 K. Note that our goal is 1 x 7.0-        W/Hz-1^2.

         (ii) Designed and had b% It 20 holders for the next batch of 5 mm

    bolometers (which is under construction at JPL). Not only will having

    a separate holder for each bolometer turn the testing into a more

    efficient, " assembly - line" process, but also the new holders should

    allow for better cooling of the bolometers, which has hitherto been
                                 19


something of a ,problem.

     (iii)Dztermined the optimal geometry and dimensions for observation-

grade bolometers of this type. Though still somewhat tentative, the

plan for batcbes following the one presently being built calls for

square detectors scaled down from 5 mm to 1.25 mm on a side, and for

-1114 -g down the thickness of the bolometers and the cross-section of

their support legs after the photolithography process is complete, to

empirically determined optima.




                                                                            J




                                                                            1
.                                   20



                  PUBLICATIONS SUPPORTED BY NGL 05-002-207

                                   1980


    J. G. Cohen, J. A. Frogel, S. E. Persson, and R. Zinn, "A Metal Rich
         Globular Cluster in the Outer Halo," 1980, Ap. J., 239, As

    M. Werner, S. Beckwith, I. Gatley, K. Sellgren, G. Berriman,and D.
         Whiting, "Simultaneous Far-Infrared Near-Infrared and Radio
         Observations of OH/IR Stars," 1980, Ap. J., 239, 540-548.

    E. Dwek, K. Sellgren, B. T. Soifer, and M. W. Werner, "Excitation
         Mechanisms for the Unidentified Infrared Emission Bands," 1980,
         Ap. J., 238, 140.

    J. A. Frogel, S. E. Persson, J. G. Cohen, "Photometric Studies of
         Composite Stellar Systems: IV. Infrared Photometry of Globular
         Clusters in 1131 and a Comparison with Early-Type Galaxies,"
         1980, Ap. J., in press.

    G. J. Veeder and Dennis L. Matson, "The Relative Reflectance of Iapetus
         at 1.6 and 2,2 vvv," 1980, A. J., 85, 969.

    K. Sellgren, "Spatial Observations of the Orion Nebula in the Unidentified
         3.28 µm Feature," 1980, Ap. J., in press.

    R. D. Gehrz, J. A. Hackwell, G. L. Grasdalen, E. P. Ney, G. Neugebauer,
         and K. Sellgren, "The Optically Thin Dust Shell of Nova CYGNI 1.978,"
         1980, Ap. J., 239, 570 -580.

    G. Neugebauer, D. Morton, J. B. Oke, E. E. Becklin, E. Daltabuit,
         K. Matthews, S. E. Persson, A. M. Smith, B. T. Soifer, S. Torres-
         Peimbert,and C. G. Wynn-Williams, "Recombination Spectrum and
         Reddening in NGC 1068," 1980, Ap.J., 238, 502.

    B. T. Soifer, G. Neugebauer, K. Matthews, E. E. Becklin, C. G. Wynn-
         Williams, and R. Capps, " Infrared Observations of the Double
         Quasar 0957+561 A, B and the Intervening Galaxy," 1980, Nature,
         285, 91

    M. W. Werner, E. E. Becklin, I. Gatley, G. Neugebauer, K. Sellgren,
         H. A. Thronson, Jr., D. A. Harper, R. Loewenstein, and S. H.
         Moseley, "High Angular Resolution Far-Infrared Observations of the
         W3 Region," 1980, Ap. J., 242, 601.
//




                                           21



          B. T. Soifer, G. Neugebauer, J. B. Oke, and K. Matthews, "Infrared and
               Optical Observations of the Hydrogen Lines in Quasars," 1981,
               Ap . J •s 243, 369.

          B. T. Soifer and G. Neugebauer, "The Infrared Properties of Active
               Extragalactic Nuclei," 1980, Presented at IAU Symposium 69,
               June 1980.

          T. J. Phillips, G. R. Knapp, P. J. Huggins, M. Werner, P. Wannier,
               G. Neugebauer, and D. Ennis, "Temperatures of Galactic Molecular
               Clouds Showing CO Self Absorption," 1930, Ap. J., in press.

          Y. Kondo, D. M. Worrall, R. F. Mushotzky, R. L. Hackney, K. R. H.
               Hackney, J. B. Oke, R. Yee, G. Neugebauer, K. Matthews, P. A.
               Feldman, and R. L. Brown, "Quasi-Simultaneous Observations of the
               BL Lac Object MK 501. in X -ray, UV, Visible, IR and Radio Frequencies,"
               1980, Ap. J., 243, 690.

          L. Froidevaux, K. Matthews, and G. Neugebauer, Thermal Response of
               Saturn's Ring Particles During and After Eclipse," 1980, Icarus,
               in press.

          L. Blitz, F. P. Israel, G. Neugebauer, I. Gatley, T. J. Lee, and
               D. H. Beattie, "The Largest HII Regions in M 101," 1980, Ap_J.,
               in press.

          T. W. Jones, L. Rudnick, F. N. Owen, J. J. Puschell, D. J. Ennis, and
               M. W. Werner, "The Broadband Spectra and Variability of Compact
               Nontherma3., Sources," 1981, Ap. J., 243, 97.

          S. E. Persson, J. G. Cohen, K. Sellgren, J. Mould, and J. A. Frogel,
               "Infrared Photometry of the Semistellar Nucleus of M31," 1980,
               Ap. J., 240, 779.

          N. J. Evans II, C. Beichman, I. Gatley, P. Harvey, D. Nadeau, and
               K. Sellgren, "Infrared Studies of the S235 Molecular Cloud,"
               1980, Ap. J., in press.
     ,i

          D. Nadeau, G. Neugebauer, K. Matthews, T. R. Geballe, "Spectroscopy of
               the BY Line in the Galactic Center," 1980, A. J., in press.

          G. Neugebauer, E. E. Becklin, D. C. Jewitt, R. J. Terrile, G. E. Danielson,
               "Spectra of the Jovian Ring and Amalthea," 1980, A. J., in press.

          B. T. Soifer, G. Neugebauer, and K. Matthews, "Near Infrared Spectro-
               photometry of the Satellite's and Rings of Uranus," 1980, Icarus,
               in press.

          C. A. Beichman, S. H. Pravdo, G. Neugebauer, B. T. Soifer, K. Matthews,
               and H. A. Wooten, "Extremely Red Compact Radio Sources: The'Empty
               Field' Sources," 1980, Ap. J., in press.
                                   22




    D. Nadeau, T. R. Geballe, G. Neugebauer, "The Motion and Distribution of
         the Vibrationally Excited H2 Regions in the Orion Nuclear Cloud,
         1981, Ap. J., submitted.

    F, P. Israel, I. Gatley, K. Matthews and G. Neugebauer, "Observations
         of NGC 604 Over Six Decades in Frequency," 1981, A and A, submitted.

    C. Be&chman and S. Harris, "The Formation of a T Tauri Star: Observations
         of the Infrared Source in L 1551," 1981, An. J., in press.

    G. J. Veeder, E. F. Redeaco, D. J. Tholen, A. Tokunaga, C. Kowal, K. Matthews,
         G. Neugebauer, B. T. Soifer, "ThelDiameter and Albedo of 1943 Anterus,"
         1981, Ap. J., submitted.

    B. T. Soifer, S. P. Willner, R. W. Capps, R. J. Rudy, "4-8 Micron Spectro-
         photometry of OH 0739-14, " 1981, Ap. J., submitted.




3                                                                                    I

