---
title: Computational methods for aerodynamic design using numerical optimization
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19830010393
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19830010393
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONTRACTOR_REPORT
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-23
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 82a22c814b03a55fac0b813069c9b41c9bfce2460d1e1d2f0b9a8810aa31ba7f
pages: 103
words: 5917
cv_look_pages: 4
---

                                    General Disclaimer

    One or more of the Following Statements may affect this Document



      This document has been reproduced from the best copy furnished by the
      organizational source. It is being released in the interest of making available as
      much information as possible.



      This document may contain data, which exceeds the sheet parameters. It was
      furnished in this condition by the organizational source and is the best copy
      available.



      This document may contain tone-on-tone or color graphs, charts and/or pictures,
      which have been reproduced in black and white.



      This document is paginated as submitted by the original source.



      Portions of this document are not fully legible due to the historical nature of some
      of the material. However, it is the best reproduction available from the original
      submission.




Produced by the NASA Center for Aerospace Information (CASI)
   ARTMEW Of
AERONAUTICS ANC► ASTRONMITICS,
MASSr4CHUSE I I INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
CAMMDW. MASSACHUSETTS 01139
                        COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
                       FOR AERODYNAMIC DESIGN
                    USING NUMERICAL OPTIAIZATION

                                   by
                           Martin F. Peeters


            CFDL-TR-83-1                       February 1983




This research was performed in the Computational Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory, MIT, and was supported by NASA
Ames Research Center grant NAG 2-115.




    Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
         Car-abridge, Massachusetts 02139
                                    ORIGINAL. PA P: i3
                                    OF POOR QUAUN




                  COMPUTATIONAL METHODS FOR AERODYNAMIC DESIGN
                          USING NUMERICAL OPTIMIZATION


                                       by

                               Martin F. Peeters



                                   ABSTRACT

         Five methods to increase the computational efficiency of aerodynamic
     design using numerical optimization, by reducing the computer time required
     to perform gradient calculations, are examined. Four of these methods have
     flaws, while one shows promise. The promising method consists of drastically
     reducing the size of the computational domain on which aerodynamic calcula-
     tions are made during gradient calculations. Since a gradient calculation
     requires the solution of the flow about an airfoil whose geometry has been
     slightly perturbed from a base airfoil, the flow about the base airfoil is
     used to determine boundary conditions on the reduced computational domain.
     This method worked well in subcritical flow, but some unresolved problems
     remain if it is used in supercritical flow.




                                              -2-
l
i.
               PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED



                            TABLE OF CONTENTS




     Abstract ...............................................2

     List of Symbols .........................................6

     1) Introduction..... ....... o ............... o ............ 8

             Optimization Concepts ...........................9

             Examples of Airfoil Optimization ................15

             Limitations of Airfoil Design Using
             Numerical Optimization ..........................16

     2) Methods for Fast Gradient Calculations ...............18

             Perturbation Equations ..........................18

             Local Methods ...................................19

             Local Linearization .............................20

             Method of Integral Relations ....................23

             Method of Reduced Domains ....................... 25

             Wind Tunnel Analogy .............................28

     3) Results of Studies Using the Method of
        Reduced Domains ......................................30

              Exploratory Studies .............................30

             Boundary Condition Modi., ications ................33

              Summary of Results of Exploratory Studies....... 40

             Full Potential Equation Calculations ............ 41

             Optimization Calculation ........................44

     4) Conclusions and Recommendations ......................47

     References and Bibliography .............................49

     Table..... .............................................51

     Figures.................................................52


                                    -4-
LA
AFpenaix - Method of Solution of the Small Disturbance
           Transonic Potential Equation ................. 101




                             -5-
                                                       OF POOR QUALITY
                         L157 OF SYMBOLS



a        speed of sound (m/sec)

c        airfoil chord (m)

Cd       drag coefficient

C1       lift coefficient

Cp       pressure coefficient

(D       doublet strength

f        airfoil geometry

G        constraint function

h        shape function

K        transonic similarity parameter

Ku       curvature -     d
                             Ax          l        1
M        Mach number

OBJ      objective function

r        coefficient of shape function

t        airfoil thickness (m)

u,v       perturbation        velocity       in   x   and   y   direction,

respectively

Vol      area within airfoil divided by 6

x,y      Cartesian coordinates

z,y      dimensional   values of x,y (m)

y        transonic lateral coordinate



         ratio of specific heats

d        thickness/churn

         pertubation velocity potential


                                  -6-
                                OF POOR (^..._..

         velocity potential



Subscripts


b        base flow

i,j          mesh point indices in x and           y   directions,

respectively

L        local condition

is       lower surface
us       upper surface
CY'      freestream condition



Superscripts


q        design iteration number

'        pertubation from base flow




                              -7-
                              CHAPTER 1 . INTRODUCTION                        ORiGMAL
                                                                              OF POOR QUALI .1 Y



      Improved methods for the design of airfoils are always a

subject: of interest in aeronautical engineering.                                    To date the

most      successful           analytical              methods        for     the     design        of

airfoils have relied on some form of                             inverse          calculations.

An     inverse     calculation              is     one        in which the desirea flow

field is specified and the                       airfoil       shape         is     solved        for,

which     generates           this     flow        field.        Examples of the use of

inverse methods can be found in the work of Henne (ref.                                            1),

or Chin ana Rizzetta (ref. 2).

       Inverse methods can be a definite aide in the design                                         of

airfoils     but        they     do    have            some    inherent           drawbacks:        1)       J



Inverse methods require apriori                          knowledge          of      the     desired

pressure     or     velocity distibution along the airfoil,                                  2) The

desired flow field may be impossible                             to     realize           with     any   t

physically        realistic           airfoil           shape,       and 3) Constraints on

the airfoils characteristics are not easy to implement.

       An alternative approach for the design of                                  airfoils         has

been     proposed        by Hicks, Murman,                and Variderplaats (ref. 3)•

The     technique        is     to     desgn            airfoils            using         numerical

optimizaton         in        which     an        aerodynamic           analysis           code     is

coupled to a numerical optimization code.                               This method              woula

allow      the      designer           to        optimize        a     single        performance

characteristic           of     the     airfoil           while        at     the     same        time

constraining            other         performance              characteristics              of     the

airfoil     to     be     within        certain           values        prescibed           by     the


                                                 -8-
                             ONNOM rpm M
                             of   0M
designer.

    This method for designing airfoils is very flexible. It

gives the designer freedom to choose which performance

characteristics to optimize and how much degradation in

other performance characteristics is tolerable. Which

performance characterlstic is to be optimized and which

performance characteristics are to be constraints can be

varied, giving the designer accurate information on design

tradeoffs.

    Initial work with this method has shown that while it

seems to work, it requires a considerable amount of c.p.u.

time, limiting its usefullness.                  The objective of this

present      research   is        to         explore ways in which the

computational effciency            of        designing   airfoils   using

numerical optimization can be increased.

   The basic concepts involved in optimization will be

reviewed first. Thereafter modifications to the method that

could improve the computational efficiency will oe

discussed. Conclusions and recomendations will then be made.


Optimization Concepts


   Consider an airfoil in which the upper burface is defined

by the functional relationship •F vs (x/c) and the lower

surface is defined by the functional relationship fis (x/c).

It is desired that a certain performance characteristic of

the airfoil is optimized. For example, assume that the drag

at zero angle of attack is to be m4nimzed. In this case the


                                       -9-
r

                             CMINAL PAGE IS
                             0W POOR QUALITY

    drag would be called the objective function. In doing the

    optimization, it is desired that constraints be imposed on

    other performance chr icteristics of the airfoil. For

    example, the airfoil volume is constrained to be greater

    than a specified minimum and the lift is constrained to be

    greater than a specified minimum.

        To perform the optimization, modifications will have to

    be made to the airfoil geometry. This is accomplished by

    adding shape functions to the initial airfoil so the urner

    surface of the airfoil would be given by


        (x/c) = fus ( x /c) + r, *h, (x/c) +...+ r+ *hh(x/c)
                  )4;h./


    and similarly for the lower surface. The function h„(x/c) is

    a shape function. Figure 1 illustrates some examples of

    shape functions that have been used by Hicks and

    Vanderplaats (ref. u) for optimization. The r„'s determine

    the magnitude of each shape function added to the initial

    airfoil. These are the only quantities that are varied in

    the optimization process so the r„ 's are ref ered to as the

    design variables.

       The statement of the problem can be summarized as

    follows:


           Minimize OBJ(X)

           Subject to: G; (X) < 0        i=1,m

           where X is a design vector




                                  -10-
                                 0. t




                             ORIGINA       L P,at   ;.^

                             OF POOR QUALITY


    The following terminology is useful when discussing

opt:'mization. The n dimensional space spanned by the vector
X is refered to as the design space. A constraint is said
                             J
to be inactive if G;(X) < 0; it is said to be violated if G;

(X) > 0 ; it is said to be active if G; (X)                    a0. Since an

exact zero is rarely found on a computer, a more reasonable

definition for an active constraint is lG; (X)+ < d where a is
a small value. This will be the definition of an active

constraint used in this paper. A design is feasible if for

all i G;(X) <0. ine minimal feasible design is said to be

optimal.

    How the optimization procedure actually works is best

explained by illustating a simple exampl- Consider the

problem:


                 Minimize Cd

            Subject to :
                 Cl,04 -C^ < 0             (lift constraint)

           and

            Vol k ,, - Vol               < 0   (airfoil volume constaint)

           whereX = Q
                    ^a
                                    r,     and r Z are the coefficients of

two shape functions


The design space for this hypothetical problerr, is shown in

figure 2. Contours of constant objective function ( Cd ) and

the constraints are illustrated in the design space. assume

that the initial airfoil is given by
                                    ORIGINAL PA(;:: iS
                                    OF POOR QUALITY

                     r, = 0

                     r^ = 0


     and that this initial airfoil is a feasible design.

        The optimization process is an iterative procedure in

     which the following recursive relationship is used


              X I's = X              S                        Cl)


     where q is the iteration number, vector S is the direction

     of search in the design space and a is a scalar defining

     the distance of tra ,: _ in the direction given by S. Each

     optimization iteration thus procedds in two steps: First the

     vector S giving the direction of travel is found, then the

     scalar A is determined.

         The procedure for determining S is somewhat different

     depending on whether any constraints are active. In the

     example of figure 2, it is assumed that no constraints are

     active initially so the determination of S proceeds as

     follows. Each design variable is separately perturbed to

     determine its efY'ect on the objective function; thus a

     finite difference approximation to the gradient of the

     objective function is constructed as



                          a x,                    v x,
       708J                 013J)         v      a Cv
                          a X^                   o xi
f
t

                          a x„                   a x„
fi


S
f



                                         -12-
4




`k
                       r ^^




                      ukiGMA:. PA :. W
                      OF POOR OUALI t'.

In this example there are only two design variables. F,,.r

each one an aerodynamic calculation must be performed .,;th

the design variable perturbed to determine the change in the

objective function.

    Whith a finite difference arpro::imation to the gradient

of the objective function found, S can now be determines.

Different optimization schemes use different nethods to
          ^                                            J
determine S. A steepest descent method would just make S the

negative of the gradient. Conjugate gradient methods (ref.

5) or quasi Newton methods (ref, 6) determine S as some

function of the gradient. In general, optimization schemes

determine S as some function of the gradient of the

objective function.

    With S known, d must now be found. G( is found by

conducting a linear search in the direction of S until a

minimum is found, or until a constraint becomes active.

Again, different optimization codes will use different

methods to find a . A typical method would be to perform 3

evaluations of the objective function on the line defined by

S. A quadratic fit is then made with these 3 points and the

minimum is found. Similar ideas are used in other methods.

    Now equation 2 can be used to determine a new airfoil

geometry. In the example given in figure 2 this would cause

a movement in the design space from A to B. This procedure

is repeated until either a minimum is found in the objective

function, or a constraint becomes active. In the example of

figure 2 the optimization procedure would move the design to
                           ORIGINAL
                                         S
                           OF POOR QUALITY


C where the lift constraint becomes active.

    At this point a somewhat differe:t procedure is used to

find the vector S. In addition to finding a Finite

difference approximation to the gradient of the objective

function, a finite difference approximation to the gradient

of the constraint function must be foun(,. This is done in

the same manner as before. Each design variable is perturbed

separately to determine its effect and the objective and

constraint functions. The determination of S again varies

from program to program, but usually the optimization

program will try to move the design closer to a minimum and

at the same time push it away slightly from the constraint.

   Constrained and unconstrained optimization iterations are

performed as necessary until a feasible design is found

which minimzes the objective function (optimal design). In

the example of figure 2, this would move the design to point

E. There is no guarantee that this design is at an absolute

minimum. There may be rany local minima in the design space.

In general an improvement in the design will have been made,

but to have more assurance in finding the absolute minimum

the optimization procedure should be started at different

points in the design space. In the example of figure 2 point

E is a relative minimum. If the procedure was begun at point

F, the absoulute minimum, point G, would have been found.




                           -14-

                                                               t. —J
                                                                  .
                                   OF POOR QJWL VV

Examples of Airfoil Optimization


    The concepts outlined above have been tested by numerous

people. Numerical optimization has been used to optimize low

speed, high lift airfoils (ref. 7) ; it has been used to

optimize airfoils in transonic flow (ref. 8,9). The results

obtained by hicks, Murman ano Vanderplaats (ref.     3) in which
airfoils in transonic flow are optimized, will be presented

as an example demonstrating the potential that this method

has for the design of airfoils.

     Their optimization procedure couplea together an

aerodynamic analysis code based on the small disturbance

transonic potential equation and CONMIN (ref.10), a FORTRAN

program for constrained function minimization.

    Some results from their work are presented in figure 3.

In each case the objective was to minimze drag (the only

drag present in this inviscid calculation is wave drag ). In

each case the freestream Mach number was 0.5; there were

seven design variables; the airfoils were symmetric. In the

cases of figures 3a and 3b the only constraint was an

airfoil volume constraint, the cases of figures 3c and 3d

imposed a curvature constraint on the airfoil and a

thickness/chord constraint in addition to the airfoil volume

constraint. In every case a significant reduction in drag

was realized.




                           -15-                                    -
                              6 1/




                                UH16;Nt%L i _._ .:'
                                OF POUR QUALITY




    Limitations of Airfoil Design Using Numerical Optimization


        The above examples indicate that improved            airfoil

    designs can be realized using numerical optimization as a

    design tool. This method is, however, limited by its

    excessive appetite for c.p.u. time. The examples presented

    utilized an aerodynamic analysis code based on the small

    disturbance transonic equation and had only seven design

    variables.    A snore realistic problem would utilize         an

    aerodynamic analysis code based on the full potential
f


    equation and might have fifteeen or more design variables.

    In this case the c.p.u. requirements of numerical

    optimization would generally be considered too large for the

    method to be used.

        It is found that a significant fraction of the time

    spent in designing airfoils using numerical optimization is

    spent on calculating the finite difference approximations to
    the gradients of the objective and constraint functions.

    Recall that a gradient calculation is made by separately

    perturbing each design variable and then performing an

    aerodynamic    analysis          to determine the change in the

    objective function and the active constraint functions.      The

    flow about the unperturbed airfoil provides a good initial

    guess for the solution of the perturbed airfoil,             but

    computer times are still very large.

        The objective of this research is to find a method for

    computing the gradients of the objective ana constraint



                                      -16-
                                     ORIGINAL PAGE W
                                     OF POOR QUALITY



functions that require significantly less computer time than

the   method         outlined       above.      The    finite   difference

approximatiin         to      the    gradients used only one sided

differencing to approximate the gradients. One sided

differencing is only first order accurate, suggesting that

numerical optimization does not require extremely accurate

gradient information. This research will take advantage of.

this fact and will try to make better use of the fact that

the solution for the perturbed body is only slightly

different from that of the unperturbed body. It is also an

objective of this research to find a method to calculate

gradients that is not specific to a particular set of

governing      equations.           That is, the method should be

applicable to the small disturbance transonic potential

equation,      the         full     potential     equation, and Eu.ler's

equations.




                                      -17-
                                0106MM PAGE It
                                OF POOR Qt1AUW


         CHAPTER 2. METHODS FOR FAST GRADIENT CALCULATIONS


        Five different methods were examined tha'^ could quickly

    solve for the flow about an airfoil whose getmetry has been

    slightly perturbed. One of these methods shows promise in

    meeting all the objectives stated above. The five methods

    are: 1)Perturbation Equations, 2) Local Methods , 3) Local

    Linearization 4) Method of Integral Relations, 5) Method of

    Reduced Domains.

     The first four methods listed were found to have various

    shortcomings while the final method listed shows some

    promise. This section will begin with a brief review of the

    first four methods listed above ; after which a more

    extensive review of the Method of Reduced Domains will be

    given.

        All preliminary investigations were performed using the

    small disturbance transonic potential equation. A review of

    the important details involved in solving this equation is

    presented in the Appendix.


    1)Perturbation Equations:

        An obvious first step in solving a flow problem which is

    a perturbation from a known base flow is to rewrite the

    governing equations with the parameters split into two

    parts. The first part would satisfy the base solution and

    the second part would be a perturbation from the base

    solution. Writing the potential as

                   (^ — 4)ti}$,

                                 —1   b-

a
                                               ORIGINAL Pj .t;-: I::-'
                                               OF POOR QUAL11"V


ana plugging this into the small disturbance potential

equation yields
                                       /                                                              (31

Discarding higher order terms in the perturbation potential

and ncting that the base potential satisfies the equation

yields the desired perturbation equation


                          tax - (^*i) ¢x0, *p ^y y = O                                           Cat)

    The perturbation form of the potential must also be

substituted into the shock jump relations for a complete

formulation of the problem. The method was not pursued,

however, because equation 4 is essentially no simpler to

solve than the original small disturbance equation.


2) Local Methodz

    Local methods try to relate the pressure at the airfoil

surface with the local geometry of the airfoil. This is a

method proposed by Davis (ref. 11) in which he uses the work

of Spreiter and Alksne and                                 their             method       of     local

linearization (ref.                     12) as a basis to derive the following

equations:
                                                ' ^^ 11t C^ t^) {;^ J
          Z^hl(Ytt,^l! (n^i r ) - I ( ^` 'i1
                                                                                 M4 > l        (Sa)
  Cp


  C PZ         rt          (I' f1m ' r ^l'/`1 "^^ ^L   3   /`^'   ^^rf^} J       ^3 1




where

        ^: ( I /( /- ( YW/ .I C^
                      URiGSNA'-     :`4
                      OF POOR QUALITY

and


                                 do


      To obtain these very simple equations, a considerable

number of questionable assumptions had to be made in

addition to the original assumptions made by Spreiter and

Alksne in their development of local linearization. Becuase

of all the assumptions made, the validity of equation 5 was

put in doubt so the method was not pursued further.


3) Local Linearization:

      An attempt was made to use the work done by Spreiter and

Alksne that did not require the plethora of assumptions made

in local. methods. Local linearization is valid for purely

subsonic flow, purely supersonic flow, and flow with free

stream Mach number very close to 1. The method will be

outlined for purely subsonic flow. The ideas used in this

case are also usea in the supersonic case and the case where

freestream Maoh number is near 1.

      The analysis begins with the small disturbance transonic

potential equation




Let




and initially treat       as a constant. This yielcs the simple

equation




                              -20-
                                   ^: F'Un^t Qlir,1 iTY

the solution of which is


                                       r) o x         t
This equation can now be differentiated with                    respect      to      x

yielding
              du_
              d-X
                               ^                                            C /off
                                     x

The expression for a         is now substituted back into                 equation

10      and   this    ordinary       differential         equation   is     solved

yielding




where

              k=      17,E C^t^)

and C is a constant of integration. The above step is an

attempt to compensate for the approximation made initially

in the analysis in which ^ is treated as a constant. The

above steps may seem somewhat arbitrary, but Spreiter and

Alksne have shown that this sequence of steps leads to the

most reasonable approximation.

The only thing that remain: to be done is the evaluation of

the constant of integration. The method given by Spreiter

and Alksne for the evaluation of C is not used. Equation 11

can be rewritten as


                     3k
The flow about a base airfoil is known so substituting in

U: band (/ b in the above equation yielas an expression for



                                         -21-
                                 ORIGINAL PAGE 19
                                 OF POOR QUALITY



C.   Note    that     C   will       now        be a function of x.      With C(x)

known, u(x,0) can be found from equation 11                       yielding

       u (x, o) :   I< I(k2l (ud 0 c(X))) 1', - /7,01 ►     I                   / 1)
     Equation 13 was used to solve for Cp for the perturbed

airfoil. The base airfoil used was a parabolic arc with ; =

.08. The freestream Mach number was .75• This yielded a flow

that was subsonic everywhere. Four perturbations in the

fora, of shape functions were separately added to the base

airfoil. The four shape functions are presented in figure 4.

Each shape function was multiplied by a factor of .004.

     The flow about the perturbed airfoil was solved using

equation 13 and also using the finite difference solver

outlined in Appendix A. The changes in pressure coefficient

from the base to perturbed airfoil for each perturbation is

shown in figure 5. The results look very promising. The

curves obtained using equation 13 or the finite difference

method lie nearly on top of each other. The computer time

required to solve the problem with equation 13 is 3 orders

of magnitude less than the time required by the finite

difference method.

      Attempts were           made         to      extend       this   method      to

supercritical flow, but these failed. The fundamental

problem is that the ideas used in local linearization cannot

be applied to mixed flow. The ability to extend this methoc

to the full potential equation or Euler's equations also

seems doubtful.



                                       -22-
                                   OF POOR QUALITY


    For these reasons, the method was abandonned. If,

however, there Is a need to design subcritical airfoils
where the small disturbance potential equation is a

reasonable approximation, then this method should work very

well.


4) Method of Integral Relations


    The purpose of this method is to reduce the dimension of

an equation by 1. How this is done is best explained by

illustrating a simple example. Consider the following two

dimensional equation

                     aT           ^S       o                           (^y
                     J^A          jj

where the boundary conditions

    6 (x ) U)         9,               c (x, yo). y ) =   9
are given. This equation can be integrated with respect to y

yielding               YA.Y


                ^x     o

If F can be written as a(x)*b(x,y) where b(x,y)               is   a   known

function then the integral can be performed yielding


        ^x
where

            Qlx) = J b<x, y) cry
                              a

    This one dimensional equation is much simpler to solve

than the original two dimensional equation. The success of


                                          -23-
                                 Ii




                                      ",   'I I Nrc^. '
                                              P;JC 4J
                                      OF POOR QUALITY


this method depends on the accuracy with which b(x,y) is

known. It was hoped that since a solution of a flow that is

,just slightly perturbed from a base flow is desired, the

base flow should provide a reasonable approximation to the

function b(x,y).

    To use this method on the small disturbance transonic

pote c, tial equation, the equation must be written in

divergence form as follows


         ^                                       y
thus in this case
             F= k       ^x _ (^t ^)/^ ^X^                  (/q4)
             G         Oy                                 (lg 6^

07 is given at y = 0 and goes to 0 as y goes to infinity so

the limits of integration are 0 and infinity. Writing F as




gives for the function b(x,"r)

       b rx,     y ) = Fb l x , ,^ /Fb c x, ^)             (a.07

 The problem with this is that Fb(x,0) may be equal to zero

at some point in the flow. In fact F d (x,y) may be zero at

some point in the flow so that with b(x,9) written as a

ratio, the possibility always exists that the denominator

will be zero.

    Other forms for b(x,y) were investigated such as

assuming that b(x,y) was an exponential function or an

algebraic function. Again, the flow about the base airfoil


                                      -24-
                                                                   a
                            6. t/




                                        ORIGINAL         (i
                                        OF POUR QUr,'-I i Y


    was used as a guide to determine the exact form that b(x,y)

    should take. No reasr-:able way of using the base airfoil to

    determine bix,y) was found. For this reason the method coulo

    not be used.


    5) Method of Reduced Domains

        The basic idea behind this method is very simple. When

    calculating the flow about the perturbed airfoil the same

    solver is useci as the one used to calculate the flow about

    the base airfoil, but the size of the domain on which the

    calculation is made is greatly reduced. The motivation

    behind this is that a perturbation in airfoil geometry will

    primarily affect the flow very close to the airfoil so that
    the base flow will provide reasonable boundary conditions

    for the reduced domain. Figure 6 is a typical comparison of

    the domain size used to calculate the flow about the base

    airfoil -Id the perturbed airfoil.

        The reduction in c rputer time that can be expected

    using the method of reduced domains comes about not only

    t.case the number of mesh points is fewer so the number of

    calculations per iteration is fewer, but also because fewer

    mesh points generally lead to a higher convrgence rate.

        Suppose that a problem is solved using an iterative,

    finite difference scheme and that we want to reduce the size

    of the error by 10-1". The number of :teraticns to ao this,

    p, is given by
                                    J




i

                                         -25-
                            OF POOR QilALITY


where 3 is the spectral radius.

    For a Laplace equation

            ^Px. f u r y = o                           ^^ ^- l

solved with a Jacobi iterative scheme on a square domaic

with ax and ay equal, we have


                    '/( N                               3)

where N is the number of mesh points.

    The rate of convergence is thus dependent on the number

of mesh points in this case. While the rate of convergence

for the small disturbance potential equation or the full

potential equation cannot be found analytically, it is

expected that the rate of convergence will be a function of

the number of mesh points.

    Unlike the first four methods tried this method makes

its a,proximation in the boundary condtions used when

solving for the flow about the pert.tirbed airfoil, not in the

actual method of solution. Some advantages to this are

immediately apparent:1) MaJor changes to existing cones are

not requirea since the same solver is used, 2) Application

of this method to codes based on different governing

equations is possible, 3) A tradeoff exists between accuracy

and speed, the larger the domain the more accurate the

solution,   but also the greater the c.p.u. requirement. This

last advantage is important because it gives flexibility in

using the method of reduced domains. In soiue applications

the size of the cc.main coulc be reuuced substatiaily thereby


                              -26-
                                   URIUNIVAL      ':,
                                   OF POOR QU,.! iTY


    greatly reducing c.p.u. requirements. However, the size of

    the aomain could always be increased if accuracy became a

    problem.

        Some trends can be found in the accuracy of using the

    base flow for boundary conditions by examining the inner and

    outer expansions used at different Mach numbers to derive

    the small disturbance potential equation from the full

    potential equation.

        To derive the small disturbance potential equation valid

    for subsonic and supersonic flaw

               (/- lye ) ox   f   ^ yy   = O                   (Z y ^


    from the full potential equation




    requires the use of inner and cuter expansions of the form




    where

                   Y - 116,
    and E, is a small parameter related to              the   airfoil
    thickness.

        To derive the small disturbance potential equation valid

    for transonic flow




                                         -27-
t
                                         a




                                   N L PAUL L;
                               ORIGM
                               OF POOR QUALITY


      from the full potential equation requires the use           of the

      following inner and out er expansions

                              El ^^` (x,y^ t f 3 ^i (X,^ r .. .

                                                                     Cz^`1
      where




      and ej. is a small parameter related to             the     airfoil.

      thickness.

          The important point is that for supersonic and subsonic

      flow the inner solution is valid only for y of order 6, ,

      while for transonic flow the solution is valid for y of

      order 1. This means that a perturbation in airfoil geometry

      will affect the flow for a greater distance from the airfoil

      in transonic flow than in subsonic or supersonic flow. The

      accuracy of using the base flow for boundary conditions at

      the edge of a given reduced domain should therefore be less

      in transonic flow than in subsonic or supersonic flow.

          A complete outline of the inner and outer expansion

      procedure can be found in reference 13.


      Wind Tunnel Analogy


          There is a physical analog to computing the flow about

      the perturbed airfoil on a reduced domain that offers

      insight into the problem.      Determining the         aerodynamic

      characteristics of an airfoil          by performing wino tunnel

      tests is similar , to the methou of reduced domains.        In each


                                  _2b_


_ Y
                   OF POOR QUALITY


case the flow is affected by the outer boundary.

    The hypothetical wind tunnel in which the perturbec

airfoil is tested is, however, special. The solution fcr the

base airfoil is obtained on the full domain so that if the

domain is reduced, the exact boundary conditions are

availiable at the edge of the reduced domain. If the flow in

the interior of the reduced domaii. is perturbed and then the

problem is solved with the Name airfoil as before, exactly

the same answer as that found on the full domain will be

computed.   This means that the hypothetical windtunnel has

been constructed in such a way as to give aerodynamic

characteristics for the base airfoil which are the same as

if the base airfoil had been tested in free air. Figure 7

shows the base airfoil in the hypothetical windtunnel.

Solving for the flow about a slightly perturbed airfoil is

thus like testing the slightly perturbed airfoil in the

hypothetical windtunnel.




                           -29-
                      ORIGINAL !','^:.' t'
                      O F POOR QUALITY


CHAPTER 3. RESULTS OF STUDIES USING THE METHOD OF' REDUCED
                          DOMAINS


Exploratory Studies


    Results presented in this section compare the change in

Cp caused by perturbations in airfoil geometry as computed

on the full domain and the reduced domain. The base airfoil

in each case was a parabolic arc at zero angle of attack,

and the four perturbations of figure 4 multiplied by a small

factor were separately added to the base airfoil.

    It is difficult to quantify the performance of the

method of reduced domains without doing an optimization run.

A subjective assessment of the resultz will be used

initially in this chapter to develop confidence in the

method. Later in this chapter an actual optimization test

will be performed.
    Initially all results presented will be frocn subcritical

tests. Greater difficulty was anticipated for supercritical

tests and these are discussed after the subcritical results

are properly understood.

    In solving the flow on the reduced domain, using as the     {

basis for the solution the small disturbance potential

equation, two different tyres of boundary conditions can be

specified. Either the potential can be specified at the edge

of the domain (Dirichlet boundary condition) or the normal

derivative of the potential, the transverse velocity, can be

specified (Neumann boundary condition).



                             -30-
                         II



                                        .,,.
                          111L ^'r'3- — .v
                     QRiGV'1
                     OF POOR QUALITY


    Solving the flow about the perturbea airfoil on the

reduced domain and specifying the potential to be that of

the base flow on the outer boundary is analogous to testing

the perturbed airfoil in the hypothetical windtunnel with a

freejet boundary condition at the tunnel walls. That is, the

specification of the potential to be that of the base flow

on the outer boundary forces the pressure to be that of the

base flow on the upper boundary of the reduced domain. In a

windtunnel with free jet boundaries, one expects the peak

perturbation velocitie:3 to be underestimated thus

underestimating the peak perturbation Cp.

    Figure 8 shows the results where the base potential was

specified at the edge of the reduced domain. The flow

conditions in this case were:

             freestream Mach number = 0.7
             thickness/chord        = 0.1
             perturbation multiplication factor = 0.001

The size of the reduced domain is shown in figure 9. The
number of mesh points in this reduced domain was 116 while

is was X965 for the full domain. The underprediction of the

change in Cp is consistent with the above arguements. The

results are, however , reasonably accurate and the average

c.p.u. requirement in computing the flow on the reduced

domain was approximentaly 60 times smaller than the c.p.u.

requirement for computing the flow on the full comain.

    The next boundary condition tested was a         Neumann

boundary condition on the upper boundary of the reduced

domain.   The finite difference algorithm used in these

                                                               k

                              -31-
                          0RIG11 ;- r'-', *iCiC E0
                          OF POOR QUALITY

computations required the specification of the potential at

the upstream boundary, so the potential at the upstream

boundary was specified to be that of the base flow. For

convenience, the potential was specified to be that of the

base flow at the downstream boundary also. In all

computations where a Neumann boundary condition was used at

the upper boundary, the above outlined boundary conditions

were used at the upstream and downstream bounaaries.

    Specifying the transverse velocity to be that of the

base flow on the edge of the reduced domain is analogous to

solid wall boundaries on the hypothetical windtunnel. Solid

wall boundaries on a windtunnel constrain the flow to be

tangential to the solid wall. In this case one would expect

a test in the hypothetical wind tunnel on the perturbed

airfoil to overestimate peak velocities thus overestimating

the perturbation in Cp.

    The results presented in figure 10 are consistent with

this prediction. The flow conditions in this case were:

            freestream Mach number = 0.7
            thickness/chord          = 0.1
            perturbation multiplication factor = 0.001

The size of the domain used in this case is presented in

figure 9. The average c.p.u. requirement for computing the

flow on the reduced domain was reduced by a factor of 45 as

compared to the c.p.u. requirement of the full domain. The

smaller reduction in c.p.u. time in this case as compared to

the previous case was anticipated since Neumann bounaary

conditions generally lead tc slower convergence.


                               -32-                            w
                          URiGIPI AL"I
                                    :.:
                          OF POOR QUALITY



   Windtunnels usually have ventilated walls to try to

   ;en the effect of the walls on the flow. The next section

   tribes attempts to correct the boundary conditions used

   ;he edge of the reduced domain in the hope of yieldig a

     accurate solution.


   idary Condition Modifications


    Modifications were made to each of        the   boundary

   U tions used above. The Dirichlet boundary condition was

   .fied by treating the perturbation in geometry of the

airfoil as a perturbation doublet and then adding the

perturbation in potential caused by this doublet to the base

potential on the outer boundary. The Neumann boundary

condition was modified by treating the perturbation in

geometry of the airfoil as a wavy wall and using a

simplified analysis to determine the effect of this

perturbation on the transverse velocity at the boundary.

    In Appendix A it is shown that in the far field the

airfoil is treated as though it were a doublet. This

treatment of the airfoil allows the potential to be

determined in the Car field by use of equation A5. This

equation is accurate only if it is used at points a

considerable distance from the airfoil ( at least 1 chord

length ).The accuracy of equation A5 diminishes when it is

applied closer and closer to the airfoil, but how rapidly

the accuracy decays is not known. As an approximation,     this
equation was used to determine the change in potential at


                           -33-

                                                                  :^i
 i
 a


                                OF POOR QUALITY

     the edge of t,",e reduced domain caused by the perturbation in

     airfoil geometry.

         The doublet was positioned on the airfoil at the chord

     station where the amplitude of the perturbation was at a

     maximum. Equation A6 is the equation for the doublet

     strength. The equation has one part due to the airfoil

     volume and a second nonlinear part. The contribution. from

     the nonlinear part is generally small so in computing the

     perturbation doublet strength it was negleted. The equation

     for the doublet strength was therefore




     where f '(f) is the perturbation in airfoil geometery.

     Figure 11 presents the results obtained with the above

     outlined boundary conditions. The flow conditions for this

     test were:

               freestream Mach number = 0.7
               thickness/chord        = 0.1
               perturbation multiplication factor = 0.001

     The size of the reduced domain is given in figure 9. The two

     curves lie reasonably close to each other. The average

     computing time required on the reduced domain was

     approximately 40 times less than that required on the full

     domain.

         Modifications of Neumann boundary conditions is similar

     to changing the hypothetical windtunnel shape. The problem

     is to determine the extent of the modifications required.

     This problem can be restated as the problem of determining



                                  -34-

L,
                               OF POOR QUALITY

how much of the perturbation in transverse velocity at the

airfoil surface is translated to the edge of the reduced
domain. As a guideline to determine the decay in the

transverse velocity a simple wavy wall model for the
perturbation is used.

      Consider the small disturbance transonic                     potential

equation

                                    t   0- y = U                     (3v)
subject to the boundary conditions


        ^x       ^y         are {ini^              40


and

         V N, u) _      y C'X, u)       t9 roc 6 r,

Let us solve this equation for subsonic flow where
( 1(-()'"') ox       ) is always greater than zero.             To make the

mathematics tractable let us approximate the coefficient of
                                        a.
the fix„ term as a constant, A                 This equation, with the

boundary conditions given, can be solved in closed form

using separation of variables. The solution is
                                              ti
           '^ (x, y) = B(CosdX)e                                    C3l}

Note that the local value of                 is used at every point.

      The important information from equation 31 is the rate

at which velocities at Y = 0 decay. Using the aecay rate of

this equation gives for the velocity at any point Y
                                                    9 ()C, 0)
             4y (-X y l -y ^'^, ^) e `y `                           ` 3 2-




                                    -35-
i
                              ORIGINAL K*'.^„L 1i
                              OF POOR QUALITY

    Equation 32 can be used to approximate the perturbation

    velocity at the edge of the reduced domain. To use equation

    32 ,B , which determines the wavelength of the wavy wall

    must be known. Since the airfoil is similar to a half sine

    wave, B was made to be 77' .

        Figure 12 presents the results of using the

    approximations just oulined. The flow conditions in this

    test were:

                 freestream Mach number   = 0.7
                 thickness/chord          = 0.1
                 perturbation multiplication factor = 0.001

     The size of the reduced domain is given by figure 9.     The

    two curves lie very nearly on top of each other, indicating

    that the above approximation is a very good one. The average

    computing time required on the reduced domain was 50 times

    less than that required on the full domain.

        These subcritical results are encouraging. The results

    obtained with the four different boundary conditions used

    above appear to be at least reasonably accurate and

    sometimes very accurate. The saving in c.p.u. time in each

    case was substantial.

        The same four boundary conditions outlined above were

    tested in supercritical flow. The one difference is that the

    wavy wall formula given above is valid only in subsonic

    flow. A supersonic wavy wall formula is required for cases      A




    where the flow at the eage of the outer bounaary is

    supersonic. The derivation of this formula is completely

    analogous to the aerivation presented for the subsonic flow.


                                  -36-
                           ORIGIAAL Pi-AGi IS
                          OF POUT: QUALITY


    The result is




        As can be seen, the transverse velocity at the airfoil

    surface does not decay but propogates along characteristics.

    In locally supersonic flow the boundary condition was

    therefore applied as follows: The slope of the

    characteristic was determined from the local Mach number at

    the boundary. The characteristic was then approximated as a

    st-raight line. This line was followed to the airfoil surface

    where the perturbation transverse velocity was known. This

    transverse velocity was then propogated 'back up along the

    approximation of the characteristic to the boundary of the

    reduced domain, where it wa- added to the base transverse

    velocity. This procedure is illustrated in figure 13.

        The runs made with the boundary conditions being: 1) The

    base potential, 2) The base transverse velocity, and 3) The

    base potential with the potential due to a perturbation

    doublet added to it, were all ruv under the same conditions:

              freeesteam Mach number   = 0.32
              thickness/chord          = 0.1
              perturbation multiplication factor = 0.001

    The size of the domain used is shown in figure 9.

        Figure 14 shows the results where the base potential was

    specified on the edge of the reduced domain. The effect of

    the perturbation doublet was negligible , the results being

    essentially those presented in figure 14. The results in

    these cases are not very goon. The largest changes in Cp



                                -37-


u
                                    a




                            ORIGINAL PAGE   fs
                            OF POOR QUALITY

occur near the shock and these are not captured wel

the base transverse velocity was specified at t

boundary of the reduced domain, the computations we

converge to a solution.

     The tests in subcritical flow using the wa

approximation yielded the best results so it was hoped that

they would yield good results in the supercritical case. The

initial test was a conservative one in which the flow was

only slightly supercritical. The test conditions in this

case were:

             freestream Mach number   = 0.78
             thickness/chord          = 0.10
             perturbation multiplication factor = 0.0011

The size of the reduced domain used is shown in figure 9.

    Results are presented in figure 15. As can be seen the

results are not very accurate. It seems that supercritical

flow is much more sensitive to boundary conditions than

subcritical flow.

    The flexibility of the reduced domain method was put to

use to try to overcome these difficulties. The outer edge of

the domains used generally crossed through a region with

supersonic flow. This was the probable cause of

dissappointing results just presented. To get around this,

the shape of the domain was altered so that the outer

boundary was always in subsonic flow. A typical dcmain for

supercritical flow calculations is presented in figure 16.

Figure 16 also shows the boundary conditions tested. The

base potential was specified everywhere except at the very


                             —38—


                                                               a^
                  OF POOR QUTAL'ITY


top of the "notch" part of the domain.

base potential was specified or the base t

was specified.

    For each boundary condition a series of tests were

conducted in which the domain size was increased until

consistently acceptable results were obtained. For these

tests the flow conditions were:

          freestream Mach number = 0.82
          thickness/chord = 0.10
          perturbation multiplicatin factor = 0.001

     Figure 17 presents what are considered acceptable

results for• the Dirichlet boundary condition and figure 19

shows results for the Neumann boundary condition. The

corresponding domain size required to achieve these results

is shown in figure 19. The number of mesh points in the

reduced domain with Neumann boundary conditions was 218

while the number of mesh points in the reduced domain with

Dirichlet boundary conditions was 1140. Recall that the the

number of mesh points in the full domain was 3965.    As can

be seen, the size of the domain required to obtain

reasonable results using the Dirichlet boundary condition is

considerably larger than the domain required to achieve

reasonable results using the Neumann boundary condition. An

explanation for this phenomena has not yet been found.

    The average c.p.u. time required to get the results on

the reduced domain is about 30 times less than on the full

domain if a Neumann boundary condition is used and about 6

times less if a Dirichlet boundary condition is used. While


                           -39-
                            URIGi ;'A-- ,   ; iS
                           OF POOr^ QUALMY



the reduction in c.p.u.        time is not as      large as tl^e

reduction      realized   in subcritical flow,     it is still

substantial.


Summary of Results of Exploratory Studies

    The results can be summarized as follows:
            Sucbritical Flow

                 1) Reasonably accurate results can be obtained

                 on a substantially reduced domain.

                 2) There is flexibility in applying boundary

                 conditions. Different boundary conditions

                 yield different results but all of these

                 results seem acceptable.

                 3)   The c.p.u. requirement of the reduced

                 domain calculations is from 40 to 60 times

                 lower than the c.p.u. requirement for full

                 domain calculations, depending on boundary

                 conditions applied.

            Supercritical Flow

                 1) Reasonably accurate results can be obtained

                 on a substantially reduced domain but the

                 outer t undary of the reduced domain must be

                 in subsonic flow.

                 2)   There is no flexibility in applying

                 boundary conditions. Fast and reliable results

                 can only be obtained with the use of Neumonn

                 boundary conditions.


                                -40-
                 3) The c.p.u.requirement of the reduced aomain
                 calculations is 30 times smaller than the

                 c.p.0 requirement of full eomain calculations.
    Note that the savings in computer time using the method

of reduced domains cam p about primarily because of the

reduction in the number of calculations required per

iteration. The reduction in the actual number of iterations

on the reduced domain was not urge, always being less than

a factor of 2.


Pull Potential Equation Calculations


    The knowledge gained from applying the method of reduced

domains to an aerodynamic analysis code based on the small

disturbance potential equation is now applied to the full

potential equation. The        full   potential   equation   is

considerably more accurate than the small disturbance

potential equation and so is used much more frequently in

the design of airfoils.

   A computer code that solves the full potential equation

is much more complex than one that solves the small

disturbance potential equation. PL.06, a nonconservative full

potential equation solver written by Antony Jameson, was

used in these tests. PL06 was chosen because it is the

aerodynamic analysis code in use at NASA Ames for numerical

optimization of airfoils. A complete outline of the

fundamentals involved in solving the full potential equation

can be found in reference 14.


                              -41-
       Test s were                   conduct e           us i n    FLC6 i n which the s Z of the
computational domain was                                  greatly            reduced.         FLOb          maps         the

airfoil             onto             a      unit circle and then performs an inversion

such that infinity                           is mapped into the                   origin           of        the        unit

circle.                  Thus            the computational                  domain used in FLOb                       is the

inside of a unit circle .                                 The outer           boundary        of the             reduced

domain must                   be     in subsonic            flow,       so for          a   typical          case       of a
                                                                                                                                  1
lifting             airfoil with a 3uper• 3unic zone on                                     the upper surface
                                                                                                                                  9

of    the airfoil,                       the computational                  domain woulu           be       like        that

shown       in figure -1 0.                     Because      of    the coordinate                 system used              i::,   r
FLOb,       a     reduction                 in domain size              like    the reduction shown                        in
                                                                                                                                  fi
t'igur• e         .'U,        reduced           the number         of mesh         points         by    a    factor       of
                                                                                                                                  i
only    5 or             U.


       FLOG also user two steps                                   in        solving         the        equation:             a

relaxation step,                          and a t'a3t solver step.                      The relaxation step

gives           slew convergence,                        but can        be    used on ir• r• (-gular•domain                       a

shapes and                l;a valid for- , upersonic flow.                                  The        fart           solver•
step        give3              very           r':apid     CO11Ver'gence            in subsonic               t'low,      but      =

becomes less and                            lean        sLable>        as     theylocal.               Mach           11Umber

increase::                and            goes        unstable      in aupet, 3onic.           flow.          A1so,       the

fait :3oIvrr•can only                            be used on            regular•donlvin             shape3.               Tile

two     :at.epS               combined               converge          reasonably           fast       in    tr'an3.1nlc

flow.

       11 eOJIIZIe            tAlC       reduced compuL,Itional                 domain        1^       11'r et ular        in

shape,          the       f:a3t          :+ol veer    Cannot      be used       over        the whole:           domain.

Therefore,                theyfait.             Solver      i:: usey u only             1n the     region              shown
in     CI       LI r v        :U.         The        r el.1xtlon        ate p   i:..I   u:ed over            t. tic    whole
                                                                                                                                  I




                                                                                                                                  5
domain. Not being able to j-e the fast sclver on the

complete reduced domain does not slow convergence since that

part of the domain where it is not used is a region of

supersonic flow.

       Tests were run on the airfoil shown in figure 21 at zero

angle of attack, with a freestream Mach number of 0.8

resulting in a supersonic zone on the upper and lower

surface of the airfoil. A single perturbation givenby
                                                     /
           Pert = o.00/ t 5i 1, ( A x )              ( 3 It
was added to the upper and lower surface of the airfoil. The

boundary conditions used at the edge of the reduced domain

were: 1) Potential specified to be that of the base flow

everywhere, 2) Potential specified to be that of the base

flow everywhere except on the "notch" part of the grid where

the normal velocity was specified to be that of the base

flow. An unexpected result was found from these tests. While

in case 1 the solution did not capture the shock movement as

expected from tests performed on the small disturbance

potential solver, case 2 converged so slowly that the

required c.p.u. time was as large as that needed to solve

for the perturbed flow on the full domain.

       This fundamental difference in results from the small

disturbance potential solver and FL06 did not seem

reasonable. One important difference in the two codes was

that      FL06 is a nonconservative code while the small

disturbance solver is a conservative code. A comparison was



                                 -43-
made on the rate of convergence of the conservative and

nonconservative forms of the small disturbance code. These

tests showed that while the two forms of the code had nearly

identical convergence rates on the full domain, the

conservative form of the code converged in fewer than half

the number of iterations required by the nonconservative

form of the code on the reduced domain. While not a

conclusive result, this strongly suggests that the method of

reduced domains can be made to work for supercritical flow

if the aerodynamic analysis code is conservative.


Optimization Calculation


    Since the method of reduced domains could not be made to

work in supercritical flow using FLO6, the method was tried

on a subcritical case. The objective of this test was not to

design a better airfoil but was to demonstrate that the

method of reduced domains will produce reasonable results in

an actual optimization test.

    The optimization code used for this test is called

QNMDIFF. It employs a quasi -Newton method for unconstrained

Dptimization. The base airfoil used for this test was a 17

percent thick airfoil designed for general aviation

applications (GA(W)-1). The airfoil geometry can be found in

reference 15.    Computations were made at a Mach number of

0.22 and at zero angle of attack. The objective function

used was the sum of the differences between a target

pressure distribution along the upper surface of the airfoil


                           -44-
                           ORIGINAL PAGE 19
                           OF pOCR QUALrff


and the actual pressure distribut4on, that is
             ^                  L




The target pressure distrabution used was that of the

(GA(W)-1) airfoil. The initial airfoil used was

(GA(W)-1) airfoil to which four shape functions ha(

added. Thus the optimized airfoil would be one in whict

magnitude of the four shape f,.nctions was 0. The four shape

functions used were the ones shown in figure 4. The initial

magnitudes of the shape functions were:

          function 1 magnitude = 0.0100
          function 2 magnitude = 0.0087
          function 3 magnitude = 0.0093
          function 4 magnitude = 0.0021


    Table 1 compares the design vector and value of the

objective function at the end of each optimization iteration

as computed in the regular way and using the method of

reduced domains. Figure 22 presents graphically the

objective function history of the two methods. In each case

the objective function had been reduced substantially after

6 iterations and the design vector was very close to the

exact answer of 0,0,0,0.

    This optimization test required 40 aerodynamic

evaluations in gradient calculations and 21 aerodynamic

evaluations in line search calculations. QNMAIFF sometimes

requires central differences in gradient calculations which

is why the number of aerodynamic evaluations for gradient

calculations is not 4*6-24. Each gradient calculation. took



                              -45-
approximately one tenth the c.p.u. time on the reduced

domain as comparea to the full domain. The total amount of

computer time required for this optimization calculation

using the method of reduced domains was aproximately 45% of

the time required in using the standard method.




                           -46-
                                                              i   _pit
                                            1
t




                   CHAPTER 4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



            The method of reduced domains has the potential to

        significantly reduce the computer time required in designing

        airfoils using numerical optimization. There are, however,

        unresolved complications in using the method if the flow is

        supercritical.     The use of a nonconservative potential code

        leads to      unacceptably   slow       convergence   rates   when

        computations are performed on the reduced domain. It is

        probable that this problem would be eliminated if                a

        conservative potential code was used.

            Future work on the method of reduced domains should

        concentrate on understanding the effect that different

        boundary conditions have on computations using a reduced

        domain. This paper has presented results of using different

        boundary conditions. Explaining why one boundary condition

        works better than another has proved elusive. With the

        proper understanding of the effect of boundary conditions,

        the full potential of this method would be known.

            This research has concentrated on reducing the computer
    '   time required to determine the gradients needed by the

        optimization program. Research is also warranted on

        increasing the efficiency of the line search. Making full

        use of the fact that the line search is a one dimensional

        problem could yield a signifigant reauction in c.p.u.

        requirements. Another area of possible research is in

        determining the best way to modify the airfoils shape.


                                     -47-
Different design variables will yield different design

spaces and one design space may be much more conducive to

numerical optimization than another.




                           -48-
                    REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


    1) Henne, P.A., "An Inverse Transonic Wing Design Method",
    AIAA Paper 80 - 0330, January 1960

    2) Chin, W.C. and Rizzetta, D.P., "Airfoil Design in
    Subcritical and Supercritical Flows", Journal of Applied
    Mechanics, Vol 46, No 4, December 1979, pp 761-766

    3) Hicks, R.M.; Murman, E.M. and Vanderplaats, G.N., " An
    Assesment of Airfoil Design by Numerical Optimization
    NASA TM X 3092, July 1974

    4) Hicks,  R.M. and Vanderplaats,    G.N., "Application of
    Numerical   Optimization to the Design of Supercritical
    Airfoils Without Drag Creep", Society of Automotive
    Engineers Business Aircraft Meeting :entury 11, Witchita
    Kansas, March 29 - April 1 1977, 770440

    5) Fletcher, R. and Reeves, C.M., "Functional Minimization
    by Conjugate Gradients", Computer J.,     Vol 7, No 2, July
    1964, pp 149-154

    6)Broyden, C.G., "Quasi - Newton Methods and Their
    Application to Function Minimization", Math. of Comp., Vol
    21, No 99, 1967, pp 368-380

    7) Hicks, R.M. and Vanderplaats, G.N., "Application of
    Numerical Optimization to the Design of Low-Speed Airfoils",
    NASA TM X 3213, March 1975

    8) Aidala, P.V., "Transonic Fighter Design Using Numerical
    Optimization", ICAS Paper No 80-2.1, October 1980

    9) Haney, H.P.; Johnson, R.R. and Hicks R.M., "Computational
    Optimization and Windtunnel Tests of Transonic Wing
    Designs", AIAA paper 79-0080, January 1979

    10) Vanderplaats,G.N., "CONMIN, A FORTRAN Program         for
    Constrained Function Minimization", NASA TM X 62,282, 1973
    11) Davis, W.H., "Technique for Developing Design Tools From
    the Analysis Methods of Computational Aeroaynamics", AIAA
    paper 79-1529, July 1979

    12) Spreiter, J.R. and Alksne, A.Y., "Thin Airfoil Theory
    Based on the Approximate Solution of the Transonic Flow
    Equation", NACA Report 1359, 1958

    13) Ashley, H. and Landahl, M. , Aerodynamics of Wings and
    bodies, Addison - Wesley Publishing Company Inc,. 1965



                               -49-


L
                           i




14) Jameson, A., "Transonic Flow Calculations", Numerical
Methods in Fluid Dynamics, Wirz, H.J. and Smolderen, J.J.,
Editors, Hemisphere Publishing Corporation,1978

15) McGhee, R.J. and Beasley, W.D. , "low Speed Aerodynamic
Characteristics of a 17 Percent Thick Airfoil Section Design
for General Aviation Applications" , NASA TN D 7428,
December 1973

16) Murman, E.M. and Cole, J.D., "Calculation of Plane
Steady Transonic Flo ,as", AIAA Journal, Vol 9, No 1, January
1971 , pp 1 14-1 21

17) Murman, E.M., "Analysis of Embedded Shock Waves
Calculated by Relaxation Methods", AIAA journal, Vol 12, No
5, May 1974

18) Isaacson, E. and Keller,  H.B.,  Analysis of Numerical
Methods, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1966

19) Liepmann,   H.W. and Roshko,    A.   ,   Elements of Gas
Dynamics, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1963

20) Smith, G.D., Numerical Solution of Partial Differential
Equations: Finite Difference Methods, Claredon Press, 1979




                               -50-
                                                  I/




                                        oh ,,CINAL C'A-—:r 143
                                        OF pooR QUA,11-Y




                                                                   C14               10                  Ic              to
                    V1            J               N                _                 ^{
                                  O               O                O                 6M                                  en
         m
         O
                    S

                                  C               O                C
                                                                                     ^o                  N               .,
                                                                                                                          -



     N
C               OO       co ON           V) r^            fn n              ^Q z                 CN C                    --^
O               f\ -+    r\ Q 1          NN               ^T rT             ^1 N                 ON             ..I .-+
L        is     00 C14   ON              .-r O            .-^ O             OO                   CO             OC
L
v         >+    CO       OO              OO               CO                CO                   OC             OO
Z        uu                   1               I       I        I        I        I           I             I         I    I
 c                                                                                                                             L
+^        v                                                                                                                    v
         >
C         C     OO       O•^                 1
                                                          d r`
                                                          in       n        O 10
                                                                            Or-4
                                                                                                 r` ^
                                                                                                     ;
                                                                                                 &+ V1
                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                s  N
                                                                                                                r-,O           Fv
                                                                                                                               C:
                O^       ^s              .-r-+            OC                CO                   OO             OO             r,
7         to
u                   O    O O             O O              O C               O O                  O O            C O            L
                                                                                                                               N
QJ                                                                                                                             +i

a
          w                                                                                                                    L
          4J        O             .-c             N                c•                S                   ^! 1            ^p    d
         u                                                                                                                     C
         r••I
                                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                     rn
                    ^a                            s                                  O                   C               O
                    un            a%              n                S                 .-c                 —4              11
     aC
     C
                                  n
                                  C^
                                  d
                                                  N
                                                  O
                                                  C
                                                                   C
                                                                   O
                                                                                     re
                                                                                     v1
                                                                                     u'^
                                                                                                         ie
                                                                                                         --;
                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                         ie
                                                                                                                         cu
                                                                                                                         r^
                                                                                                                               +d

                                                                                                                               Lcc
                    O                                                                N                   .0              co    v
                                  o               O                d                                                           a


     N                                                                                           r` N           f CJ
     O                   n N             s s              v1 O                                                  n s
                                  nn
                                                                            ^Q ON                O 00                          4l
                O        O, .T           n Ln             ^z                .1 un                —4 ?           .7 —•
p               r\ .-i   14                 N             CC -^              C'4                 OO             CC
O    *             N     O                1O              OO                CO                   OO             CO
u     :r        OO       cc              CO               OC                CO                   OO             00
                                                                                                                               F
w        O                1               i       I        I        I        1           I       I               1
         u
         u
$w       41                                                                                                              N
m    >                        ^                                             ^l1                  v1n            In       .-i
0                        00 en           ^C C             ^O ^G             ^T CID               v ^+           -IT      G
O        c      CO       mN              co n                               N Ln                   rn
to
v    -+
         to     O
                O O^
                    n    n  a\
                         0 .7
                                         ao C
                                         O --
                                                          =^
                                                          O cc              O C14                O C
                                                                                                                O O
                                                                                                                O C
                                                          O C               d 0                  O O            0 0
^        y
         v      -+c      co              oc               o0                oc                   o..            _o



         L

     ^-d
      1.0




      0.6




      0.0



7/c

      0.40




      0.20




      0.0
             0.0           0.20          0.40           0.60     0.80   1.0




                                         C


                                                          .
                                                          3
                        3) 7/c         sin 77(,^,/C)3




                   Figure 1.      F-xamples of Shape Functions



                                                                              fi




                                        -52-
r




                                       r2




    Figure 2. - Design Space Example




                   -53-
 t




                          ORIGINAL. WAGS Js
                          OF POOR QUALITY
1+

                I

-.6                  /\                               /
                                                                           C'
                                                                                           710
     co -.2                                                            \
           0                                                                               I   G     v
                                                                                                   10 a
                           INITIAL AIRFOIL (ARBITRARY), C 0 4 0.0083, V-0.721         \\
           .4              FINAL AIRFOIL, C 04 0.0 )03, v-0.644



.           60       10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                       z/c, percent chord

      a) Constraint: Vol t 0.4                 n - 71 M            0.8, C 1 - 0.0


       -1.0 r




                                                                   \            Cpr
           -4
      cp                                                                                   110 rv
           -2
            0                                                                                  0 v
                                                                                      \        -10 a
            .2
                             INITIAI     *"OIL (ARBITRARY), CO . 0.0003, V-0.721
.              4--•          FINAI     1t  OIL, C O . 0.0003, V -0.645




                60    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                       z/c, percent chord
        b) Constraint: Vol ? 0.6 . V - 7, M - 0.8, C 1 - 0.0


        Figure 3. - Drag Minimization




                                               -54-
          -.s

          -.6

          —,4
     Cp
          -.2


            0


           .2


           .4




            60           10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                      z/c, percent chord


   c) Constraints: Vol Z 0.7, jKu +` 100, (t / c)                            .125 at (x/c) • 0.41
      n - 7. M   0.8. C. - 0.0

          -1.0




                     I
                                                                      1      C*
           - ,q                                                               p

   C p\

-.2                                                                                       ►0
                                                                                      '        c
                                                                                               a,
                0                                                                     ^0
                                                                                               (IJ
                                                                                               a
.2                                                                                   - -10
                              INITIAL AIRFOIL (ARBITRARY), Co o 0.0083, 3 •0.721
                4        --   FINAL AIRFOIL, Co S O.0028, v n 0.789



                .6
                     0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                        z/c, percent chord

   d) Constraints: Vol > 0.7, IKul ^ 100, (t/c)                              .125 at (h/c)           0.51
      n - 7, M -0.8, C 1 - 0.0




                                         -55-
                               ORIGIN I                       ,
                               OF Pc) C)t '
                                           ^            a I ^y




                      Pert I        Pert 2                Pert 3   Pert 4
    1.0




    0.75




    0.50



c




    0.25




    0.0
           0.0            0.25                     0.50            0.75     1.0

                                               7-/r.c



                 peri    I -     ( 5.., ( 17


                 PC                        77,




                 Pet i




      Figuie y . - Shape Functions


                                      cc
               .0^'


                                        ORIGIN .",?.`,^

                                        OF p o()€^ QJ?- L,'CY
             0.06           r



                                                     Finite Difference
                                                          Method
             0.04
                                           —          Local Linearization
       C7.
      U

             0.02
      J
      W

             0.00




             -0.02



             -0.04'
                      0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.9 1.0


                                          7/CHORD

             a) Perturbation 1


    Figure 5. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed Using Local Linearization
                and Finite Difference Method. M . 0.75, It/c) - 0.08




s                                —5^—
                            0"?'iGIIVAL
                            OF POOPQ.
                                            ij
                                     QDAL17y

       7=

                                           2
     0.u6




    0.04
a
U

    0.02
J
W
G
    0.00

                    1
    -0.02



    -0 04
                        1                           ^




        0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.2 C,9 1.0


                                          X/CHORD



      b) Perturbation 2




                             -58-
                        ORIGINAL FIA , :, ° ;S
                        OF POOR QJA i I-Y


                  ^                                     I



     ^^   L   J




     0.Po

Q

Q

w 0.02
0

     0.00



    -0.02



    -O.iu4
              0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.E 0.7 0. g 0.9 1.0


                                        X/rHORD
          c) Perturbation 3




                              -59-
                       ORIGINAL PAGE IS
                       OF POOR QUALITY




     0. It 10


     0.08


     0.06


     0.04


W 0.02
n
     0.00


    -0.02


    -0.04


    -0 . 06
           0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 O.G 0.9 1.0




d) Perturbation 4




                      -60-
                   ORIGINAL
                   ORIGINAL,   -`- i
                   OF POOR t;'.




             t




      3.0




                                                      Full
      2.0                                             Domain

y/c




      1.0




                                                         %duced
                                                        Domain
      0.0
            -1.0       0.0             1.0        2.0
                             X/c


 Figure 6. - Comparison of Computational Domains




                           1— perturbation



                                       base airfoil




 Figure 1. - Airfoil in Hvootheticai Windtunnel




                    -61-
r^ ,
5^'
                                . it
                                       0R;(,'ts'!r! pp, -.. ,
                                       OF POC)R


                     i

                 'v i       !   Y                                        I




        CL      10
       U
       ~         5
       J
       W



                -S


               -10


        -15E-3
                  0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 O.B 0.9 1.0


                                                 X/CHGRD


             a) Pertubation 1



       Figure 8. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain and
                   Reduced Domain. Base Potential Specified at Edge of
                   Reduced Domain. M = 0.7, (t/c) = 0.1




                                       -62-
                          1/




                     ORICiN .
                     OF pook QUAILL',I-Y

 n o r r^




       0



       5




      -5



- 10E- 3
        0.0 0.1     0.2 03.3 0.4 0,5 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.9 1.0


                                  X/CHORD




b) Perturbation 2
                       ORIGII4,A'L          . - ^;-
                       OF POOR QUALITY


      .1r


            25


            20


            15


^           10
Q

^            5
L.,
0
             0


            -5


        -10


 -15E-3
             0.0 0.1     0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.B 0.9 1.0


                                                  X/CHORD



 c) Perturbation 3




                                     _64-
            i




    10.02
C

    0.01


    0.00



    -0.01


     I Ill,

            0. 0.1   0.   0.3 0.^ L70.6 0 7 0.6


                                   /CHCC, o




    d) Perturbation 4




                                                  a



                            -65-                  a
                               QU
                      of




                     AIRFOIL
                                    1.0
     0.0




Figure 9. - Reduced Domain




                       -66-
                          ORIGIN L PAGE
                          OF POOR QUALITY




      -^c
      CJ

      ?©

 ^ 15
       10
 J
 W

        0


       -5

     -10


 - 15E - 3
             I   I   I     I          I      I      I   ^^   I     I

        0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.B 0.9 1.0


                                          7/CHORD


a) Perturbation 1




Figure 10. - Pertubation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain and
             Reduced Domain. Base Transverse Velocit y Specified
             at Top of Reduced Domain. 4 - 0.7, (t/c) . 0.1




                               -67-
                     Id.




                               ORIG;Ni',\',-
                               OF POUR QUAL11,%,




0. 03,


0. 0 2


0.01


0.00


-0.01


-0.02
     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0-4 0.5 0.6 0.7 O.e 0. 19 11.0

                            R/CHORD




 b) Perturbation 2




                     -68-
                                                                            ^-41




                         OWGINAL
                         OF POOR QUALITY




  0.03



  D . 02

  0.01



  10.00



 -0.01,


 - (7, rA 0

          0.0 0. 1   0. 2 0          C). 4 B, 5 D.6   0   0 ,9 0 .9 1 . D

                                       7/CHORD




c) Perturbation 3




                              -69-
                           ORICINII t. ►"A,.:e^: r.G
                           OF POOR QUALITY



                                                       I^


     0.04



     0.03



     0.02
c

W 0.01
0
     ©-00


    -B.al



    -0.pip
         0.0 0.1    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.9 1.0


                                     7/CHORD



       d) Perturbation 4




                           -70-
                                   ORICINAt P    M
                                   OF POOR



         ^L                 X^ ~
                            'J

                i




         l^



V
                I                                                           I
                ^   I



F"-


W
          l^
                                                                            Y

                                                            +t`"k^ fl X +
                                                                            I

                                                                            I
         1 Li




        aJ Farturaation 1


      Figure 11. - Perturbation in Cp As Computed on Full Domain
                   and Reduced Domain. Perturbation Potential Added
                        to Ssso PotonC:al at tEdbc of Reduced Domain.
                        M  - 0., , It :) - c1.1
                            ORIGINAL PAGE IS
                            OF POOR QUALITY



                                                                    I


        23



        i5

a

Q
w        5
0



         S


             ^^ I       I      ^      I      ^      I   I   I   I
-1@E
         0.01 0.i 0.2 d.3 d.4 0.5 D.6 ©.7 0.E 0.9


                                          X/CHORD
                                                                        .9




    b) Perturbation 2




                                                                        y

                               -72-
r
s

8
b




                                 OF
         v'IL^ ..     I     I    I                I   ^   i




              25


              C^


              15


    ^         10
    Q

    w0         5

              -5


            -18



                0.0 0.1 ©.2 8.3 0.4 ©.5 0.6 0.7 0.B 0.9 i.0


                                        X/CHORD



             c) Perturbation 3




                                 -73-
r
                          ORIG NAL PACZ i3
                          OF POOR QUALITY




     ^.0^3



     0.02

U
    0.01
J

    0.00




    -0.01



    -0.02
         0.0 0.1    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0..7 O.e 0.9 1.0

                                                           ,:L
                                   VCHORD




      d) Perturbation w




                            -74-
                                                                         t




                              OF POOR QUALITY




               I




L         ^J
L1



          5
J

          5^



         1L



     5
          0 0 0.1 0.21 0.] '0.4 0.5 Li ' s 0. 7 0.6 0.° 1.0


                                    Y C,HC

     a) Perturbation 1


     Figure 1Z. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain
                  and Reduced Domain. Perturbation Transverse Velocity
                  Added to Base Transverse Velocity at Top or Reduced
                   Domain. M - 0.7, (t,'c) - 0.1




                            _'S_
                                       L




                                 OF POJ:l Q-X




     Li
     L:)




             -5


            -10



       - 1 51 E 3
                0 0 J     C) 2                 5 0       7   0/




                                             Li
                                           L, C R-^ D,




            b) Perturbation 2




Li
                             OF POUR QUALITY


         3




       20 r                                       ^^


        15


^      10
Q

w       5
U
        0

       _J


      -10

-
    15E-3 !     II       1      (             I        I   I   ►   i



        .0 .0 0.1 0.2 0.3 9.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.2 0.9 1.9


                                    X/CHORD




     c) Perturbation 3
                                   i




                       OF POOR QUALITY




    0.02
U
    ©.01
J
W
D
    12.00


    -0.0i


    -a.a2
         0.© 3.i 0.2 0.3 D., 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 1.0

                                  VCHORD




     d) Perturbation




                           -78-
                                     t
                  Ufdl INA 1":




                           Supersonic Point


                                 i




PertL
Veloc

                        Airfoil




   Figure 13. - Use of Characteristic Boundar y Conditions in
                Supersonic Flow




                         ;o_
                           OF pOCR GJALITV

1-




     a




 -10

 -i5

 -00




  3D



     Q.a 0-.i LD .9 9.3 0.4 ©.5 9.E 0.7 ©,9 0.9 1.0


                                 CHORD

a) Perturbation 1


Figure 14. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain and
             Reduced Domain. Base Potential Specified at Edge
             of Reduced Domain. `1 -0.32, (t,"c) - 0.1




                    -80-
                            dhia !N1"^' t
                            OF POOH




              i




                                     t

,^            I


Q
F-


      a.ala^-

      a.0!

     -0.01



     - 0.03
          0.0 0.!    0.? 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.c 0.7 0 g 0.9 1.0


                                     X CH pD



        b) Perturbation 2




                              -81-
                             r +i




                                      p l— Ea
                           ORIGINAL P G
                           OF POOR QUALITY




    ^ 1r




    o. oe
CL ,6
Q a.^4
J
     0.02

     0.00


    -0.02

    -0.04


    -1.(7.6
          O.0 0.1 0.22.? 2.40.52.62.70.22.9 1.2,

                                      V CHORD


       c) Perturbation 3




                               _R2-
                              ORIGINAL PAGE i$
                              OF POOR OUAIL.:TY




            j-1 A




    0. 03


    0.02


    L.Oi

    f61. . ( / 'A 0
             Ld




-   0. 0 11,


-0-02




                0.0 0   0. 2 .
                             O\2' D                    020
                                                   0.7 (     0


                                        71"CHORD




          d) Perturbation ^
                            ORIGINAL PAk'--- t-:
                            OF POOR QUALITY



                      i

               C ^'




               15


               10
         a
         `^      5
         Q

         w 0
         0
                 r


              -10


              -15


         -20E-3 >                                                          i

                 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.E 0.7 0.e 0.9 1.0


                                            X/CHORD


              a) Perturbation 1



              Figure 15. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain
     {                     and Reduced Domain. Perturbation Transverse Velocity
's                         Added to Base Velocit y at Top of Reduced Domain.
t                          a - 0.75, (t/c) -0.1
     U. clf



a 0.0    2^

L)


     1. 0:
Ll
^ 0.01

     1.10



     -0.01




          00        0 L"? 0 31       0    0 6 01 7 0,   Ll
                                   X, CHORD




      b) Perturbation 2




                            _ac_
                          ORIGINAL
                          OF POOR QUALI




     L7.0


     '".oG


     0.05

     0.OL,
C1
U



     0.02
w
     0.01



    -0.01



    -'0.X72
           0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 D.Y 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.E 0,   l.d

                                7//CHORD


      c) Perturbation 3
                                                         i




    0.03



    0.02
Q

J ^► .01


    0.00


    0.01


    -0.02
        0.0 0.1    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 O 7 0.2 0.9 1.0


                                  X/CHORD




       d) Perturbation 4




                           -67-
r,




                              ORIGINAL, PAGE IS
                              OF POOR QUALITY




                   (Y' wn      r_   0y w   re




                                                              m,


                                                        i.V
      0.0
                             Airfoil




     Figure 16. - Typical Notch Shaped Reduced Domain




                            -88-
                               oV Pooa




Cr
J




J
W



     0.02



     -0.03



     -0.14
         0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.9 1.0


                                   X/CHORD



        a) Perturbation 1


        Figure 17. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain and
                     Reduced Domain. Base Potential Specified at Edge
                     of Reduced Domain. M = 0.82, (t/c) - 0.1




                            -89-
         1
         . -1.


                                                 k
                                                 i\

                         ORIW AAL PAS 1^
                                                 j2




                  i
    a
         21. 0
Q
_^
         ,0 . 00 1I
1
J
         ".01

        -0.02



        -0.0,3 `-
                 0.0 0.1 0, .2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.? 0.5 0.9 1.0


                                      X'CN',nD


         b) Perturbation 2
              I_

              i

  3 . , n, ri
  ILI   .Oc
              Ii




  0.04
J
,J
p 0.02

  0.00

 -0.02

 -0.04

  0. 016
          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0. 16 0.7 O.B 0.9 1.0


                                   X/CHORD




        c) Perturbation 3




                            -41-
                        ..   .. .... ... ...._.-   e.°........   ..   .. ...    „._,_   s- ..^.   .-•   `u^cmu sx   ._   a. ^'v^'m.   "atr   â^a^x=.   5   ......   ,9




                                                                                                                                                                         7




     1   n




         IL"




     U . '0 I




     0.03
(1
     0 02
Q
r
     0 0 IL
G
     0.00


     -©.01


     -0.02




                k^.O a.1 0.2 0.3 D.7 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.B 0,(9 1.D


                                                                               X/^NORD




               d) Perturbation 4




                                                                      _o2_
    n „


     -^ n r




    0.01


    0.00

x-0.01
J
W
x-0.02

    -0.03

    -0.04

    -0.05
          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 PDA, 0.5 a.6 0,7 0.9 0.9 1.0

                                   x/ CHORD


       a) Perturbation 1


       Figure 18. - Perturbation in Cp as Computed on Full Domain and
                    Reduced Domain. Base Transverse Velocity Specified
                    at Top of Reduced Domain. M - 0.82, (t/c) a 0.1




                            -93-


                                                                         33
    0.02

a

Q

    0.00
0
    -®.01


    0.0,2


    -x.03
         0.0 0.1 0.2 ©.3 0.4 a.5 D.6 @.7 0.a @.° '.a

                                  7/CHORD


       b) Perturbation 2




                           -94-
     L'.




    0 . L%

    a.^6
Q 0.04
J
0 0.02

    0.00

    -0.02

    -0.04

    0. 06 1         1     1    1      1        1      1   1   1   1   1



             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.B 0.9 1.0

                                            nl I
                                          Xi^^ CORD




           a) Perturbation 3




                               -95-
                                             i




    L   L^             I     I     ^             ^   j   I




    n ^^
    u L v


    a . 0^

    0.OJ


    0.02
Q
W 0.01
0
    V).uiu


    -©.01


    -8.02


    -a .M
               ^7
         0.x.J U. 1   0.2 9.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.9 1 0


                                       7/CHORD




        d) Perturbation 4




                            -96-
                           p "',GE !S
               uRiGIN PI -
                   pOOR QUALITY
               OF




      a) Neumann Boundary Condition




         0.0                            1.0


       b) Dirichlet Boundary Condition


Figure 19. - Comparison of Domain Sizes Used




                    _97-
                  ORIGINAL PACE IS
                  OF POOR QUALITY




Figure 20. - Reduced Domain Used in Solving Full Potential
              Ecuat-Jon




                     C-2
                  -98-
G:




                 ORIGINAL PAGE       i
                 OF POOR QUALM(




                                                                 I




                  i              S       yz
     y/^ ' ^(•0 ^^ ^^      .51




                                              (p4pr4i"I'( Grc)



      Figure 21. -
             Airfoil Shape Tested




                        -99-
ii




                                    ORIGINAL !3 k,.'22 iJ
                                    OF POOR QUALITY
                  0.0




                                                    Reduced Domain
                                                       Method


                                                    Regular Method

              -2.0



     log 10 OBJ



              -3.0




                                                                 r
              -4.0




                        0   1   2         3     4       5    6
                                     Iterations



             Figure 22. - Iteration History of Objective Function
                              J T ,-.


                        OF F'OUit QUALITY

      APPENDIX. METHOD OF SOLUTION OF THE SMALL DISTURBANCE
                   TRANSONIC POTENTIAL EQUATION



       Cor^sider the similarity form of the small disturbance
transonic potential equation

                       (^J
                         t+ ^^^) +s1^ Cry) =                           .^ 1
          ^^                                     Y
where

           K C ^- r1.0 ) /N o i'l,

and

          y ; g y3 MAy

The pressure coefficient is the y, given by

        cP :      ^x C ^^ ^„^ y )                             ^,^ z )

       If the profile of the airfoil is given by

                y- J, fox )                                  (43)
then the Neumann boundary condition, transferrer to the axis
i^
               ^ y -                                         .4 ;^ )

                         ax
In the far field the airfoil is treated as a doublet. This

gives for the potential in the far field

 (t(x , ^) = (^'^'') ( xr'(x^^Ky.>>                         (AS)
where       = doublet stength                    40

                  J'PO d^                - 2. -f f I ^r 7

                                                                              w
                                        --i0i-
                                      ORIGINAL PAC- 19
                                   OF POOR QUALITY

    The numerical method used to solve this              equation

proceeds as follows.         Let p,,` be a central difference

approimation to the x derivatives


                l            Q, y L

where
                    ot ')      .., -
                              4__

          y                       2 G -X


and let qi,y be a central difference approximation to the y

derivatives


                            471
Define the following switching func'ion




Then a fully conservative finite difference scheme to solve

the small disturbance potential equa               is




    Details of this method can be found in references 14,16,

and 17.

