---
title: Computational aerodynamics and artificial intelligence
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19840023019
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19840023019
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-24
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 241a42c75c5b7be692791b6581d71674bb91c7aa66220e77051ad051d63dfeb5
pages: 41
words: 5037
cv_look_pages: 6
---

3 1176 00187 8140
~   . . ~,   .L   ..

                               -



                       NASA Technical Memorandum 85994




                                                         NASA_TM_8599419840023019




                       Computational Aerodynamics and
                       Artificial Intelligence
                       Unmeel B. Mehta and Paul Kutler




                       June 1984



                                                                 : :.'"., <)
                                                                          '_" 1•   1084
                                                                                     \".j




                                                           LANGLEY RESEARCH CENTER
                                                                 LIBRAR'{, NAS/'\
                                                              HM,1PTON. VIRGINIA




                       NI\S/\
                       National Aeronautics and
                       Space Administration                      111111/111111 1111 1111111/1111111111111111 1111
                                                                               NF00846
NASA Technical Memorandum 85994




Computational Aerodynamics and
Artificial Intelligence
Unmeel B. Mehta
Paul Kutler, Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California




NI\S/\
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, California 94035
                            TABLE OF CONTENTS


SUMMARY . . . . . . . . .                                               1
INTRODUCTION . . . . . .                                                1
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE                                       . . . .   5
EXPERT SYSTEMS . . . . .                                    . . • . .   7
BUILDING EXPERT SYSTEMS                                             .11
EFFECTS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON COMPUTATIONAL AERODYNAMICS 15
ANATOMY OF AN EXPERT SYSTEM: AERODYNAMICIST . . . . . . .         . . 19
EXPERT SYSTEMS IN COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS    .....             . 22
EXPERT SYSTEMS FOR AERODYNAMIC DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT               . 26
RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS                                               . 28
CONCLUDING REMARKS                                                  . 30
REFERENCES   ..... . .                                              . 32




                                   iii
                        Computational Aerodynamics
                                     and
                           Artificial Intelligence*

                            Unmeel B. Mehta and Paul Kutler
                     NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California


                                           SUMMARY


     A major role of computational aerodynamics in the future is that of acquiring new knowl-
edge in a number of complex aeronautical problems. It will also play an increasingly effective
role in the aerodynamic design and development process. The science of artificial intelligence
can advantageously be applied to both these roles of computational aerodynamics. This report
considers some aspects of artificial intelligence and speculates on how knowledge-based systems
can accelerate the process of acquiring new knowledge in aerodynamics, how computational fluid
dynamics may use expert systems, and how expert systems may speed the design and development
process. In addition, the anatomy of an idealized expert system called AERODYNAl\flCIST is
discussed. The report concludes with a discussion of resource requirements for using artificial
intelligence in computational fluid dynamics and aerodynamics. Three main conclusions of this
report are presented. First, there are two related aspects of computational aerodynamics: rea-
soning and calculating. Second, a substantial portion of reasoning can be achieved with artificial
intelligence. It offers the opportunity of using computers as reasoning machines to set the stage
for efficient calculating. Third, expert systems are likely to be new assets of institutions involved
in aeronautics for various tasks of computational aerodynamics.



                                       INTRODUCTION


      The knowledge base of aerodynamics has experienced tremendous growth during this century
(fig. 1). Before World War I, the foundations of aerodynamics were established. During the years
between the beginning of World War I and the end of World War II, there was a surge in the
establishment of low-speed aerodynamic knowledge. Following World War II, there was a great
increase in high-speed aerodynamic knowledge. At present, we are at the threshold of acquiring
new aerodynamic knowledge primarily through computational aerodynamics. This new knowledge
is sought in a number of complex aeronautical problems, such as the understanding of helicopter
flows, drag-reduction devices, high-lift devices, turbulence-control mechanisms, vortex flows and

 * This is the corrected version, with six additional figures, of AIAA Paper 84-1531, Snowmass,
 Colo., 1984.

                                                 1
flows with separation, and highly maneuverable aircraft.


                                                                              UNSTEADY
                                                                              AERODYNAMICS




                                                        HIGH SPEED
              UJ                                        AERODYNAMICS
              t:l
              Cl
              UJ
              ...J
              s:o
              2
              ::.:::
                                     LOW SPEED
                                     AERODYNAMICS




                       AERODYNAMIC
                       FOUNDATIONS


                1726         1915         1945              1975       2005
                                                 YEAR



          Figure 1. - Growth of aerodynamic knowledge (partly based on reference 1).


     Another area in which computational aerodynamics will playa major role is aerodynamic
design (fig. 2). Currently, computations based on the linearized inviscid and linearized inviscid
plus boundary-layer approximations are routinely used in the design process, and those based
on nonlinear inviscid and nonlinear inviscid plus boundary layer are in limited use (refs. 2
and 3). One can safely predict that before the end of this century, numerical solutions of the
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations will likely be routinely applied to solve aeronautical
flow problems.
   '[There are two possible applications of artificial intelligence (AI) to computational aerody-
namICS. First, in the process of acquiring new knowledge, it can make some of the complex
research problems manageable by efficiently using available knowledge. Second, in the process of
applying available knowledge to tractable aeronautical design and development problems, it can
reduce the time required for their numerical solutionsj This report speculates on these roles of
AI in computational aerodynamics.                      -
      The extent to which computational aerodynamics can provide new knowledge depends on
computational efficiency, manageability of computational complexity, and improvement of tur-
bulence models (fig. 3). These factors are pacing the advances in computational aerodynamics
(see also references 4-7). Computational efficiency includes both computer speed and memory
and the speed of numerical algorithms. Manageability of computational complexity includes grid
generation, body definition, data-base and programming logic management, data analysis, and
computational method formulation. On the other hand, how effective computational aerodynam-
ics is likely to be in applying knowledge to the aerodynamic design process depends on the speed

                                                  2
at which a design process can be completed with the use of computational aerodynamics, and on
the degree of confidence the designer has in computational aerodynamics relative to his confidence
in experimentation and analytical methods (fig. 4). These are the factors pacing the acceptance
of computational aerodynamics by management. Artificial intelligence is likely to play a useful
role in all of the above factors (figs. 3 and 4).



              LINEARIZED INVISCID     I    2D   I           3D



              NONLINEAR INVISCID                                     3D



              BOUNDARY LAYER                    2D               3D



              LINEARIZED INVISCID                                    3D
              PLUS BOUNDARY LAYER

              NONLINEAR INVISCID
              PLUS BOUNDARY LAYER
                                                                 I    3D    •



              REYNOLDS AVERAGED
              NAVIER STOKES




                                    1960             1970            1980       1990   2000


     Figure 2. - Computational aerodynamics in design and development of fiight vehicles
                           (past dates are based on reference 7).


     The potential applications of knowledge-based systems, an applied side of AI, are enormous
in many human endeavors dealing with problems of a scientific, technical, and commercial nature.
Realizing this, Japan in 1981 embarked on a plan to develop the fifth generation of computers;
these computers will not be information (data) processing systems, but knowledge-information
processing systems (ref. 8). The U. S. industrial response was the creation in 1983 of the
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corp. Its largest and most expensive program is
nicknamed alpha-omega for advanced computer-architectures (ref. 9). Also in 1983, the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) announced a new program called Strategic Com-
puting and Survivability, to promote development of a new generation of superintelligent com-
puters for military use (ref. 10). Great Britain, in response to the Japanese plan, has formulated
the Alvey Programme for Advanced Information Technology with emphasis on the development
of knowledge-based systems (ref. 11). The European Common Market countries have also begun
the European Strategic Programme on Research in Information Technology (ESPRIT) with one
major area of research being information and knowledge engineering (ref. 12). These activities
have come about because of the belief that "knowledge is the new wealth of nations" (ref. 8).
Thus, it is possible to state that computational aerodynamics and aerodynamic knowledge in
knowledge-based systems can be the new asset of institutions involved in aeronautics.

                                                      3
                                                                              CD =? AND
                                                                              DRAG REDUCTION


                 HELICOPTER
                 FLOWS


                    BLOWING SLOT
                                              VORTEX FLOWS AND

   ~-~                                        FLOW SEPARATION


   ~~             HIGH-LIFT
                                                                                  ~
                                                                            ~
                  DEVICES
                                                                             ~""--==
                                                                           ~

                                      o
                                       o                                   >777777777777/'
                                                                              TURBULENCE CONTROL


                              o
                                  o
COMPUTATIONAL
COMPLEXI~

                                       ~URBULEN~                            +
~OMPUTATIONAL=>
                                           MODEL
                                                                                       I I I I I


EFFICIENCY           COMPUTATIONAL                               COMPUTATIONAL
                     AERODYNAM ICIST                             AERODYNAMICIST


             Figure 3. - Artificial intelligence to assist computational aerodynamics in
                                  the acquisition of new knowledge.

     This report has four purposes: (1) to survey some aspects of AI that may be relevant to
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and in particular to computational aerodynamics; (2) to
describe how expert systems, a class of knowledge-based programs, are likely to accelerate ad-
vances in aerodynamics; (3) to discuss possible expert systems in CFD; and (4) to discuss how
expert systems are likely to speed the design and development process. A brief description of the
origins of AI and of its various disciplines is first presented. What are expert systems? What can
they do? Where can they be utilized? These questions will be addressed. Then, a few examples
of existing expert systems are presented. Next, basic concepts and tools for constructing expert
systems are discussed. After speculating on how AI is likely to influence computational aero-
dynamics, the anatomy of an idealized expert system called AERODYNAMICIST is described.
Further speculations are presented on the likely use of expert systems in CFD and in the aero-
dynamic design and development process. A discussion of resource requirements for effective
applications of AI in computational aerodynamics concludes this report.
LACK OF
                                       C)     o
   ~~
                                   o           o
   CONFIDENCE                 o                    o
   IN DESIGN
                          o                            o                                     ES

   DESIGN             o                                    o       QUERIES
   EFFICIENCY     o                                            o   :ROBLE~

                                                                         ~~""'~ICE
                                                                              SOLUTIONS




    AERODYNAMIC                                                AERODYNAMIC
    DESIGNER                                                   DESIGNER


           Figure 4. - Artificial intelligence to assist computational aerodynamics in
                         aerodynamic design and development process.


     As a caveat, the reader should keep in mind that the perspective of the authors is that of
active researchers in computational aerodynamics and in CFD, but not in the field of AI.
    The authors would like to thank William B. Gevarter for his comments and suggestions,
which have helped to improve the presented discussion of the science of artificial intelligence.



                                  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE


     In 1844, Augusta Ada Byron, Countess of Lovelace, possibly the first computer programmer,
recognized that the dichotomy between the progranuner and the computer was false (ref. 13).
Today, a computational aerodynamicist manipulates algebraic symbols leading to the develop-
ment of a computer program, whereas a computer is confined to arithmetic calculations or data
processing (number crunching). This division of labor between the computational aerodynamicist
and computer is neither necessary nor appropriate. Computers are capable of manipulating any
sort of symbol. In 1937, Alan Turing outlined a machine, now known as the Turing machine, that
contained the notion of a universal machine capable of doing anything that can be done by any
machine, including symbolic manipulation, and of what can or cannot be computed.

                                               5
     The origins of AI can be traced to mathematical logic, computation, and cybernetics (refs.
14 and 15). The developments of mathematical logic and new ideas concerning computations
during the 1930's and 1940's led to the development of the modern computer, a descendent of the
"analytical engine," a machine conceived by Charles Babbage around 1843. Complexity of doing
computations with a computer and interest in simulating intelligent behavior in the computer led
to the emergence of the science of AI. In 1950, Turing proposed a test, now known as Turing's Test
which would indicate whether or not a machine was intelligent. In this test, if an interrogator,
separated from the person (or machine) under interrogation, could not tell for certain whether he
or she was communicating with a person or with a machine, then the machine could be said to be
intelligent. The concepts of cybernetics and self-organizing systems also affected the emergence of
AI by influencing the fields of logic and computation. The phrase "artificial intelligence" became
popular at the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence in 1956 (ref. 15).
At that meeting, the discipline of AI is considered to have been born. John McCarthy is credited
with coining the above phrase; Turing is called the father of AI.
     The word "intelligence" means the ability to learn, understand, or deal with new or trying
situations (ref. 16). Another meaning of this word is the ability to apply knowledge to manipulate
one's environment or to think abstractly as measured by objective criteria. It derives from the
Latin "legere" meaning to gather, and hence to select. The Latin "intellegere" means to select
among and, therefore, to know, to understand, and to perceive (ref. 8). If an artifact or a device
can gather, select among, know, understand, and perceive, then we have an artificial intelligence
or an intelligent machine. Artificial intelligence is the part of computer science concerned with
concepts and methods of symbolic inference by a computer and with the symbolic representation
of kno;l~~ig;-t~b"e--used iiI-mairing inferenc'es (ref. 8). Th~s, computer progra~IlS are designe-d
to create computer systems exhibiting the characteristics we associate with intelligence in human
behavior.
     There are two principal disciplines of research in AI (fig. 5): cognitive science and intelligent
machines. The first is the theoretical side of AI, and it deals with modeling human processing
of information. The second is the applied side of AI, and it is concerned with constructing
computer programs that perform expertly in cognitive tasks of problem solving. This second
branch breaks down into subdisciplines based on applications: language understanding, vision
systems, automatic programming, theorem proving, and intelligent robots. At present, those
applications which do not fall into one of these subdisciplines are put into the subdiscipline called
problem solving.
     If a comparison were made between current intelligent machines and intelligent humans, it
would be observed that both the computer system and the human brain would have certain lim-
itations. The computer system does not have all five sophisticated human senses (sigh( hearing(
smell, taste, and touch), although some computer systems do have sight and hearing capabilities.
The computer system generally lacks common-sense reasoning. Finally, it does not usually have
an instantaneous flash of recognition or intuition. On the other hand, the conscious state of a
human brain has a short attention span. It is not capable of entertaining more than a few, say
three or fOUf, hypotheses simultaneously, and it is limited in speed. At present, the difference be-
tween future intelligent machines and intelligent humans is unknown because of a lack of sufficient
information (ref. 17).


                                                  6
                                           ARTIFICIAL
                                         INTELLIGENCE




                                                          INTELLIGENT MACHINES
                                                            (KNOWLEDGE BASED
                                                                 SYSTEMS)


      COGNITIVE
       SCIENCE




                                                                                 PROVING




                          Figure 5. - Branches of artificial intelligence.


     Knowledge-based systems are computer programs that can reason, make judgments, and
draw:~onclusions in a specific domain by drawing on encoded factual and heuristic knowledge,
pr;blem-solving methods, and inference procedures (fig. 6). Some programs can even understand
written and spoken words. Knowledge is usually inexact, incomplete and ill-defined. Just as
amateurs become experts incrementally, amateur knowledge-based systems can be caused to evolve
into expert knowledge-based systems. Therefore, those knowledge-based systems are known as
expert systems.



                                     EXPERT SYSTEMS


      An expert system is a knowledge-based computer program in some domain that performs
a specialized, usually difficult, professional task at the level of (or sometimes beyond the level
of) a human expert. The minimum accepted range of behaviors associated with the nature of
expertise in expert systems consists of knowledge, public and private, about a narrow specialized
domain, and skill at solving some of the domain problems. !\fA.CSYMA (ref. 18) and DENDRAL
(ref. 19) are examples of such systems. These systems will be described below. Some expert
systems have begun to explain results, for example, PUFF (ref. 20), and to learn, for example,
EURlSKO (ref. 21). In addition to these capabilities, systems capable of exhibiting the other
behavioral characteristics associated with the word "expertise" were nonexistent as of 1981 (ref.
22). '\!,hese are abilities of reorganizing knowledge, breaking rules by understanding not only the
letter of the rule but the spirit as well, knowing when a problem is outside the sphere of expertis0

                                                 7
                         JUDGE




                                                                      HEURISTIC
                     REASON
                                                                     KNOWLEDGE




                                                        INFERENCE
                                                       PROCEDURES




                        Figure 6. - Features of knowledge-based systems.


and of gradually decreasing expertise as the boundaries of expertise are approached. Further,
expert performance means, for example, the level of performance of expert aerodynamicists doing
research, design, or development in aerodynamics, or of very experienced people doing scientific,
technical, or managerial tasks. The power of an expert system lies in the knowledge it possesses
rather than in a collectio~ of d_~~ain~f~dependent soi~tion metho.d~ (ref. 23).'         ~ '-~-
     In most technical and scientific fields, experts select among difficult choices by symbolic
                                                             -worlaiig
 manipulations, ~.~feren~i''ll procedures, and by'<lrawingupon        ruies-ofihumb--;;i he~ristics
.based on exPeriential knowledg:~:Expert systems are particularly suited for the mo-deofthinking
 that is primarily reasonin-g rather than calculating.
     Expert systems work especially well in dealing with two generic kinds of problems. First
are the pure combinatorial problems in which pursuit of an exact or optimal solution would
lead to a combinatorial explosion of computation. Second are the data-interpretation problems
requiring analysis of a large amount of data. When successfully applied to these problems,
expert systems can have substantial economic value. They are particularly powerful when expert
performance is based largely on compiled experience. Expert systems can make, and have made,
a difference of millions of dollars on the bottom line. They can also alter the perception of
management concerning realities. These benefits are achieved when expert systems are designed
with one or more of the following objectives (fig. 7): (1) sustaining growth through duplication of
expertise, (2) capturing and distributing expertise for new ventures, (3) combining the expertise of
many experts, (4) solving intrinsically complex problems that resist solution by other means, (5)
managing knowledge, (6) providing a competitive advantage, (7) preserving perishable expertise,
and (8) improving skills of low-skill workers. Some of these objectives are discussed with case
studies in reference 8. The net effect of meeting anyone of these objectives is to increase the
number of available experts (fig. 8).

                                                 8
                Figure 7. - Objectives for which expert systems are advantageous.




                                                      ES
                    LEVEL OF EXPERTISE                                    LEVEL OF EXPERTISE


                 Figure 8. - Expert system increases the availability of expertise.

     During the past 20 years, a number of experimental and operational expert systems have
been developed for diverse domains. Such systems were developed in areas of bioengineering, the
chemical industry, computer science, education, engineering, genetics, law, management science,
manufacturing, mathematics, medicine, the military, and resource exploration. Furthermore,
there are expert systems for developing expert systems. The functions of some of the existing
systems are briefly explained in references 8 and 24-28. Applications that demonstrate the use-
fulness of expert systems are described below for routinely solving difficult real-world problems.
     An expert system in mathematics, called :MACSYMA (ref. 18), is a general-purpose set of
programs that can solve a variety of mathematical problems far beyond the abilities of most math-
ematicians. It has algebraic-manipulation capabilities, as well as the numerical subroutine library,
IMSL, and an extensive plotting package. It can perform at least 600 distinct mathematical oper-
ations (ref. 29). These include the four basic arithmetic operations, differentiation, definite and
indefinite integrations, solution of equations including ordinary differential equations, solution of
systems of linear or nonlinear algebraic equations, simplification, factorization, matrix operations,
vector algebra, order analysis, and finite or infinite sums of Taylor series expansions. MACSYMA

                                                 9
uses both algorithmic and nonalgorithmic procedures, mathematical knowledge, and heuristics.
It does not use search and reasoning under uncertainty; it does not explain its reasoning. It is
used extensively by mathematicians, physicists and engineers.
     In the domain of the chemical ind ustry the DENDRAL expert system surpasses all humans in
determining the relatively small set of possible molecular structures of known atomic constituents
generated by given mass spectrographic, nuclear magnetic resonance, and other chemical experi-
mental data (ref. 19). This system has three functional parts; namely, planning, generating, and
testing. The planning part reduces the effort of the problem solver by using encoded heuristic
knowledge of expert chemists. This limits the search for matching the generated structures with
the data. The generating part generates systematically all possible partial organic structures that
meet the constraints set by the planner and those apparent in the data. Then it expands these
substructures in all plausible ways, and it simulates the behavior of the resulting structures in
a mass spectrometer. The testing part compares the simulated spectra with the experimental
spectrum. This whole process leads to accurate, high-quality results in a fraction of the time
that an exhaustive search would take. DENDRAL is widely used by chemists. A significant point
about this system is that the theory of mass spectrometry was incomplete, and the rules about it
were inexact. This led to the development of the :META-DENDRAL system, which automatically
inferred these rules from examples successfully analyzed by humans.
     CADUCEUS, a knowledge-intensive system in the domain of internal medicine, attempts to
make a diagnosis at a level of expertise that permits it to solve most of the clinical pathological
problems which baffle human experts (refs. 24 and 30). It covers more than 80% of all internal
medicine; it incorporates more knowledge of internal medicine than any human can. Its knowledge
base includes about 500 diseases and more than 3,500 manifestations of disease. It consists
of an extremely large semantic network of relationships between diseases and symptoms with
approximately 100,000 associations. This system is undergoing formal clinical trials, and it is
likely to be used eventually as a diagnostic aid to physicians' assistants, in rural health clinics, in
military medicine, and in space travel.
     Rl/XCON is an expert system that configures requests of customers for VAX computer sys-
tems at Digital Equipment Corporation from a customer's order of various standard and optional
components (ref. 24). It breaks up the problem into subtasks and it does each of them in order
as follows: (1) checks orders for completeness and gross problems, (2) (theoretically) puts com-
ponents into CPU cabinets, (3) places unibus boxes filled with components in unibus cabinets,
(4) places panels in unibus expansion cabinets, (5) performs a system floor layout, and (6) lays
out the system cabling. After completing these subtasks, Rl/XCON provides a configuration
overview diagram, cabinet assignment detail diagrams, unbundled component ordered list, un-
configured component list, forgotten component list, unused capacity list, etc. Before this system
was developed, the resident DEC experts thought that this job could not be done by a computer
system. R1/XCON has been reported as saving DEC millions of dollars each year.
    Knowledge, reasoning, expertise, and complexity are the key words associated with these and
similar systems. Knowledge is the grist of the expert mill.
     Hayes-Roth et al. (ref. 24) consider ideal expert systems to have seven fundamental charac-
teristic features. First, they are considered to act expertly if they produce high-quality results in
a minimal amount of time. Although high performance is sometimes difficult to quantify, quality

                                                 10
and adroitness of performance are necessary for systems to be experts. Second,~pert systems
employ symbolic reasoning. This allows explicit symbolic representation of knowledge based on
logical foundations and on first~order predicate calculus] Third, expert systems have general
problem-solving ability in the domain of their expertise, along with knowledge of basic principles.
This determines the degree of intelligence of an expert system. Fourth, expert systems are uti-
lized in complex and difficult domains. If a particular domain is not complex and difficult, then
that domain does not qualify for an expert system. Fifth, expert systems take a problem stated
in some arbitrary initial form and reformulate it in the form appropriate for processing. Sixth,
expert systems have the ability to reason about their own processes. Seventh, an expert system
is characterized by the generic task that the system is constructed to perform. Most of these
tasks are control, design, diagnosis, debugging, instruction, interpretation, monitoring, planning,
prediction, and repair. The above seven features are current fundamental goals of building expert
systems. However, no existing system has all of these features.
    [The expert-system domain must be well chosen. Not all domains are amenable to building
expert system0 In domains that are well bounded, expert systems work the best. There are
generally seven stages of development of an expert system - conception, feasibility demonstration,
prototype construction, extended use in a prototype environment, acceptance of the performance
of the prototype system, commercial system construction, and commercial system release. Very
few existing systems have gone through all of these stages. The unfavorable characteristics of
the domain for building an expert system may terminate the expert system project in its initial
stages of development. Another factor which may limit the development of the expert system is
the lack of knowledge-engineering tools.
     A knowledge engineer builds an expert system in the domain of interest by tapping the
knowledge and expertise of an expert in this domain. The expert must be acknowledged to
perform the problem-solving task well. He must be to able to articulate his expertise, which
comprises: (1) factual and heuristic knowledge; (2) inferential, jUdgmental, and experiential
procedures; and (3) problem-solving methods. Further, he must be available for constructing
an expert system. If there are a number of experts that meet these requirements, they may have
differing and conflicting views. In such cases, one of them is appointed as knowledge czar, and
the expert system is built based on his views.



                             BUILDING EXPERT SYSTEMS


     Two basic concepts are sufficient for building expert systems: symbols and search (ref. 31).
Expert systems basically manipulate symbols and perform problem~solving tasks generally using
search. Symbols are sufficient for any intelligent action (ref. 31). They are used for encoding
knowledge of experts into systems that would act intelligently. Depending on the nature or
complexity of the problem domain, search is required for efficient use of the expert knowledge.
The concept of symbols underlies symbolic representation of knowledge and the manipulation of
that knowledge (symbolic reasoning). The process of building expert systems with these basic
concepts can require years of effort. However, the expert system technology has evolved to the


                                                11
point where a few building tools and languages, which are derived from basic AI programming
languages, exist for constructing expert systems. In this section we describe the above basic
concepts, the basic languages, and some of these tools. In addition to these, we indicate how
expert systems differ from conventional programs.
     Symbols are strings of characters, for example, transonic, 20.0, and jogging. The symbol
structures usually employed are a type of data structure, called list structures, containing symbols,
for example, (Multiply 7 Z) and (difference 8 (divide 7 8)).
     There are different methods for representing knowledge (ref. 14). In expert systems for
computational aerodynamics and fluid dynamics, knowledge is most likely to be represented by
the propositional doctrine (ref. 32) and by procedures. The propositional doctrine utilizes a
declarative knowledge base plus an inference mechanism. In declarative representations, the
static aspects of knowledge, such as facts about objects, events, and their relations, are stressed.
Knowledge is represented declaratively by methods based on mathematical logic, such as first-
order predicate calculus which allows manipUlation of knowledge by logical operations and rules
of inference. Examples of logical and arithmetic inferences are illustrated in figure 9. Production
systems (ref. 14) are equivalent to expressions of first-order predicate calculus. The basic concept
of these systems is that the knowledge base consists of production rules in the form of condition-
action pairs, that is, IF-THEN expressions. In this, the action part of the rule pair is executed
only if the condition side is invoked for a piece of knowledge or in the reverse manner when
SUbstantiating hypotheses. On the other hand, procedural representations of knowledge stress
how to use knowledge in well-specified situations (ref. 14). Knowledge is contained in procedures
that know how to do specific things, how to find relevant facts and make inferences.


                                                                    ARITHMETIC
                                  LOGICAL INFERENCE
                                                                     INFERENCE


                        GIVEN {RULE 1 IF R = P + Q THEN R = Q + P
                               RULE 2 IFR=P+Q THEN P=R-Q

                                  IF                                IF
                                        z=x+y                              x = 10
                                        z = 36                             Y = 26
                                        x = 10                             z=x+y

                                THEN                                THEN
                                        z =y+x (RULE 1)                    z = 36
                                        y = z - x (RULE 2)
                                        y = 26




                     Figure 9. - Logical inference versus arithmetic inference.

     Expert systems are problem-solving systems. These usually have three main components, a
data base, a set of operators, and a control strategy. The data base is the knowledge base asso-
ciated with the current task-domain and the desired goal. Operators, such as rules of inference,
help achieve the goal by manipulating the data base. A control strategy is used for deciding
what operator to apply and where to apply it. A method of search for an appropriate operator
sequence for achieving the goal is an example of a control strategy. A problem-solving method is

                                                     12
formulated as a search procedure in many expert systems. Problem-solving methods are required
for intelligent action based on symbolically represented knowledge.
     Search is generally unavoidable, but unlike the knowledge base it is not critical in expert
systems. There are different search techniques (refs. 14, 24, 33, and 34): (1) the data-directed or
forward chaining strategy, which starts from known conditions and proceeds toward the goal; (2)
the goal-directed or backward chaining method which begins from the goal to be achieved and
progresses toward facts; (3) the heuristic search technique, which generates and tests solutions; (4)
the difference reductlOn or mean-ends analysis, which tries to reduce the difference between the
current and the goal state; (5) the blackboard model, which mixes forward and backward chaining
strategies, and in which multiple sources of knowledge check the status of the emerging solution
on the blackboard in order to decide what these sources can contribute; and (6) the bidirectional
search, which involves searching from both ends of a search space. The data-directed, goal-
directed, and bidirectional search strategies could involve blind search strategies, which are not
practical for large problems. The heuristic search technique reduces the amount of computation
by using heuristic knowledge about the problem. Feigenbaum considers the blackboard model to
be the most powerful (ref. 33).
     For manipulating symbols, the language development and selection are driven by conve-
nience, efficiency, and availability of special features, although any programming language may
be used. There are three major families of languages: functional languages, for example, LISP;
logic programming languages, for example, PROLOG; and object-oriented languages, for example,
SMALLTALK. These languages produce descriptive programs emphasizing what is to be done.
On the other hand, languages such as FORTRAN, PASCAL, ADA, BASIC, and PL/l produce
procedural programs emphasizing how the computation is to be done.
      In an attempt to create intelligent programs, list-processing languages were developed during
the 1950's. LISP (11 St Processing) evolved out of experience with list-processing. It was created
by McCarthy (ref. 35) in 1958. It is the second oldest language after FORTRAN. LISP and its
variants are extensively used as the AI programming languages in the United States. The func-
tional nature of LISP is illustrated in figure 10 by comparing a LISP program with a FORTRAN
program for computing a factorial. The LISP program is very much like the mathematical task
of computing the factorial. Functions in a LISP program define formal mathematical expres-
sions. The program FACTORIAL is represented in the same data structure as all the other data,
namely, list structure. This program is recursive, unlike a FORTRAN program, which cannot
call itself.
     Mathematically, the formal language of symbol structures is generally predicate calculus.
Therefore, there is considerable work being done in logic programming, for example, PROLOG
(P ROgramming in LOGic). It is primarily used in Europe and Japan. In PROLOG, relations
or predicates are defined by sentences of predicate calculus.
     Since it takes a long time to build an expert system, special tools have recently begun to be
developed for knowledge-engineering tasks. These tools are themselves expert systems. Most of
them have evolved from existing expert systems. In this case, these tools are either skeletons of
existing systems or of parts of these systems. Some of these tools are for knowledge representation,
some are for building inference systems, and some are for both. Tools for building inference
Rystems are useful only in domains that can utilize control strategies similar to those from which

                                                13
                                          MATHEMATICAL TASK
                                                    1         IFN=1
                                          NI=
                                                {
                                                    N(N-1)1   IF N> 1




                       LISP PROGRAM                              FORTRAN PROGRAM

                       FACTORIAL (N)                                NF = 1
                         (COND ((EQUAL N 1) 1)                      DO 10 I = 1,N
                         (TRUE (TIMES N (FACTORIAL                  NF = NF*I
                           (DIFFERENCE N 1)))))                  10 CONTINUE



           Figure 10. - Functional programming versus von Neumann programming.

these expert tools were derived. It is a difficult yet essential task to choose an appropriate tool for
building a particular system. Problem characteristics determine solution features. These, along
with the required capability of the expert system, determine system features. Solution features
and system features guide the choice of tool features for building the expert system. These
considerations and guidelines for choosing an appropriate tool for building an expert system
are discussed in reference 24. Furthermore, that reference describes and evaluates a number of
available tools.
     The basic concepts of AI and the characteristics of conventional programs result in a number
of differences between expert-system programs and current computational aerodynamic programs.
These are listed in table 1 for different features of these programs. Because of some of the features,
namely programming style, program architecture, types of data, and programming tools that are
used in developing expert-system programs, these programs grow incrementally, and they are usu-
ally easy to modify. On the other hand, because of the same features, the conventional programs
for computational aerodynamics grow by revision, and they are difficult to modify. Consequently,
expert-system programs are more useful and can be quickly developed, as illustrated in figure 11.
     Another way of comparing these programs is to consider the hierarchy of solution methods,
as shown in figure 12. Algorithmic programs for narrow domains, for example conventional com-
putational aerodynamic programs, are usually powerful but not general or domain-independent.
On the other hand, programs that are domain-independent are not that dependable. In be-
tween these two we have expert system programs. Those expert programs that do not contain
algorithms are more general but less powerful than comparable programs using only algorithms.
However, expert systems that contain both algorithms and non-algorithmic procedures are both
powerful and more general than comparable conventional (algorithmic) programs. An example
of such a system is MACSYMA. Note that almost all expert system programs for computational
aerodynamics will be of this type.

                                                        14
                                                                    COMPUTATIONAL AERODYNAMIC
           FEATURE              EXPERT-SYSTEM PROGRAMMING
                                                                          PROGRAMMING

    EMPHASIS                 WHAT IS TO BE DONE                     HOW IT IS TO BE DONE

   SOLUTION METHOD           INFERENCE RULES AND HEURISTIC SEARCH   ALGORITHMIC (PROCEDURAL)

   PROGRAM ARCHITECTURE      CONTROL STRUCTURE SEPARATE FROM        DATA AND CONTROL INTEGRATED
                             DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE

    DATA BASE                PRIMARIL Y SYMBOLIC                    PRIMARILY NUMERIC

   TYPES OF DATA             IDEAS, KNOWLEDGE, NUMBERS, AND         NUMBERS
                             PROGRAMS

   DATA RELATIONSHIPS        COMPLEX                                SIMPLE

   PROGRAMMING STYLES        FUNCTIONAL, OR LOGICAL, OR OBJECT·     VON NEUMANN STYLE
                             ORIENTED, OR COMBINATIONS OF THESE

   PRIMARY LANGUAGES         LISP, PROLOG, SMALL TALK, AND          FORTRAN
                             VARIANTS OF THESE

   PROGRAM GROWTH            INCREMENTAL GROWTH                     GROWTH BY REVISION

   PROGRAMMING TOOLS         AVAILABLE                              BECOMING TOOL CONSCIOUS

   MODIFICATIONS             USUALLY EASY TO MODIFY                 DIFFICULT TO MODIFY



               Table 1. Comparison of expert-system programming and computational
                    aerodynamic programming for various programming features


                     EFFECTS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON
                         COMPUTATIONAL AERODYNAMICS


      Computational efficiency, computational complexity, and modeling of turbulence determine
the extent to which computational aerodynamics is likely to be effective in acquiring new knowl-
edge in aerodynamics. Computational aerodynamics is now being applied to increasingly time-
consuming and complex problems, and to problems in which the nature of turbulence is poorly
understood. The science of artificial intelligence will indirectly help improve computational effi-
ciency. It is also the contention here that expert systems will assist in managing computational
complexity. Further, the reasoning power of expert systems will aid in development of turbulence
models. Therefore, AI will accelerate the process of acquisition of new aerodynamic knowledge
(fig. 13). In this section, we discuss how AI is likely to assist computational aerodynamics.
     Computer hardware has advanced tremendously in the last 29 years, from the vacuum tubes
of early computers to very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuits, producing a net improvement in
computation cost effectiveness of 103 (refs. 2 and 4). In the same period, both the architecture
of computers and the programming languages used to control them have remained substantially
the same. This has limited the full exploitation of VLSI circuit technology. Although there are
vast differences in hardware and performance of the first four generations of computers, they are

                                                   15
                               100


                        >
                        I-
                        ...J
                        ~
                        ::l      50
                        w
                        >
                        I-
                        <t:
                        ...J
                        W
                        0:


                                  0

                                      0                          3



                  Figure 11. - Advantage of expert-system programming over
                   conventional programming (partly based on reference 36).




                                            ALGORITHMS




                                              EXPERT SYSTEMS
                                              (ALGORITHMIC AND
                                              NONALGORITHMIC PROCEEDURES)

                          0:
                          W
                          ~
                          oc..



                                  EXPERT SYSTEMS
                                  (NONALGORITHMIC
                                  PROCEDURES)




                                                    GENERALITY


                                 Figure 12. - Hierarchy of solution methods.

all based on a single basic design - the von Neumann processor. Even array processors that have
single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) path architectures use sequential instruction-stream,
von Neumann programming methods. Since programming languages, such as FORTRAN, are
modeled on the von Neumann processor, programs are complex, concerned with the smallest data
entities, and rarely reusable in constructing new programs. Consequently, the writing of software
is becoming more expensive every year (refs. 37-40). Software is the limiting factor in putting
computer power to its maximum use. It is generally believed that AI is the cornerstone of next-
generation computer technology (ref. 41). This will definitely be advantageous to computational

                                                       16
          Figure 13. - Effects of artificial intelligence on computational aerodynamics.


aerodynamics. Note that it may be the worldwide interest in knowledge-based systems rather
than in CFD that is going to be the driving force behind the development of the fifth-generation
computer.
     In the view of many researchers in the field of computer architecture, the fifth-generation
compu ters will use multiple-instruction, multiple-data (l\flMD) streams and many rather than just
a few processors (refs. 41-43). This will make a break with the von Neumann architectures and
programming languages. Two of the likely language types to emerge as predominant languages
on the fifth-generation computers are the functional-level programming (refs. 44 and 45) and
a combination of LISP and PROLOG. In the functional-level programming, programs are put
together with so-called program-forming operations to build new programs. These in turn can
be used to construct even larger ones. This approach allows parallel or concurrent operations
to be expressed easily. LISP is an example of functional programming style, but it retains some
features of von Neumann programming. The functional-level of programming along with expert
systems for automatic programming (refs. 29, and 46-50) will greatly reduce the software cost
and complexity of FORTRAN-like computer codes.
     There are two related aspects of computational aerodynamics (fig. 14): reasoning and
calculating. Reasoning is based on factual and heuristic knowledge of both computational pro-
cedures and aerodynamics; and it is carried out by symbolic manipulation and inferential pro-
cedures. Calculating is based on reasoning. It is impossible to calculate without doing some
reasoning. Although limitations in computational speed are considered to be a pacing item of
the advances in computational aerodynamics, the mere existence of a piece of hardware that can
execute instructions rapidly does not, by itself, guarantee that a particular problem can be solved

                                                17
quickly. Again, it is reasoning that is going to extract high performance out of a computing ma-
chine. The science of artificial intelligence offers the opportunity of using computers as reasoning
machines to set the stage for efficient computations.



                                                     /"            /


                                                 ; COMPUTATIONAL ;
                                                   AERODYNAMICS //:




                                REASONING                                   CALCULATING
                            (NON ALGORITHMIC)                              (ALGORITHMIC)



                                                     INFERENTIAL
            FACTUAL                                  PROCEDURES




                                             SYMBOLIC
                         HEURISTIC         MANIPULATION
                        KNOWLEDGE




                      Figure 14. - Aspects of computational aerodynamics.

     It behooves the computational fluid dynamicist to exploit the expertise of systems like MAC-
SYMA for reasoning before computation. There are at least two advantages of algebraic programs
over purely numerical ones. First, a result in algebraic form is more va.luable t.han one in numeri-
cal form. Second, simplifying an expression algebraically before evaluating it numerically reduces
the computation time. Furthermore, there are at least four advantages of automatic algebraic
computations. First, months or years of work with pencil and paper can be done in a few minutes.
For example, in 1847 Charles Delauney began algebraic computation of the position of the Moon
as a function of time (ref. 13). It took him 20 years to complete this calculation. In the process
he also committed three errors. In 1970, this computation was repeated on a computer in 20 hrs.
Second, a human being is more likely to make a mistake than is a computer system. Third, a
general mathematical expression stating a scientific theory can be easily simplified under certain
assumptions by algebraic manipulations which may be very difficult for the human being. Fourth,
a human being is freed from usually tedious algebraic manipulations to pursue more stimulating
and interesting mental scientific activities.
     The domains of computation and aerodynamics are complex and difficult. Obviously, the
domain of computational aerodynamics is then complex and difficult. Expert systems in these do-
mains will be a great benefit to the computational aerodynamics community as discussed in some
of the following sections. These systems will become intelligent assistants to a computational
aerodynamicist. They will accelerate the advances in computational aerodynamics, and they will
speed design and development pro~esses. These achievements are possible simply because these
assistants are the reservoirs of knowledge, and because they are capable of making manageable

                                                18
the complexity associated with difficult computational problems. In addition, the expertise in
continuously updated software of an expert system remains an asset to the problem-solving pro-
cess forever. Unlike its human counterpart it never cries, dies, moves on, or contains obsolete
knowledge.
     An expert system can be of tremendous utility in analysis of experimental data. For example,
a laser Doppler system produces a huge amount of data. These data can be statistically processed;
they can be used for developing theories of turbulence. The expert system can seek orderly
patterns in irregular data and thereby hit on predictable laws of turbulence. This is not far-
fetched; already, a system called BACON simulates some of the important processes of scientific
discovery. It has independently rediscovered laws of planetary motion, electrical resistance, and
Black's law of temperature equilibrium, as well as concepts of atomic weight and specific heat
from physical data (refs. 51 and 52). Another example is EURISKO, which develops its own
theories and ideas once it is given the principles of a discipline (refs. 21 and 53). A third example
is LOGIC THEORIST, which follows rigid rules and logic to find alternative proofs of theorems in
 "Principia Mathematica" (Russell and Whitehead). And the fourth example is the development
of elaborate mathematical theories from a few simple axioms of the set theory (ref. 54).



           ANATOMY OF AN EXPERT SYSTEM: AERODYNAMICIST


     Figure 15 shows the idealized anatomy of an expert system called AERODYNAMICIST,
which processes knowledge and information (data). An expert system with such an anatomy
could be used in the domain of computational aerodynamics. It could also be used in various
subdomains of computational aerodynamics and CFD. None of the existing expert systems has
the anatomy of this idealized system, although some parts of it are contained in every existing
system. The idealized system is based on requirements of the above domains. It is designed
considering what is technologically feasible and is likely to be feasible. Further, some parts of it
are concocted from generic structures of expert systems described in references 8, 24, 27, 36, and
55.
     AERODYNAMICIST can be used in three modes: the expert mode, the learning mode, and
the teach mode. It contains the following subsystems: (1) a language processor or an input/output
system, (2) a system manager, (3) a knowledge base comprising factual and heuristic knowledge,
(4) an inference system or a method of reasoning and of solving problems, (5) a knowledge and
inference acquisition system, (6) an expertise controller, (7) a status recorder, (8) an explanation
system, and (9) an information processor. Each component of this system is described briefly
below.
     An aerodynamicist or a student communicates with the expert system using the language
processor in domain-oriented language, which is generally some limited variant of English, or by
means of a graphics editor. In addition to these modes of communication, a knowledge engineer
may use a structure editor for knowledge and inference acquisition. The aerodynamicist employs
the system as an expert. The knowledge engineer communicates with the system to build its
knowledge base and its inference system. The student learns how to use the system. The language


                                                19
                                    EXPERT   ~
                                                  j)
                                                   KNOWLEDGE
                                                   ENGINEER




     AE RODYNAM ICIST                                                                 STUDENT




     KNOWLEDGE AND INFERENCE,-_ _~                                        EXPLANATION SYSTEM
                                         SYSTEM MANAGER


 ,-
 I
                                       EXPERTISE CONTROLLER                STATUS RECORDER
 I
 I
 I
 I


                                         a
 I      KNOWLEDGE BASE                                 ;I'
                                             II         'INFORMATION
 IL _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..JI                 ,              PROCESSOR

      KNOWLEDGE PROCESSOR



             Figure 15. - Anatomy of AERODYNAMICIST, an idealized expert system
                                for computational aerodynamics.


processor acts as an intermediary between anyone of the above users and the expert system, and
also transforms communication of the user into a language that can be understood by the system
manager. This processor also transmits to the user the response of the expert system to the user
directives.
      The system manager directly or indirectly controls the other subsystems of AERODYNAM-
ICIST. It sends directives to and receives responses from the knowledge and inference acquisition
system, expertise controller, and the explanation system. It receives commands from and sends
its response back to the language processor. It monitors the errors and interrupts of systems that
are under its control.
     The most important part of the anatomy of any expert system is the knowledge-base system,
because the performance of the expert system depends on the knowledge it has. In the domain
of utility, the expert system contains the following different types of knowledge that would make
it behave knowledgeably: facts about objects, actions and events; the time-history of a sequence

                                                  20
of events; cause-and-effect relations; performance knowledge, that is, knowledge about how to
do things; meta-knowledge, that is, knowledge about what is known; the theory of domain; and
heuristic knowledge, that is, experiential and judgmental knowledge and rules of good guessing.
Some domains may not contain all of these types of knowledge. A discussion of some of these is
given in reference 14.
     The next most important part of any expert system is the inference system. It contains
inference procedures or problem-solving methods, which reason by manipulating and acting upon
the combination of knowledge contained in the knowledge-base system and the problem sub-
mitted by the user. The inference system may contain different kinds of reasoning, some of
which are discussed in reference 14. Formal reasoning based on mathematical logic deduces new
data structures from given data structures by syntactic manipUlation of given data. Procedu-
ral reasoning involves simulating answering questions and solving problems as, for example, the
information (data) processing done in computational aerodynamics. Meta-level reasoning deals
with meta-knowledge, that is, knowledge about what is known. Nonmonotonic reasoning with-
draws a previously deduced conclusion in response to learning some new facti see, for example,
reference 56. Various combinations of these three kinds of reasoning are contained in existing
expert systems. Reasoning by analogy, reasoning through generalization, and abstract reasoning
are not yet feasible for implementation in expert systems. Common-sense reasoning is another
kind of reasoning that is difficult at present to implement. Some of these are likely to be feasible
in the future.
     Knowledge and inference acquisition are equivalent to machine learning. When AERODY-
NAMICIST is being used in the learning mode or when it needs to capture its own experience,
the knowledge and inference acquisition system is used. The knowledge engineer encodes the
knowledge of the expert and inference rules utilizing this acquisition system as an aid. There
are three other ways of acquiring knowledge (ref. 24): (1) The expert can interact directly with
this acquisition system using an "intelligent editing program"; (2) induction programs may gen-
erate knowledge based on experience, obtained from the expert and from textbook cases; and (3)
knowledge may be acquired directly from textbooks using text-understanding programs. The last
two ways are not yet demonstrated. The knowledge and inference acquisition system decides how
knowledge and inference shall be organized, controlled, propagated, and updated. It handles the
difficult task of knowledge-base management. It determines how the inference system will use
knowledge. An example of an acquisition system is TEIRESIAS (ref. 57). It assists the expert
in acquiring, correcting, and using new inference rules without calling on a knowledge engineer.
     The expertise controller actually controls the solution process for solving the problem submit-
ted by the aerodynamicist or the student. It performs three functions: scheduling, interpreting,
and enforcing consistency. It solves the problem by using the knowledge system, the inference
system, and the information processor. It formulates a list of things to do, controls that agenda,
and determines what action should be executed next. It interprets the inference procedures and
applies them to the knowledge base and problem data. It ensures that plausible solutions or
conclusions are arrived at, and that inconsistent ones are rejected.
     The status recorder records all the activities of the expertise controller. Particularly, the
status recorder has the following information: (1) status of three types of actions taken by the
expertise controller, (2) record of the strategy embarked upon in order to solve the problem,


                                                21
(3) agenda of potential actions awaiting execution, (4) record of the intermediate hypotheses,
decisions and successful solutions, and their dependencies, and (5) list of failures during the
problem solving process. In addition to this record keeping activity, it provides information to
the explanation system.
     The explanation system explains the actions of the expertise controller either to the aero-
dynamicist or the student user by tapping the information generated in the status recoder. The
explanation system answers questions about how the solution of the problem was determined,
why the expert system failed to provide the answer, why some decision, conclusion or hypothesis
was reached while some other was rejected. The explanation system assists the user in evaluating
AERODYNAl\flCIST, deciding whether to use the built-in expertise, and in debugging, modify-
ing, and expanding the built-in expertise. This is particularly important for building confidence
of designers of aerodynamic vehicles in computational aerodynamics.
    The knowledge base and the inference system primarily compute by reasoning. On the other
hand, the information processor primarily computes by calculating. This is its only function in
AERODYNAl\flCIST. The information processor is essential, particularly when a flow field is to
be determined.



         EXPERT SYSTEMS IN COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS


     The design and application of software for CFD basically involves four related phases: soft-
ware method formulation, programming, validation, and utilization. Each phase requires deci-
sions by one or some of the following: the theoretical expert, software designer, or applications
engineer. Further, CFD involves the synthesis of many facets (fig. 16), each of which requires
expertise. It is conceivable that an expert system could be designed that would act as a flow-field
synthesizer; that is, act on all of the 10 facets depicted in figure 16 for a computation. Because
of the knowledge-accumulation concept used in such a system, wrong paths and mistakes often
made by researchers can be avoided.
    Present expert-systems techniques show promise of being used in at least five aspects of
the CFD simulation process that would involve some of the above facets: definition of the flow-
problem, grid generation (one of the computational complexities associated with advances in
CFD), construction and analysis of numerical schemes, flow-solver selection and use, and data
reduction, analysis and display (fig. 17).
     Before a computational fluid dynamicist begins constructing a computer program to solve a
flow problem, he has to completely define the problem based on the physical aspects of it; see,
for example, reference 58 for viscous flows. This process could be performed by an expert system
with extensive fluid dynamic knowledge encompassing flow regimes, local flow characteristics, ac-
ceptable assumptions and their shortcomings, governing equations, physical boundary and initial
conditions, and solution methods (see figure 17). The expert system in essence could develop a
blueprint for tackling the flow problem. Such a system could be used for education; it could also
be used by a person not familiar with fluid dynamics.


                                                22
                                        I
                                                          II
                                     PROBLEM
                                                      GOVERNING
                                    DEFINITION
                                                      EQUATIONS


                           X
                                                                       III
                        OUTPUT
                                                                   TURBULENCE
                       AND DATA
                                                                     MODEL
                       REDUCTION

                         IX                                               IV
                      INITIAL                                          SOLUTION
                    CONDITIONS                                         CONCEPT


                          VIII                                          V
                       BOUNDARY                                     ALGORITHM
                       CONDITIONS                                  DEVELOPMENT


                                                          VI
                                        VII
                                                       CONFIGU
                                       GRID
                                                        RATION
                                    GENERATION
                                                      DEFINITION



                  Figure 16. - Various facets of computational fluid dynamics.


     One of the most important steps required to accurately solve a three-dimensional CFD prob-
lem using finite-difference procedures involves the proper location of the nodal points in the flow
region to be resolved. There are basically two decision stages and a feedback stage involved in
the discretization process. The two decision stages involve (1) the grid topology, and (2) the grid-
generation scheme; the feedback stage involves an analysis and modification of the grid based on
the grid metrics, the flow-solver algorithm to be used, and the flow-solution generated. Grid gen-
eration is an intrinsically complex and difficult reasoning process. It is a combinatorial problem
because the degrees of freedom in distributing grid-points are directly proportional to the number
of grid-points. Therefore, AI techniques can greatly reduce the complexity associated with the
creation of grid networks.
     The conceptualized expert grid-generation system SPIDER shown in figure 18 is based on
the three major elements of an expert system mentioned earlier (see figure 15). It depicts a few
essential ingredients of some of these elements. The input phase consists of three groups of input
information required by SPIDER. The first part of this input information consists of various flow
parameters such as the Mach number, angles of attack and yaw, and Reynolds number. These
parameters would determine, for example, whether planes of symmetry can be employed, the
position of the outer computational domain, and the possible regions of nodal point clustering.
The second group of input information is the geometric data; that is, body coordinates that
form the boundary of the computational domain. The third group of input data consists of
such qualitative program control information as the desired level of accuracy required and the
permissible level of expense to be incurred.
     Contained in the knowledge base of SPIDER would be the facts and heuristics. In this
case the facts would consist of the grid-generation schemes and the grid-analysis procedures.

                                                 23
                                                                            U"+1 _ U"        U"+1 _ 2U"+1 + U"+1
                                                                             1           1    1+1     1      1-1
                                                                                 .::It              .::lx2

FLOW-PROBLEM DEFINITION                     GRID GENERATION               CONSTRUCTION AND ANALYSIS
                                                                            OF NUMERICAL METHODS
• PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF FLOW             • CONCEPTUAL OR TOPOLOGICAL           • DEVELOPMENT OF SCHEMES
    SPEED REGIME                         DISCRETIZATION                        WITH SPECIFIC PROPERTIES
    VISCOUS OR INVISCID
    STEADY OR UNSTEADY                 • DEFINITION AND APPLICATION          • STABILITY ANALYSIS
    THIN. SLENDER OR                     OF GRID-GENERATION PROCEDURE
                                                                             • ACCURACY ANALYSIS
     COMPLEX-SHEAR LAYERS
                                       • GRID-GUALITY ANALYSIS
    SHOCK WAVES - FLOW
     DISCONTINUITIES                   • GRID-POINT LOCATION ADJUST
                                         MENTS
• SURFACE AND FIELD VARIABLES

• PHYSICAL BOUNDARY AND
  INITIAL CONDITIONS

• SUGGESTIONS AS TO SOLUTION
  METHODOLOGY


                       FLOW SOLVERS                                                 DATA REDUCTION

                   • NAVIER-STOKES SOLVER

                   • PNS SOLVER
                                                                      Q   iW ·   (ANALYSIS AND DISPLAY)
                                                                                         ENGINEERING QUANTITIES

                                                                                     • FLOW VISUALIZATION

                   • BOUNDARY LAYER SOLVER                                           • ERROR ANALYSIS

                   • INVISCID SOLVER

                  Figure 17. - Expert systems in computational fluid dynamics.


The heuristics knowledge would consist of good practice and good judgment of constructing
acceptable grid systems. For example, there currently exists no theory that can determine the
zoning or grid patchwork for either two- or three-dimensional problems. Therefore, heuristics
would be employed.
     Once the flow field has been zoned, each zone can then be discretized using the procedures
denoted in figure 18 which include both algebraic and differential approaches. With the flow
region discretized, various levels of grid-analysis procedures can be used to judge the quality
of the created grid. These vary in complexity from procedures that simply look at the grid
parameters (such as the transformation Jacobian, geometric derivatives, and ratio of the metrics)
to procedures that combine these functions with the flow-solver algorithm and flow solution to
yield a modified grid. Thus, this system must interact with the flow solver to receive information
on the flow solution and transmit information on the new nodal point locations.

                                                     24
                  ZONING                           FLOW
                                                   PARAMETERS


                                                      Moo' ex, 13, Re




                                                   PROGRAM                               BODY 1 t,x,Y,z
                                                                        BODY 1 t,x,Y,z   BODY 2 t,x,Y,z
                                                   CONTROL
                                                   PARAMETERS             •      •         •      •
                                                                          •      •         •      •
                                                   LEVEL OF               •      •         •      •
                                                    ACCURACY              •      •         •      •
                                                   COST




      CONFORMAL            ELLIPTIC               KNOWLEDGE                                COORDINATE
      NONCONFORMAL         PARABOLIC                 BASE                                  LOCATIONS
                           HYPERBOLIC


                                                                                         COMPUTATIONAL
                                                                                         SURFACE TYPE


                                                                                         ZONAL INTERFACE
                                                                                         INFORMATION




                   Figure 18. - SPIDER, an expert system for grid generation.


     The expert grid-generation system simply produces as output three pieces of information to
be used by the flow solver: (1) the coordinate location of the nodal points, (2) the definition of
each surface of the computational cube (e.g., plane of symmetry, body, and shock wave), and (3)
the zonal interface control parameters. The latter piece of information tells the flow solver which
zonal boundaries are adjacent to each other. This is required by the boundary-condition routines
in the flow solver.
     An expert system can be constructed for building and analyzing numerical methods. Such a
system could develop a numerical method that has specified properties and capabilities. It could
perform a stability analysis, and determine phase and amplitude errors of any numerical method.
It could be made to compute test problems and present sample results. It could summarize all the
characteristics of the numerical method. It could check for and construct compatible numerical
schemes that might be used in different parts of the flow field. Sometimes it is difficult to perform
a stability analysis; for example, it is generally difficult to perform a stability analysis with

                                                 25
nonperiodic boundary conditions. For such situations, the expert system could be advantageous.
     Just as MACSYMA solves ordinary differential equations, an expert system could be devel-
oped to solve the partial differential equations governing fluid flows. This system would contain
knowledge of existing flow solvers. It would automatically select the solution method and generate
the corresponding code for a specific problem. In addition, the system would assist in determining
a correct solution by checking whether the problem is well-posed. This system would be widely
used by aerodynamicists in aerodynamic research, design, and development. It would not be
necessary that the user have any knowledge of the solution procedures used by this system.
     Three-dimensional computational fluid dynamic solutions generate vast amounts of data. The
processing of these data for analysis and display is somewhat analogous to signal interpretation
in military and space applications. It is highly conceivable that an expert system could be
constructed to make decisions, and to process and display useful data in an appropriate form
based on known desired displays. This system would decide what part of the flow field to analyze,
what analysis to perform, what to display, and how to display it. It could also summarize the
significant physical, computational, and design aspects of the computed results.
   The above five examples are a just a few of the potential applications of expert systems in
CFD. These are felt to be the ones most promising and immediately possible.



  EXPERT SYSTEMS FOR AERODYNAMIC DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT


     Flight vehicle designers need sophisticated computational aerodynamic tools to simulate the
flow field about complicated three-dimensional flight configurations. They would prefer to have
expert simulation tools at their disposal in a relatively short time. They would also like to use these
tools withou t the need to know exactly how they work. Furthermore, they would like these tools
to be easy to use, versatile, reliable (thus improving productivity), robust, and accurate (so that
the design and development of more efficient configurations would be feasible). The development
of sophisticated computational aerodynamic tools requires vast expertise and enormous resources
in terms of both manpower and computer capacity (Le., speed and storage). The creation of these
simulation tools requires knowledge; for example, in the disciplines of aerodynamics, structural
dynamics, propulsion, design methods, fluid dynamics, numerical analysis, and computer science.
Such tools demand an inordinate amount of development time. To provide simulation programs
that are easy to use, reliable, and versatile, and to alleviate a long development process, expert
systems can be employed (fig. 19).
    There are at least nine areas in which expert systems can be developed. These areas are
potential flow, Euler equations, thin-shear layer (boundary-layer) equations, Reynolds-averaged
Navier-Stokes equations, parabolized Navier-Stokes equations, computational design, aerody-
namic knowledge-base, structural knowledge-base, and aerodynamic design knowledge-base.
     Abundant knowledge is available for determining the potential flow around aerodynamic
vehicles. The numerical procedures and techniques are well understood. For transonic flows,
the aircraft industry is routinely using potential-flow codes, such as the series of FLO codes


                                                 26
                 Figure 19. - Expert systems provide the flight vehicle designers
                         with usable, versatile, and reliable design tools.


(ref. 59). The strengths and weaknesses of small-disturbance and full-potential methods are well
known. The characteristics and capabilities of various numerical methods are also well known.
For incompressible flows, the panel method and the Douglas-Neumann code exist. In short,
the numerical determination of potential flow is no longer a basic research topic. It is just a
matter of properly utilizing the available knowledge. All this knowledge can be codified into an
expert system that would automatically generate the grid system using SPIDER and solve for the
potential flow around any vehicle. The expert system could make all the relevant decisions based
on the requirements specified by the user, and then it would direct a supercomputer to perform
the calculations. Upon receiving the computed data, it would analyze the data and report the
significant results. A similar case, based on availability of enormous knowledge, can be made for
developing an expert system for automatically and expertly computing thin-shear layers.
    During the last 4 years, there has been significant progress in computing solutions of the Euler
equations. Although there is still a lot to learn about solution procedures for these equations, it
makes more sense to begin building an expert system now than developing a portfolio of codes for
each application that arises. The expert Euler equation system could be continuously updated,
and thus its capability would incrementally grow. Conventional programming techniques generally
produce codes that need to be redesigned when their requirements are modified (fig. 11). An
expert system that is incrementally developed, on the other hand, would result in a code that
would remain operational with changing requirements within the same domain. A similar case
can be made for developing an expert system that would solve Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
equations and the parabolized Navier-Stokes equations.
    Aerodynamic design methods are classified as either inverse solution methods or numerical

                                                27
                       r-
optimization methods.~Jnverse methods determine the aerodynamic body surface that produces
the desired pressure distribution. These methods, at present, are best suited for initial design
because it is difficult even for an experienced designer to specify the pressure distribution that
would achieve the design objective and because structural constraints are difficult to impose (ref.
60). But an expert system can search through a knowledge base containing various pressure
distributions associated with the shapes of the bodies and their design characteristics, and it can
construct the likely pressure distribution that would satisfy the design conditions. This pressure
distribution can then be used for the inverse problem. "\
                                                        J



     On the other hand, numerical optimization methods couple flow solvers with numerical mini-
mization schemes to produce designs that achieve user-specified design objectives. In these meth-
ods, the designer specifies an initial aerodynamic body, design objectives, design constraints, and
design conditions. The effect on the design objectives and constraints is determined by computing
the flow field. A search direction is established that minimizes one of the design objectives while
satisfying the constraints. In this fashion the design variables are perturbed independently, and
the design objective and constraints are again evaluated. When the objective can no longer be
reduced in the current direction, a new search direction is chosen, and the process is repeated.
The number of design points that can be considered by numerical optimization is theoretically
unlimited; however, computer capacity limits the number of these points (ref. 61). In such in-
stances, an expert system with heuristic search procedures utilizing a knowledge base of previous
designs and experience related to the optimum way to perturb the variables could benefit the
optimization process (fig. 20).
     Knowledge of fluid dynamics, structural mechanics, and mechanical design pertinent to the
design and development process of an aerodynamic configuration in knowledge-based systems
could be a great asset to designers and developers. A lot of heuristic and experiential knowledge
is used in design and development of aircraft operating in the transonic regime (refs. 62-64).
Imagine what an asset it would be if the aerodynamic design expertise of Kelley Johnson, designer
of planes such as U-2 and SR-71 for Lockheed Aircraft Company, were to be-encoded.



                              RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS


     Constructing an expert system requires a substantial investment of time and manpower.
Davis (ref. 22) conducted a survey to determine the time required to build an expert system. The
results of his survey are shown in figure 21. The systems mentioned in this figure vary drastically
with respect to the size of the problem they are trying to solve and the amount of knowledge they
need to perform expertly. For example, the size of the problem solved by MACSYMA is probably
two orders of magnitude larger than that of PUFF. Furthermore, the level of performance that
was achieved by the various systems was not the same. Some of these systems routinely solved
practical problems, while others never made it beyond the research stage. Nevertheless, there is
a decline in the time required to build a system. The curve suggests that it would take about 5
man-years to build an expert system that can be routinely used. Davis has qualified this estimate
by requiring that the problems must be clearly defined, and that experienced researchers and


                                                28
                DESIGN -
               • OBJECTIVES
               • CONSTRAINTS
               • CONDITIONS
                INITIAL CONFIGURATION


                           l
                                                    EXPERTISE                        INFORMATION
                INPUT/OUTPUT SYSTEM           I-                      ~
                                                    CONTROLLER                       PROCESSOR
                                                                      1+
                           1                                t              4


                                                              -
                  OPTIMIZED DESIGN
                                                     INFERENCE                       KNOWLEDGE
                  AND ITS
                                                     SYSTEM                          BASE
                  CHARACTERISTICS


                                                            t                            I
                                                   BLACKBOARD                  • PREVIOUS DESIGNS
                                                   MODE OF SEARCH              • NUMERICAL OPTIMIZA
                                                                                 TION TECHNIQUES
                                                                               • HEURISTIC KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                 - PERTURBATION
                                                                                   EXPERTISE
                                                                                 - FLOW FIELD
                                                                                   EXPERTISE



      Figure 20. - OPTIMIZER, an expert system for aerodynamic design optimization.

mature technologies be used for building the expert system.


                                50
                                              MACSYMA
                                                        HEARSAY



                           en
                                40

                                                INTERNIST   I
                                                     I
                           ~ 30
                           UJ                           MYCIN
                           >
                           2:
                           <{
                           ~
                                20
                                                            HARPY    I
                                                                     PROSPECTOR



                                10                 CASNET        PUFF

                                 o ~~L~'______~______~______XCON
                                                                 I
                                                             ~____~_
                                     !   65         70        75                80
                                                      YEAR BEGUN


                    Figure 21. - Development times in man-years of some of
                        the existing expert systems (from reference 22);
                  the vertical bars indicate the error in estimating man-years.

    Hayes-Roth has given an estimate for building a knowledge-based system that ranges from 7

                                                         29
months for simple systems in a friendly environment with existing tools to 15 years for complex
systems in demanding environments where fundamental research and development are required
(ref. 65). This time estimate covers the period from conception of the knowledge system solution
to application. This includes building a prototype system for feasibility demonstration that
a knowledge system can be of use in the given context, designing and developing the actual
system, and integrating the hardware, software, user interface, and knowledge base. Simple
systems generally contain 50 pieces of knowledge - a piece of knowledge is the smallest piece of
information; for example, a single IF-THEN rule. A current complex system generally requires
105 pieces of knowledge. It is projected that at a noneducational institute the cost will range
from $175,000 for a simple system with 14 man-months of work to $15,000,000 for a complex
system with 50 man-years of work. These estimates include the costs for design, development,
knowledge engineers, computing, overhead and expert-system building tools.
      The discipline of knowledge engineering is the most crucial in development of expert sys-
tems. It is the art of designing and building knowledge-based systems. It involves knowledge
representation, knowledge acquisition, knowledge refinement, knowledge system architecture, and
knowledge system performance. Knowledge engineering is the pacing item for advances in expert
system technology because, at present, knowledge engineering has four significant shortcomings
(fig. 22). First, there is a scarcity of knowledge engineers. Currently about six computer science
doctoral-level graduates per year are involved in construction of knowledge-based systems (ref.
36). There are about 70 persons in the world who have a high level of experience in knowledge-
based system design and development (ref. 36). Second, there is a lack of knowledge-engineering
tools. Existing tools for knowledge-representation and problem-solving structures are not always
amenable to new applications. Often laboratory tools must be modified or new tools must be
constructed. Third, knowledge engineering is still in a research stage. Although there are ways
machines can learn, knowledge is often handcrafted because human-like knowledge-acquisition
modes are not yet thoroughly understood. Fourth, there is a knowledge-representation mismatch
between the way a human expert normally states knowledge and the manner in which it must
be represented in the expert system. Therefore, the expertise of a knowledge engineer in pro-
gramming the expertise of a human expert is extremely crucial in building expert systems (ref.
65).
    To date, expert systems have been created and exercised on third-generation computers only.
Programming languages used in AI must be available on existing fourth-generation computers for
using AI in computational aerodynamics. Since computational aerodynamics generally requires
supercomputers, it is highly desirable that the reasoning aspect of computational aerodynamics
be accomplished on the same or similar computer. In addition, tools for building expert systems
should be available on this computer.



                                 CONCLUDING REMARKS


    There are two ways the science of artificial intelligence is likely to benefit computational aero-
dynamics. Directly, it will greatly influence the reasoning aspect of computational aerodynamics


                                                 30
                                                c
                                              ••••
                                              ••••
                                              • •••
                                               I I I

                                                ES


                      Figure 22. - Pacing items for knowledge engineering.


based on available knowledge and expertise. It offers the opportunity of using computers as rea-
soning machines to set the stage for efficient calculating. This will be accomplished through the
use of knowledge-based systems. Artificial intelligence will make knowledge easily available and
usable. It will make computational complexity manageable. It will provide designers of aerody-
namic vehicles with reliable, easy to use, and versatile expert computational aerodynamic tools,
as well as related design tools. Indirectly, a major worldwide interest in knowledge-based systems
is likely to lead to the development of the next generation of computers and the higher-level
programming languages based on functional programming style that will replace von Neumann
computers and von Neumann programming languages such as FORTRAN. This will result in
faster computers and in greater simplicity in programming, both of which will be advantageous
to computational aerodynamics.
     Expert systems are likely to be a new asset of institutions involved in aeronautics, particu-
larly for various aspects and tasks of computational aerodynamics. Expert systems will introduce
a new way of preserving knowledge, and, consequently, they will change the way knowledge is
passed from one generation to the next. They will liberate people from concentrating on narrow
domains of knowledge and allow them to entertain broad-range problems. On the other hand,
the widespread use of only one or a few expert systems may lead to uniformity and homogene-
ity. A tendency toward overdependence on expert systems may stifle individual creativity and
innovation.
     There are three major stages of the computational aerodynamic development cycle (see also
reference 2): (1) research, (2) technology transfer, and (3) design and development. The first
stage, research, is the stage in which a computational procedure is conceptualized, algorithms are
developed, and pioneering applications are performed. After feasibility of the computational tool
has been demonstrated, technology transfer or dissemination from the research mode to the design

                                               31
and development mode occurs. In this stage, the engineering user requirements are considered
and different technology components are assembled for engineering applications. When this is
completed, the design and development stage begins, in which the developed technology from the
research stage is utilized in the design process, as well as in creative and innovative developments.
These three stages are likely to be greatly accelerated by the use of artificial intelligence concepts
(fig. 23).


                               100              DESIGN AND                              _
                                                DEVElOPMEN~.,,·
                                                           AI       )           )
                                                                I           /
                                       TECHNOLOGY ~                        /CONVENTIONAl
                                       TRANSFER           -'    ~/I
                                     RESEARCH    ./ / /    _...     ./ /




                                 o
                                                -- -                2               3       4
                                                                TIME


                      Figure 23. ~ Artificial intelligence accelerates research,
                    technology transfer, and design and development stages of
                            computational aerodynamics development.

     Predicting the future is a difficult and hazardous business. Nonetheless, we have ventured
into the unknown world of computational aerodynamics and artificial intelligence (CAAI) by
speculating on the role that artificial intelligence may play in computational aerodynamics; the
ultimate goal being to bring intelligent machines to bear on the present and future complex
computational tasks of the fluid dynamicist and aerodynamic designer. Further, we have assumed
that challenges facing the science of artificial intelligence (ref. 32), particularly in the field of
knowledge engineering (refs. 65 and 66), will be successfully resolved by those engaged in artificial
intelligence research.



                                          REFERENCES


1.   Rogers, E. W. E.: Aerodynamics - Retrospect and Prospect, Aeronatical J., Feb. 1982, pp.
     1~22.

2.   The Influence of Computational Fluid Dynamics on Experimental Aerospace Facilities, A
     Fifteen Year Projection, Prepared by the Committee on Computational Aerodynamics Sim~
     ulation Technology Developments, Aeronautical and Space Engineering Board, Commission
     on Engineering and Technical Systems, National Research Council, National Academy Press,
     Washington, D. C., 1983.
3.   Hall, M. G.: Computational Fluid Dynamics - A Revolutionary Force in Aerodynamics,
     AIAA Paper 81~1014, Palo Alto, Calif., 1981.

                                                          32
4.   Peterson, V. L.: Impact of Computers on Aerodynamics Research and Development, Pro-
     ceedings oj the IEEE, vol. 72, no. 1, 1984, pp. 68-79.
5.   Kutler, P.: A Perspective of Theoretical and Applied Computational Fluid Dynamics, AIAA
     Paper 83-0037, Reno, Nev., 1983.
6.   Mehta, U. B.; and Lomax, H.: Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes Computations of Transonic
     Flows - The State-of-the-Art, Transonic Aerodynamics, D. Nixon, ed., AIAA Progress in
     Astronautics an Aeronautics, vol. 81, 1982, pp. 297-375.
7.   Chapman, D. R.: Trends and Pacing Items in Computational Aerodynamics, Lecture Notes
     in PhysicB, vol. 141, W. C. Reynolds and R. W. MacCormack, eds., 1981, pp. 1-U.
8.   Feigenbaum, E. A.; and McCorduck, P.: The FiJth Generation, Addison-Wesley Publishing
     Company, 1983.
9.   Fischetti, M. A.: MCC - An Industry Response to the Japanese Challenge, IEEE Spectrum,
     Nov. 1983, pp. 55-56.
10. Cooper, R. S.; and Kahn, R. E.: SCS - Toward Supersmart Computer for the Military, IEEE
    Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 53-55.
11. Oakley, B. W.: IEEE Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 69-71.
12. Nasko, H: IEEE Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 7]-72.
13. Pavelle, R.; Rothstein, M.; and Fitch, J.: Computer Algebra, Scientific American, Vol. 245,
    No.6, Dec. 1981, pp. 136-152.
14. Barr, A.; and Feigenbaum, E. A.: The Handbook oj Artificial Intelligence, vol. 1, William
    Kaufmann, Inc., 1981.
15. McCorduck, P.: Machines Who Think, W. H. Freeman & Co., New York, 1979.
16. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, (s. v. "intelligence"), G. & C. Merriam Co., Spring-
    field, Mass., 1976.
17. Minsky, M.: Why People Think Computers Can't, The AI Magazine, Fall 1982, pp. 3-15.
18. MACSYMA Reference Manual, version 10, Mathlab Group, Laboratory for Computer Sci-
    ence, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., 1983.
19. Lindsay, R. K.; Buchanan, E. A.; Feigenbaum, E. A.; and Lederberg, J.: Applications oj
    Artificial Intelligence Jor Organic Chemistry - The DENDRAL Project, McGraw-Hill, New
    York, 1980.
20. Kunz, J. C.; Fallat, R. J.; McClung, D. H.; Osborn, J. J.; Votteri, R. A.; Nii, H. P.; Aikins, J.
    S.; Fagan, L. M.; and Feigenbaum, E. A.: A Physiological Rule-Based System for Interpret-
    ing Pulmonary Function Test Results, Report HPP-78-19, Heuristic Programming Project,
    Computer Science Department, Standford University, Stanford, Calif., 1978.
21. Lenat, D. B.: The Nature of Heuristics, Artificial Intelligence, vol. 19, 1982, pp. 189-249.
22. Davis, R.: Expert Systems - Where Are We? And Where Do We Go from Here'? The AI
    Magazine, Spring 1982, pp. 3-22.


                                                 33
23. Feigenbaum, E. A.: The Art of Artificial Intelligence - Themes and Case Studies of Knowl-
    edge Engineering, Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
    , vol. 5, 1977, pp. 1014-1029.
24. Building Expert SystemB, F. Hayes-Roth; D. A. Waterman; and D. B. Lenat; eds., Teknowl-
    edge Series in Knowledge Engineering, vol. 1, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., 1983.
25. Gevarter, W. B.: Expert Systems - Limited but Powerful, IEEE Spectrum, Aug. 1983, pp.
    39-45.
26. Gevarter, W. B.: An Overview of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Vol. I - Artificial
    Intelligence, Part A - The Core Ingredients, NASA TM-85836, 1983.
27. Gevarter, W. B.: An Overview of Expert Systems, NBSIR 82-2505, National Bureau of
    Standards, 1982.
28. Duda, R. 0.; and Shortliffe, E. H.: Expert Systems Research, Science, vol. 220, no. 4594,
    1983, pp. 261-268.
29. Barr, A.; and Feigenbaum, E. A.: The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, WIlliam
    Kaufmann, Inc., 1982.
30. Miller, R. A.; Pople, H. E.; and Myers, J. D.: INTERNIST-I, an Experimental Computer-
    based diagnostic Consultant for General Internal Medicine, New Engand Journal of Medicine,
    vol. 19, 1982, pp. 468-476.
31. Newell, A.; and Simon, H. A.: Computer Science as Empirical Enquiry - Symbols and
    Search, The 1975 ACM Turing Lecture, CommunicationB of the ASBociation for Computing
    Machinery, vol. 19, no. 3, 1976, pp. 113-126.
32. Nilsson, N. J.: Artificial Intelligence Prepares for 2001, The AI Magazine, Winter 1983, pp.
    7-14.
33. Feigenbaum, E. A.: Artificial Intelligence, IEEE Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 77-78.
34. Gevarter, W. B.: An Overview of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Vol. I - Artificial
    Intelligence, Part C - Basic AI Topics, NASA TM-85839, 1983.
35. McCarthy, J.: Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and their Computation by Ma-
    chine, Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, vol. 3, 1960, pp. 184-
    195.
36. Partridge, D. R.: Expert Systems, seminar notes, sponsored by Tecnology Transfer Society,
    Palo, Alto, Calif., Jan. 1984.
37. Martin, E. W.: Strategy for a DoD Software Initiative, Computer, Mar. 1983. pp. 52-59.
38. Fleckenstein, W.O.: Challenges in Software Development, Computer, Mar. 1983. pp. 60-64.
39. Mizuno, Y.: Software Quality Improvement, Computer, Mar. 1983, pp. 66-72.
40. Mueller, G. E.: The Future of Data Processing in Aerospace, Aeronautical Journal, Apr.
    1979, pp. 149-158.
41. Wallich, P.: Designing the Next Generation, IEEE Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 73-77.


                                               34
42. Lerner, E. J.: Data-Flow Architecture, IEEE Spectrum, Apr. 1984, pp. 57-62.
43. Davis, A. L: Computer Architecture, IEEE Spectrum, Nov. 1983, pp. 94-99.
44. Backus, J.: Functional-Level Computing, IEEE Spectrum, Aug. 1982, pp. 22-27.
45. Backus, J.: Can Programming be Liberated from the von Neumann Style? A Functional
    Style and its Algebra of Programs, 1977 ACM Turing Award Lecture, Communications of
    the Association for Computing Machinery, vol. 21, no. 8, 1978, pp. 61~641.
46. Barstow, D.: A perspective on Automatic Programming, The AI Magazine, Spring 1984, pp.
    5-27.
47. Balzer, R.; Cheatham, Jr., T. E.; and Green, C.: Software Technology in the 1990's - Using
    a New Paradigm, Computer, Nov. 1983, pp. 39-45.
48. Lerner, E. J.: Automating Programming, IEEE Spectrum, Aug. 1982, pp. 28-33.
49. Green, C.; and Westfold, S.: Knowledge-Based Programming Self Applied, Machine Intelli-
    gence 10, Ellis Horwood Limited, Halsted Press (John Wiley & Sons), 1982.
50. Green, C.; Phillips, J.; Westfold, S.; Pressburger, T.; Kedzierski, B.; Angebranndt, S.; Mont-
    Reynaud, B.: and Tappel, S.: Research on Knowledge-Based Programming and Algorithm
    Design - 1981, KES.U.81.2, Kestrel Institute, Palo Alto, Calif., Sept. 1982.
51. Boraiko, A. A.: The Chip - Electonic Mini-Marvel That Is Changing Your Life, National
    Geographic, Oct. 1982, pp. 427-450.
52. Bradshaw, G. F.; Langely, P. W.; and Simon, H. A.: StUdying Scientific Discovery by Com-
    puter Simulation, Science, vol. 222, no. 4627, DEc. 1983, pp. 971-975.
53. Artificial Intelligence - The Second Computer Age Begins, Business Week, Mar. 8, 1982, pp.
    66-75.
54. Lenat, D. B.: Automated Theory Formulation in Mathematics, International Joint Confer-
    ence Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, 1977, pp. 833-842.
55. Sharma, A.; and Minkowycz, W. J.: KNOWTRAN - An Artificial Intelligence System for
    Solving Heat Transfer Problems, Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 25, no. 9, 1982,
    pp. 1279-1289.
56. McCarthy, J.: Circumscription - A Form of Non-Monotonic Reasoning, Artificial Intelli-
    gence, vol. 13, 1980, pp. 27-40.
57. Davis, R.: Interactive Transfer of Expertise - Acquisition of New Inference Rules, Interna-
    tional Joint Conference Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, 1977, pp. 321-328.
58. Mehta, U. B.: Physical Aspects of Computing the Flow of a Viscous Fluid, NASA TM-85893,
    1984.
59. Transonic Aerodynamics, D. Nixon, ed., AIAA Progress in Astronautics an Aeronautics, vol.
    81, 1982.
60. Lores, M. E.; and Hinson, B. L.: Transonic Computational Design, Transonic Aerodynamics,
    D. Nixon, ed., AIAA Progress in Astronautics an Aeronautics, Vol. 81, 1982. pp. 377-402.


                                               35
61. Hicks, R. M.; and Vanderplaats, G. N.: Application of Numerical Optimization to the Design
    of Supercritical Airfoils without Drag-Creep, SAE Paper 770440, 1977.
62. Lynch, F. T.: Commercial Transports - Aerodvnamic Design for Cruise Performance Effi-
    ciency, Tran80nic Aerodynamic8, D. Nixon, ed., AIAA Progress in Astronautics an Aeronau-
    tics, vol. 81, 1982, pp. 81-147.
63. Bradley R. G.: Practical Aerodynamic Problems - Military Aircraft, Transonic Aerody-
    namics, D. Nixon, ed., AIAA Progress in Astronautics an Aeronautics, vol. 81, 1982, pp.
    149-187.
64. Sub8onic/Tran8onic Configuration Aerodynamic8, AGARD-CP-285, 1980.
65. Hayes-Roth, F.: Codifying Human Knowledge for Machine Reading, IEEE Spectrum, Nov.
    1983, pp. 79-81.
66. Feigenbaum, E. A.: Knowledge Engineering for the 1980's, Computer Science Dept., Stanford
    University, Stanford, Calif. 1982.




                                             36
 1 Report No
    NASA TM-85994                                    I   2
                                                             Government AccessIon No                          3 RecIpIent's Catalog No


 4 TItle and SubtItle                                                                                         5 Report Date
    COMPUTATIONAL AERODYNAMICS AND ARTIFICIAL                                                                      June 1984
    INTELLIGENCE                                                                                              6 PerformIng OrganIZatIon Code


 7 Author(s)                                                                                                  8 PerformIng OrganIZatIon Report No
                                                                                                                  A-9807
    Unmeel B. Mehta and Paul Kutler
                                                                                                             10 Work UnIt No
 9 Perforrr,ong Organ,zat,cn Name and Address
                                                                                                                  T-6465
    NASA Ames Research Center                                                                                11    Contract or Grant No

    Moffett Field, CA 94035
                                                                                                             13 Type of Report and Perood Covered
12 Sponsorong Agency Name and Address
                                                                                                                  Technical Memorandum
    Natlonal Aeronautlcs and Space Adm1n1stration                                                            14 Sponsorong Agency Code
    Washington, DC 20546                                                                                          505-31-01
15 Supr-:ementaIY Notes
                                 -
    Point of Contact: Unmee1 B. Mehta, Ames Research Center, MS 202A-1,
    Moffett Fle1d, CA 94035. (415) 965-5548 or FTS 448-5548.
16 Abstract

         A major role of computational aerodynamics in the future 1S that of
    acqu1r1ng new knowledge in a number of complex aeronautical problems. I t
    wlll also play an increasingly effective role in the aerodynamic design and
    development process. The SC1ence of artificial intelligence can advan-
    tageously be applied to both these roles of computational aerodynamics.
    Th1S report considers some aspects of artific1al intelligence and speculates
    on how knowledge-based systems can accelerate the process of acquiring new
    knowledge in aerodynamics, how computational flu1d dynam1cs may use expert
    systems, and how expert systems may speed the design and development pro-
    cess. In addition, the anatomy of an 1deal1zed expert system called
    AERODYNAMICIST 1S discussed. The report concludes with a d1Scussion of
    resource requirements for using artificial intelligence in computational
    fluid dynamics and aerodynamics. Three main conclusions of this report are
    presented. F1rst, there are two related aspects of computational aerody-
    namics: reason1ng and calculat1ng. Second, a substant1al portion of rea-
    sonlng can be ach1eved w1th artificial intelligence. It offers the oppor-
    tun1ty of using computers as reasoning machines to set the stage for
    efflc1ent calculat1ng. Third, expert systems are likely to be new assets
    of lnst1tut1ons involved in aeronautics for various tasks of computational
    aerodynam1cs.
17 Key Words (Su9gested by Author(s))                                            18 Dlstrobutlon Statement
   Computatlonal aerodynamics
   Computat1onal flu1d dynamics                                                      Unlimlted
   Artlf1c1al 1ntell1gence
   Expert systems; Aerodynamlc deslgn
                                                                                                           Subject Category - 02
   Knowledge-based systems
19 Securoty Classlf (of thIS report)                         Securoty Classlf (of thIS page)                  21    No of Pages      22 PrIce"
                                                      l20
   Unclass1f1ed                                               Unclassified                                              39                A03
                                       "For sale by the NatIonal Technlc,11 InformatIon ServIce, Sprongfleld, VirgInIa 22161
End of Document

