---
title: Balloon-borne three-meter telescope for far-infrared and submillimeter astronomy
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19860002721
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19860002721
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONTRACTOR_REPORT
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 9dfa5872e565a707ac7f1f1217ba1c54a0da4e1bcef538c90439a353c9df38d7
pages: 19
words: 3227
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                    NOTICE



    THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRODUCED FROM
   MICROFICHE. ALTHOUGH IT IS RECOGNIZED THAT
CERTAIN PORTIONS ARE ILLEGIBLE, IT IS BEING RELEASED
   IN THE INTEREST OF MAKING AVAILABLE AS MUCH
              INFORMATION AS POSSIBLE
                           NOW-




                       ?
           BALLOON- BORN         E THREE-METER
                                 AND SUBMILLIMETER ASTRONOMY
                                                                                41

                                         Grant NACW-509




                             Semiannual Status Report No. 2

            For the period 1 March 1984 through 31 August 198-1



                                    Principal Investigator

                                     Dr. Giovanni G. Fazio




                                          October 1985


        LJN                                         Iti::c^-^9 L -;rig
       :Cj      rUF,       F.;     .6t   is D ANL jUBMI                         Nt36-121di^
     Ltt:jC^ l                                   ,,.LIM ' ;TEi l
                  it?111u.lIlUdi .>tatU.i ""POLL, I Mdr.
         illy. J 304 ("a ltho0:.7
                                   311 AstL0Pj,Y.; 1C C11
4 ULsc:CV ituL'Y)        1% Ac 4 .                                              UI1CLdS
                                           / Jt 4 - 1
                                                                   JJA G3 /69   27625


                                Prepared for
               National Aeronauti c s and Space Administration
                          Washington, D.C. 20546


                                    Smithsonian Institution
                                   Astrophysical bbservatory
                                 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138


                 The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
                             is a member of the
                Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Aatro h sits


This NASA Technical Officer for this grant is Dr. Nancy Boggess,
Code EZ-7, National Aeronautice and Space Administration,
Washington, D.C. 20546
1




               BALLOON-BORNE THREE-METER TELESCOPE FOR FAR-INFRARED
                           AND SUBMILLIMETER ASTRONOMY




                                  Grant NAGW-509




                          Semiannual Status Report No. 2

                For the period 1 March 1984 through 31 August 1984




    Princ pAl ZnvestigRtor                        Associate Director for
    Dr. Giovanni G. Fazio                         Optical and Infrared Astronomy
    Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory         Dr. David W. Latham
    60 Garden Street
    Cambridge, MA 02138
    (617) 495-7458, (FTS) 830-7458


    Co-Investigators
    Dr. William F. Hoffmann                       Dr. Doyal A. Harper
    Steward Observatory                           Yerkes Observatory
    University of Arizona                         University of Chicago
    Tucson, AZ 85721                              Williams Bay, Wisconsin 53191
    (602) 621-6529                                (414) 245-5555




                                   October 1985


                               Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro
                                     Director

                             Smithsonian Institution
                            Astrophysical Observatory
                         Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138


                    The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
                                is a member of the
                   Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
                                CONTENTS



                                                                      Page

 SECTION 1.0   INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1
         2.0   SUMMARY OF WORK "?FORMED DURING REPORTING PERIOD          1
         2.1     Optical Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1
                                                                             ti
         2.2     Gondola Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
         2.3     Other Design Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10
3.0            WORK PLANNED FOR NEXT REPORTING PERIOD . . . . . . .     13


 APPENDIX A    Reports No. 3M-201 and No. 3M-202




                                    i
                                                                             Page 1




     1.0 INTRODUCTION



          This is the second Semiannual Report submitted under Grant NAGW-509

     for the development of a Balloon-Borne Three-Meter Telescope for
W.
     Far-Infrared and Submillimeter Astronomy. It covers the period 1 March

     1984 through 31 August 1984. This grant covers work at the Smithsonian

     Astrophysical Observatory (SAO), University of Arizona (UA) and the

     University of Chicago (UC). SAO is responsible for program management, the

     gondola structure including the attitude control and aspect systems,

     mechanical systems and telemetry and command systems; the UA is

     responsible for optics design and fabrication; the UC is responsible for

     determining provisions for focal-plane instrumentation. SAO and the UA

     share responsibility for the ground support data and control computer



     2.0 SUMMARY OF WORK PERFORMED DURING REPORTING PERIOD


     2.1 Optical Design



          Four important aspects of the scientific requirements of this

     telescope are to cover the spectral range not observable or only poorly

     observable from the ground from 30 microns to 1 millimeter, to provide a

     collecting area much larger than now available from 1 meter size

     balloon-borne and airborne telescopes for high resolution far infrared

     spectroscopy, to provide a major advance in far infrared spatial

     resolution, and to take advantage of the potential sensitivity obtainable
                                                                            Page 2   #.


    from the low thermal background obtainable from observations from balloon

    altitudes. The specifications resulting from these requirements are given

    in Table 2-1.


         The 3 meter aperture provides the required large step in collecting

    area and spatial resolution, and is the largest size compatible with

    current US balloon launch facilities. The spectral range and angular

    resolution requirements imply diffraction limited optical performance at

•   wavelength of 30 microns. This means a half-power full-width of the

    central diffraction fringe of 2.5 areseconds, which determines the

    acceptable image blur from optical design aberrations, misalignment, and

    fabrication errors. Conventionally, with optical (visible light)

    telescopes, this is taken to mean total effective rms surface errors of

    1/26 of the wavelength. This yields a Strehl ratio (the ratio of the peak

    intensity of a point source to that produced by an ideal diffraction

    pattern) of .8. For radio telescope design, the rule of thumb is to

    require a surface half as accurate and a Strehl ratio of .5. Thus we

    interpret a 30 micron diffraction limited performance to mean an image

    diameter (HPFW) of 2.5 areseconds and a total surface error of 1 to 2

    microns rms. Since much of the most important science done on this

    telescope will come from observations at 50 and 100 microns and beyond, the

    2 micron figure appears adequate.


         The specification for operation at visible wavelengths is determined

    by the desire to use the main telescope for imaging stars for guiding

    purposes. This places additional constraints on the character of the

    optics surface error and polish.
                                                                                 a fAX

                                                                        Page 3


     The unvignetted infrared field of view of 5 arcminutes is chosen to

provide two full Airy disk diameters (diameter to the first diffraction

zero) at the longest wavelength of operation (1 millimeter).


                 Table 2-1 Telescope Optics Specifications


Aperture                      3 meters

Spectral Range                Visible to millimeter

Angular Resolution            Diffraction-limited to 30 microns
                              HPFW 2.5 areseconds

Field of View                 IR: 5' unvignetted with ±2.5' chop
                              and diffraction spillover at 1 min.

                              Optical: 15' vignetted only by the
                                Primary

Secondary Chopper Throw       ±5 arcminutes

Overall Focal Ratio           f/9 to f/16

Focal Plane Ratio             7.7 to 4.3 arc-sec/min                               i
Back Focus (Primary vertex    1.4 meters
  to Focus)

Maximum Secondary to          3.5 meters
  Primary Spacing
                                                                                   e
Secondary Size                Small as possible

Effective Emissivity          S10%




     Achieving maximum possible sensitivity requires an effective

noise-free mechanism for subtracting the thermal background from the

telescope and sky from the observations. The most successful technique to

date for doing this is beam switching by oscillating the second mirror

through an angle either with a square wave of a linear scan. While the use

of arrays of detectors in the far infrared may provide an alternative

background subtraction technique for some observations, the secondary

                                                                                       i
                                                                        Page 4


chopper still appears necessary for this telescope. Maintaining quality

images while tilting the secondary places mayor demands on the optical

design. A second aspect of the high sensitivity requirements is minimizing

the thermal emission of the telescope by minimizing the obscuration from

the secondary and the secondary support and maintaining very low emissive

surfaces on the optics. Both the chopper and the low obscuration

requirements dictate a small secondary mirror.


     The launch equipment and staging facilities for the National Center

for Scientific Balloo ,Ag dictate the overall size of the telescope and in

particular the maximum acceptable primary to secondary vertex separation


     The telescope is a classical Cassegrain telescope with a paraboloidal

primary and hyperboloidal secondary. The secondary is undersized relative

to the primary so that it acts as the entrance pupil of the system. The

undersizing is selected so that for the full field size, the maximum chop

amplitude, and the full diffraction width (diameter of Airy disk first

zero) at the maximum design wavelength (1 mm) the field of view of a

detector at the focal plane will "see" only the secondary, the cold sky,

and the primary, but not the warm periphery of the primary.


     The telescope design is constrained by our desire to provide as large

an aperture as possible within the capability of the US Scientific Balloon

Launch Facility. This maximum aperture is approximately 3 meters. In

addition the overall secondary vertex to Cassegrain focus distance is

constrained by the launch facilities to approximately 4.9 meters. In the

design study we have chosen as the variable parameters the aperture,

Cassegrain focal ratio, primary-secondary separation, and

primary-to-focal-plane distance. We will consider the required field
                                                                               Page 5

E     radius, chopper field amplitude, and maximum operating wavelengths to be

      fixed. The trade-off studies we will perform will investigate the impact

      of varying the input parameters on the focal plane scale, primary focal

      ratio, secondary obscuration, chopper induced an y' field aberrations, and

      alignment tolerances. These impacts will be examined for five different

      values of each of the four parameters while the other three are held fixed
F.

      at the chosen design values.
E .




      2.2 Gondola Design



            Work focused on defining the preliminary design for the gondola,

      including the telescope, pointing and stabilization system, and subsidiary

      support systems.


            The gondola we are developing will:



      1.   Provide a stabilized azimuth platform from which a three-meter

           telescope can be hung in elevation/cross-elevation gimbals.

                                                                                        3

      2.   Meet the scientific requirement of spectroscopy and imaging in the IR

           with aresecond level pointing stability.

                                                                                            i

      3.   Satisfy all NSBF structural, safety, launch, recovery and facility

           requirements in a weight-efficient manner using standard materials and

           fabrication techniques.



      4.   Provide the telescope and focal-plane instruments landing protection.
                                                                        Page 6


S. Be readily recoverable and refurbishable.



6. Accept a wide range of focal-plane instruments.


     A three-motor aperture f/13.5 Cassegrain configuration was chosen to

provide a substantial scientific gain over present one-meter stratospheric

telescopes and as a technologically feasible size for realization using a

modern lightweight mirror. This aperture size also matches the largest

sized gondola that can be conveniently accommodated by the NSBF staging

building, launch, and recovery vehicles, and is a reasonable step between

the current one-meter stratospheric telescopes and the 10- to 30-mater LDR.      ;


     The gondola employs a rigid yoke frame for telescope attachment to the

balloon suspension train. The frame has structural resonant frequencies,

mass moments and products of inertia that are consistent with control

system requirements when fully assembled as a gondola. The gondola frame

is a symmetrical modular concept composed of six structural elements: two

diagonal beams, two side columns and two horizontal stabilizer beams. The        +    j

diagonal beams and side columns are fabricated from aluminum as

deep-sectioned structural shapes yielding a load-carrying capacity (30 g's)

three times the NSBF on -axis requirement with the lowest structural                 ti


resonant frequency greater than 50 Hz, far beyond the servo system

bandpass. The stabilizer beams are standard aluminum structural beams and

are used to maintain parallelism between the side columns.


     The telescope is suspended within the gondola frame in an

elevation/cross-elevation configuration by a gimbal arrangement that

provides the telescope's fine-pointing capability. Coarse azimuthal

contrcl is achieved at the gondola attachment point to the balloon. A
                                                                        Page 7


quadrupod composite material telescope structure was chosen as optimal in

terms of obscuration, weight and thermal performance. This structure is

load bearing during launch, termination and landing. A ball-and-socket

type lock captures the telescope structure and applies a tension load

between it and the gondola during these flight phases. All NSBF safety

requirements can be met, however, with the teles,..npe unlocked. In

selecting this design, consideration was also given to a head ring design

which was rejected because of higher telescope weight and the resulting

weight and energy impacts on the rest of the -6,ndola. Reaction wheels on

the telescope and near the azimuth bearing provide inertial references for

the pointing system to work against.


     Requirements for telescope and instrument integration, launch and

recovery were major drivers of the proposed design. Gondola recovery in

particular suggests a modular design approach easily refurbishable by means

of replaceable elements.


     This telescope requires a means for sky subtraction. At a 30-km

balloon altitude, the background radiation is dominated by the telescope

rather than the sky, which has an emissivity of less than 1% over most of

the spectrum. Because of this, the "sky noise" as experienced from balloon

altitudes is very small and the required sky subtraction frequency is

determined only by the noise spectrum of the detectors, not the properties

of the atmosphere. To perform the background subtraction we plan on using

a secondary mirror oscillating between 2 -20 Hz to avoid 1/f noise

characteristic of detector amplifier systems. For many detectors, the

lower frequency would be suitable and can be selected.
                                                                            Page 8


            The pointing stability specification of 1-aresecond rms is set so as

    not to compromise the imaging qu*lity of the optics by telescope pointing

    wander. We expect this to be achi• :able with present day designs.


            The telescope is oriented in two orthogonal control axes, elevation

    and cross-elevation. However, telescope motion within its gimbal in the

    cross-elevation axis is limited to about ±3°. The full range of azimuthal

    angles requires a third control axis. The entire gond., la is therefore

    controlled in the azimuthal direction.


            Acquisitio, of a celestial source is achieved through two modes of

    operation that are called the Magnetometer and Inertial mss . The

    MMonetometer MndS is used for acquiring the approximate position of the

    source by rotation of the gondola about the azimuthal axis, using the

    earth's magnetic field as reference, to an accuracy of about 0.5°; and

    rotation about the elevation axis, using the local gondola vertical as

    reference, to an accuracy of about 0.1°. The Magnetometer Mod- brings the

    desired source direction within the range of motion of the cross-elevation

    axis.


            The Inertial Made is used primarily for science-data gathering and as

    such has various operational routines. In addition to fixed-pointing,

    which stabilizes the telescope on a given celestial target, the inertial
.
    mode can also be used to step or scan the telescope with respect to a

    celestial object. For mapping of extended sources a raster p^ttern can be

    generated by scanning in cross-elevation and stepping in elevation at the

    and of each scan line. The angular size of such rasters and the scan rates

    can be varied on command. In addition to the commanded scan rates and

    directions, a joystick control at the ground station can be employed for




                                            .ct;'   +fir s ,
     Aspect data is provided by three TV-like aspect cameras and a star

tracker. We expect to explore a number of approaches to this system

although CCD technology appears to mea l the needs of the system. Live

TV-like presentation of the aspect fields during the flight will provide

continuous assurance to the ground crew of correct pointing and pointing

stability.


     Instrument accommodations will be determined on the basis of a survey.

We expect weight, volume, power, command and telemetry capabilities

provided will meet the requirements of a wide range of potential users.

The instrument area will be designed for ease of access and instrument

mounting and alignment and is enclosed in a thermal shroud before

launching.


     The command and telemetry system is designed for compatibility with

present and planned NSBF capability. Battery types and capacities will be

chosen on the basis of price and weight tradeoffs. Sufficient energy

should be available for flights in excess of 10 hours with the baselined

gondola systems and experiment complement.                                        v




                                                                              s
                                                                                 lam`




                                                                       Page 10



2.3 Other Design Areas



     A detailed analysis of the pointing and stabilization servo system has

been performed and a preliminary component evaluation completed. These

analyses are presented in technical reports 3M-201 "Analysis and System

Design of Momentum Wheel Servo Including Flex Pivot Compensation and

Gravitational Imbalance Compensation" and 3M-202 "Derivation of Final

Momentum Wheel Speed for Proposed System Using Ancillary Torque Motor Inner

Loop". The cover pages of these reports are attached to this report as

Appendix A. Component studies focused on bearing selection and control

elements for the system.


     The command and telemetry system has been studied and will utilize

NSBF equipment whenever possible to keep cost and maintenance of equipment

at a minimum.


     Preliminary weight estimates have been completed for a vertically
                                                                                 i
stowed telescope using either a 2 M glass or 3 M composite material mirror.

These data are giver in Table 2-2.
                                                                                        j
     Preliminary thermal design studies are underway on the telescope

structure and mirror. And a test of convection at balloon altitudes is

planned for an early balloon mission.
                                                                                      Page 11


                                             Table 2-2
                              Three Meter Infrared Balloon Telescope
                                     Telescope Weight Summary

                                          3M Mirror           2M Mirror

         I.       Sec. Mirror Assembly
                       Mirror                 10.                   10.
                       Focus Drive            22.                   22.
                       Chopper                25.                   25.
                       Head Ring              90.                   90.
                       Vanes                  19.                   19.
                       Truss                 110•                  llo.
                                                      276.                  276.
         II.
 Primary Mirror Assembly
      Mirror                234.                                   485.
      Frame & Mtg.          300.                                   485.
20.   5 o Field TV                                                  20.
      1-1/2 Field TV         25.                                    25.
      Fine Aspect TV         25.                                    25.
      Star Tracker           35.                                    35.
      Counter Weight Servo   20.                                    20.
      Miscellaneous Devices  20,                                    20,
                                                      679.                 1115.

         III. Cross Elev. Axis
                   Elev. Drive System         80.                   80.
                   AZ Drive System            80.                   80.                         s
                   AZ Frame                  140.                  140.
                   Al. (R.W.)                 55.                   55.
                   AZ (R.W.)                  55.                   55.
                   Tailpiece Interface       100.                  100.
                   Electronic Interface       25.                   25.
                   Wire Harness               10,                   10,
                                                      545.                  545.

         IV.      Experiment Package
                       Tailpiece              50.                   50.
                       Experiment A          125.                  125.
                       Experiment B          125.                  125.
                       FPTV                   30.                   30.
                       Beamsplitter           12.                   12.
                       Trim Weights                                    .
                                                      347.                  347,
              TOTALS:                               1847. pounds           2283. pounds
                      Three-Motor Infrared Balloon Telescope
                                  Weight Summary
                            Vertically Stowed Telescope


                                      Weight (Lbs.)           System Totals
                                    Unit     Subtotal      3M Mirror 2M Mirror

Telescope Ansemhly,                                            1847    2283

Gondola

  Structure                                    1020
    Upper                            180
    Telescope Mount                  140
    Side Columns                     575
    Miscellaneous Structure          125

  Stabilization and Pointing                    500
    Momentum Transfer Unit            60
    Reaction Wheels                  200
    Magnetic and Gravity Sensors      40
    Elevation Drive System           200

  Electronics                                   586
    Command                           25
    Control                           66
    Batteries                        150
    Cables, Connectors, etc.          45
    Enclosures                       300

  Reentry Devices                               210
    Telescope Latch                   20
    Crash Rings                      150
    Crash Pads                        40


    Total System Weight (pounds)                               4163    4599




                                                                                 s
                                                                            Page 13



      3.0 WORK PLANNED FOR NEXT     REPORTING PERIOD



           The design definition effort on the telescope and gondola will be

      completed and the optical design and trade off studies completed.


           Behavior of sample composite mirror blanks under thermal and
F.


      mechanical stress will be evaluated by test.
F s



           A program plan and cost estimate building and operating the 3M

      telescope will be prepared.




                                                                                          a


                                                                                          1

                                                                                      t
                                                    Appendix A         1^
                                                                 3M-
                                                    Report No. 201




               Three -Meter Infrared Telescope Program
                           Engineering Report

Title:         Analysis and System Design of Momentum wheel
               Servo Including Flex Pivot Compensation and
               Gravitational Imbalance Compensation


Author:        Stan Fay


Date Prepared: 9 July 1984


Summary and Conclusions:

      This report analyzes the momentum wheel servo system. The
 analysis of this closed loop demonstrates why tachometric feedback
 cannot be used for stabilization. A feedforward lead network must
 be employed. For the same reasons, the power amplifier electronics
 of the momentum wheel torque motor must be configured as a current
 source in order to avoid the tachometric effects of the motor back
 e.m.f.
      Additionally, a technique is suggested using a subsidiary
 torque motor between " horseshoe" and mirror to provide effective
 compensation of the flex pivot torque. Also, by proper design of
 this compensation loop within the momentum wheel loop, it is
 possible to simultaneously compensate for gravitationally induced
 torques due to mass imbalance. This eliminates the need for
 mechanically positioning ancillary balancing weights.
      The math model attached may be used for further investigation
 of the effects of various noise sources, e.g., motor cogging or
 bearing noise.
                                                                         Y'
                                                                   3M-
                                                        Report Mo. 202




                Three-Meter Infrared Telescope Program

                           Engineering Report


Title:          Derivation of Final Momentum Wheel Speed for
                Proposed System Using Ancillary Torque Motor Inner
                Loop



Author:         Stan Fay



Date Prepared: 13 July 1984



The expression for final wheel speed is derived for the servo system
analyzed in Report 3M-201.

