---
title: Computational unsteady aerodynamics for aeroelastic analysis
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 19880007285
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19880007285
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Legacy CDMS
publication_date: 2019-06-24
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: bc313c4d71fb2f91599a0110b3758a9af07d8fcee7b504064e09e69615e710e9
pages: 29
words: 5578
cv_look_pages: 6
---

     NASA Technical Memorandum



      COMPUTATIONAL UNSTEADY AERODYNAMICS FOR
      AEROELASTIC ANALYSIS




     WOODROW WHITLOW, JR.


     4 L A S B - T B - 1005 23) CCBFUTA!llCLAL UNSTEADY                     ma-16668
     AEBGDYNABICS FOE B E R O E L A S I I C A L A L Y S I S
     (hASA)           29 p                               CSCL 018
                                                                            Unclas
                                                                    G3/02   0123307




     DECEMBER 1987


.
    National Aeronautics and
    Space Adrntnistratlon
    Langley Research Center
    Hampton,Virginia 23665-5225
     COMPUTATIONAL UNSTEADY AERODYNAMICS FOR AEROELASTIC ANALYSIS

                                   Woodrow Whitlow, Jr.
                                NASA Langley Research Center
                               Hampton, V i r g i n i a 23665-5225



                                            Summarv

    This report summarizes the status of computational unsteady aerodynamics methods for

aeroelastic analysis and makes recommendations for future research activities.         The flight

conditions for which various types of flows exist are described and the aeroelastic phenomena

that can occur in those flight regimes are discussed. Some important aeroelastic problems of

current interest are described, and the aerodynamic methods needed to analyze them are

presented.     The capabilities and limitations of existing unsteady aerodynamics methods are

discussed.     Computer resources required to perform aeroelastic analysis of various flight

vehicle configurations are presented.     Recommendations for future research are made, and

schedules for completion of proposed research tasks are presented.



                                          J n t r o m

    Computational aerodynamics is rapidly becoming an important tool in the design of flight

vehicles.    It allows computer simulation of flows past configurations that previously would have

required large budget and personnel resources to determine the flows experimentally.            In

addition, many design options can be examined using computational methods. To model the flow

past flight vehicles, today's engineer must choose from a range of options based upon available

computer capacity and budget.       The choices range from the calculation of the flow past a

relatively complete description of the entire aircraft using lower order approximations to the

equations of fluid flow to the calculation of the flow past less complex representations of the

vehicle, such as the wing only, using higher order flow equations.
    Flow models can be grouped into lower order potential flow models--full potential (FP) and

transonic small disturbance (TSD) potential--and the higher order models typified by various

approximations to the Navier-Stokes equations--the parabolized, thin layer, and Reynolds

averaged approximations. The intermediate Euler equations flow model is obtained from the

Navier-Stokes equations by neglecting the viscous terms.

   This paper presents some current aeroelastic problems of interest to the aerospace

community and the computational aerodynamics methods available for simulating flow fields and

analyzing aeroelastic phenomena. This is followed by a discussion of the capabilities of existing

methods and the computer resources required to use those methods for aeroelastic analysis.

Finally, recommendations for future research directions and schedules for completion of

proposed tasks are presented.



                                Current Aeroelastic Problem3

   This section describes some of the aeroelastic phenomena that have been observed on modern

aircraft and the nature of the flows involved. The aerodynamic methods necessary to analyze

each type of aeroelastic response are discussed.

   Figure 1 shows the characteristics of attached, mixed, and separated flow for complete

aircraft at free stream Mach numbers between 0 and 2.0. In region I, the flow is predominantly

attached. To obtain optimum performance and to avoid the drag penalty associated with flow

separation, design cruise conditions for aircraft typically are located in region I, near the

boundary of region II (mixed flow).

   As speed andlor angle of attack increases, a transition region of mixed flow (region II of

fig. 1) is encountered. For rigid structures, this region is typified by the onset of localized

regions of flow separation which may exhibit significant aerodynamic unsteadiness.           For




                                                   2
            realistic, flexible structures, the aeroelastic response of the structure interacts with the

            airflow to induce much more complicated situations. Structural vibrations can cause the flow to
I   '
            alternately separate and reattach at flow conditions where a rigid structure would support
        b
            attached flow.   The associated highly unsteady aerodynamic loading can interact with the

            structural dynamic response to cause unusual aeroelastic phenomena which may restrict the

            vehicle flight envelope.

                With further speed and/or angle of attack increases which are encountered under

            maneuvering conditions, stable separated flow conditions emerge (region I l l of fig. 1). Leading-

            edge vortex flows and shock-induced separated flows are of this nature. At still higher angles of

            attack, vortex bursting is encountered.     Within such regions, the flow is highly unsteady,

            requiring careful attention to turbulence modeling.

                While predictive methods for attached flows are reasonably well developed, the picket fence

            in fig. 1 emphasizes the difficulty in predicting aeroelastic phenomena in the mixed and

            separated flow regions.      It also symbolizes novel features that are being encountered in

            transonic flutter testing.   Modern high performance aircraft are capable of maneuvering at

            transonic speeds, leading to a much enlarged parameter space for flutter clearance. Wingstore

            loading, speed, angle of attack, wing shape, altitude and wing sweep all must be considered, and

            the traditional flutter boundary parameterization of dynamic pressure at flutter versus Mach

            number may need to be augmented to adequately describe aeroelastic stability boundaries. For

            instance, flutter tests give some indication that these additional parameters affect the detailed

            aeroelastic stability condition near the flutter boundary. Thus, the pickets of the fence in fig. 1

            represent isolated regions of instability and low damping that may be encountered.




                                                             3
                                  Kev Aeroelastic Problems
    The mathematical formulation that is used to model the flow is determined by the problem

that is to be solved. The flow may be modeled using a velocity potential equation, the Euler

equations, or a form of the Navier-Stokes equations. Problems of current interest include (1)

aircraft operating at maximum speed at design conditions, (2) aircraft operating in

attached/mildly separated flow conditions, and (3) maneuvering, high-performance aircraft

where vortex/shock-induced separated flows at high dynamic pressures define the flutter-

critical conditions.

    To impact the design of modern aircraft, new methods should provide accurate predictions of

nonclassical flutter features such as those observed near the edge of the flutter envelope, and

vortex flow interactions with vertical tails which severely limit structural lifetime.   These

methods also should provide a means for modeling the effects of active controls. Enhancing the

computational aeroelastic analysis capability will result in opportunities to examine key

aeroelastic problems, including the minimum in flutter boundaries usually observed at

transonic speeds (the transonic "flutter dip"), the DAST ARW-2 nonclassical aeroelastic

response, wing/store limit amplitude flutter, vortex induced oscillations of the B-1 wing, and

vertical tail buffet on twin-tailed fighters.

    Figure 2 shows a traditional flutter boundary of dynamic pressure at flutter versus Mach

number. The boundary tends to decrease with increasing Mach number for subsonic speeds,

reaching a minimum in the transonic speed range, followed by a rapid increase.            Such

boundaries are usually established for straight and level, trimmed flight conditions.      The

boundary shown in fig. 2 represents "hard" flutter conditions typified by divergent structural

oscillations that lead to structural failure.   For subsonic speeds, attached flow conditions

prevail (region I, fig. 1) and linear aerodynamic methods have been used quite successfully. As




                                                 4
speed increases into the transonic regime, the flutter boundary deviates from that predicted

with linear methods, which can become unconsewative. The minimum of the flutter boundary

is associated with the formation of shock waves and the onset of flow separation, typical of flow

in region II. This minimum is a critical condition for flutter analysis and represents a primary

challenge for computational aeroelastic analysis. A key question is the level of flow model

required to predict this minimum flutter speed accurately. It is very likely that many cases

may be treated using an inviscid flow method (Le. a potential or Euler equation code) coupled

with a viscous boundary layer method.

    The nonclassical aeroelastic response of the DAST ARW-2 is illustrated in fig. 3. This is a

region of high dynamic response at constant Mach number encountered at dynamic pressures

well below those for which flutter was predicted. The motion is of the limit-amplitude type,

and the response is believed to be associated with flow separation and reattachment over the

supercritical wing, again a region II flow condition. Interacted viscous/inviscid methods may

treat the types of flows associated with this response and may be used in the aeroelastic

analysis.

    Wingktore limit amplitude flutter is experienced by modern, high performance aircraft

under various loading and maneuvering conditions at transonic Mach numbers, resulting in

vehicle placards on performance. The conditions for which this response occurs are shown in

fig. 4.     The flow is characterized by mixed flow--region II-- over portions of the wing

surfaces. Thin layer Navier-Stokes methods can model the flows characteristic of region II and

may be required to calculate winglstore limit-amplitude flutter.

    Vortex-induced oscillations observed on the 6-1 wing occur for high wing sweep angles,

during wind-up turn maneuvers. The flow is of the type in region Ill. The instability is of the

first wing bending mode type and occurs over a wide Mach number range (0.6 - 0.95) at angles




                                                5
of attack 7-9 degrees. The range of conditions for which this phenomenon occurs is shown in

fig. 5.   A Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes method can model the stable, separated flows

associated with this instability and may be used to calculate the vortex-induced oscillations.

    Tail buffet on twin-tail fighters occurs when a vortex encounters downstream lifting

surfaces, horizontal and vertical tails, causing structural fatigue.      This type of aeroelastic

response occurs when aircraft operate in flows characteristic of region Ill. Figure 6 shows the

operating conditions for which tail buffet occurs.        Buffet of horizontal tails can occur at

intermediate angles of attack and is a result of an unburst vortex encountering a lifting surface.

As angle of attack increases, the location of vortex bursting moves upstream in the wake. Loss

of lift is associated with the burst location reaching the vicinity of the aircraft, and vertical tail

surfaces located in such regions experience severe dynamic loads. Typically, this occurs at

angles of attack of approximately 30 degrees. Navier-Stokes methods with more sophisticated

turbulence models than are currently available are needed to analyze these responses. This is

because the burst vortex phenomenon involves massive separation and large-scale unsteadiness.

Current turbulence models are not valid for such flows.



                                     Aerodvnamic Methods

    Various aerodynamic methods are available to analyze the aeroelastic phenomena discussed

above. They range from potential flow codes for complete aircraft to Navier-Stokes methods for

airfoils and wings. Table I provides a summary of current research activities in computational

unsteady aerodynamics at the NASA Langley Research Center (LaRC). The discussion below

details the methods and the types of problems to which they are applicable.




                                                  6
    Potential Flow Methods

       These methods provide a realistic opportunity to develop design and analysis capabilities for

    complete aircraft. They are applicable only to aircraft operating in attached flow (region I).

    Current potential flow capability includes the XTRAN3S (ref. 1) and CAP-TSD (computational

    qeroelasticity Erogram-Lransonic Small Risturbance) (ref. 2) codes.          The XTRAN3S code

    solves the transonic small disturbance (TSD) potential equation and was developed for analysis

    of isolated wing configurations. Extensive modifications to the code have enabled the analysis of

    either wing/fuselage or winglcanard (tail) configurations. The CAP-TSD code was developed by

    the Unsteady Aerodynamics Branch (UAB) at Langley and can be used for aeroelastic analysis of

    complete aircraft.   As an example, ref. 2 gives the details of modeling an F-16 aircraft,

    including the wing, strake, tail, fuselage, tip launcher, and tip missile.

       Methods based on TSD theory are valid for thin bodies at small angles of incidence undergoing

    small amplitude unsteady motions. In addition, the flow equations are derived assuming that the

    free stream Mach number is near unity. Thus, full potential (FP) methods are being explored.

    The state-of-the-art differencing method for calculating unsteady full potential flows was

    developed by UAB personnel with two university researchers (refs. 3-5). This method is based

    on differencing the flux function. It is an improvement upon previously-used methods since the

    flux-differencing method (a) accurately tracks sonic conditions and requires no empirical

    constants to specify the amount of artificial viscosity, (b) produces no velocity overshoots at

    shock waves, allowing for larger time steps and increasing computational efficiency for

    unsteady calculations, (c) produces well-defined shock waves with a maximum two point

    transition between upstream and downstream states, and (d) dissipates expansion shocks,

a   ruling out solutions with such nonphysical characteristics. Flux differencing was implemented




                                                      7
in an approximate factorization algorithm to yield a two-dimensional unsteady full potential

code (ref. 5). This algorithm and the algorithm used in CAP-TSD are similar.

    It has been shown that when shock waves are in flow fields modeled using potential flow

methods, the calculated loads can be highly inaccurate and even multivalued (refs. 6-9). This

is because the entropy generated by shock waves is not modeled in the isentropic formulation of

potential flow aerodynamics. Methods have been developed to modify isentropic potential theory

at the 2-D and 3-D TSD levels (refs. 8,9) and at the 2 - 0 FP (ref. 5 ) level. Calculations of

attached flows with strong shocks indicate that the modified potential methods improve the

accuracy of and extends the range of validity of potential flow solutions (refs. 5,8,9).       The

method used in ref. 5 for 2-D FP calculations can be applied in three dimensions.



ELIer/Na vier-Stokes      Methods

   Navier-Stokes methods are needed to analyze aeroelastic phenomena that occur in mildly

separated (region 11) and fully separated flows (region 111). Steady flow codes have been

developed by the Analytical Methods Branch at Langley. The CFL2D code (ref.10) is used for

2-D flows, and the CFL3D code (ref. 11) is used in three dimensions. The CFL2D and C F U D

codes are the most efficient and stable of existing codes for solving the Navier-Stokes equations.

These codes use upwind differencing with flux-vector splitting to achieve unconditionally stable

algorithms.   Solutions of the Euler equations are obtained from the Navier-Stokes codes by

neglecting the viscous terms. Although viscous effects are neglected, which limits applicability

to region I, the Euler equations can accurately model flows containing curved shock waves and

vorticity convection.   Recently, the CFL2D and CFL3D codes were modified to allow the

calculation of time-accurate unsteady solutions.    Euler calculations for oscillating airfoils and




                                                8
    wings have been obtained (ref. 12). These unsteady codes are available to be used in aeroelastic

    analysis.
I



    Interacted Viscous /Inviscid Methods

        Since inviscid flow methods--potential and Euler--are limited to the attached flow regime,

    it is necessary to interact the solutions with viscous boundary layer methods to allow analysis

    of mildly separated flows. Coupling viscous boundary layer methods with inviscid flow codes

    results in a capability for more accurately resolving some aeroelastic phenomena.              In

    particular, accurate definition of the transonic "flutter dip" and calculation of the nonclassical

    aeroelastic response observed for the DAST ARW-2 are among the problems that may be treated

    with this capability. Available boundary layer methods include one with which mildly separated

    flows can be modeled (ref. 13). This method has been tested, in a quasi-steady manner, in the

    2-D unsteady TSD code XTRAN2L (ref. 14). Implementation in CAP-TSD, in a quasi-steady,

    2-D strip fashion, is underway. These methods also can be coupled with full potential and Euler

    methods. Coupling Euler and viscous methods provides a means for calculating separated flows,

    for some cases, as well as attached and mildly separated flows. For some cases, it may be

    necessary for a vortex tracking method to be coupled with the flow solver.

        A contracted effort supported by UAB to develop a finite difference computer code for solving

    the unsteady 3-D boundary layer equations is nearing completion. When complete, it will

    provide a 3-D viscous boundary layer method (ref. 15) that is more accurate than those

    currently available.



0   Vortex Flow Methods

b      The development of methods for treating leading edge vortex flows is being supported by UAB




                                                    9
with a university grant. A hybrid vortex method (ref. 16) that can be used to predict vortex

flows arising from leading edge separation on wings at high angles of attack has been developed.

In this method, the full potential equation is solved over most of the flow field using integral

equation methods. Regions of the flow containing strong shock waves or vortices are treated by

solving the Euler equations.

   Euler methods may be used for the analysis of vortex flows arising from separation at sharp

edged wings at moderate angles of attack. In order to predict the separation line on round-edged

wings, solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations are required. Research in these areas is being

pursued under a university grant supported by UAB (ref. 16).



                               Cornmiter Resource Reauirements

   This section discusses the computer resources required to analyze aeroelastic phenomena

using various aerodynamic methods. The resources required for analysis of a complete aircraft

and a wing/body/canard configuration are presented.

   The computer resources required to calculate a single flutter point for a complete aircraft

using TSD and Navier-Stokes methods are shown in Table 11.         The required resources are

presented as central processing unit (CPU) time on the Control Data Corporation VPS-32.

Required CPU times are obtained assuming that a flutter point can be determined by calculating

a steady, loaded condition and three aeroelastic responses at varying dynamic pressures to

determine neutral stability and that the steady condition and each response can be calculated in

1000 time steps. The time for the TSD calculation is obtained using the computation speed for

actual CAP-TSD calculations--2.7 microseconds per grid point per time step. This works out

to 2.3 hours of CPU time per flutter point. This problem requires approximately 30 million of

the 32 million words of memory available with the VPS-32.         When calculating symmetric




                                               10
aoroolaslic responses, a half spar1 modo1 can bo used, with a proportional decrease in required

memory and CPU time. For run times of this length, turnaround times on the VPS-32 can be

expected to be quite long. Thus attention to ways of automating the calculation of flutter points

is needed. One such method has been developed at UAB and implemented with a 2-0 TSD method

(ref. 17). Use of a FP method would increase the computer resource requirements by 50-100

percent, while Euler methods are approximately 2-5 times more expensive than FP methods.

The time for the Navier-Stokes analysis in Table II is calculated from the following relationship



                 TIME = (GRID PTS) X        OPS        X (ITER)/(OPS/SEC)

                                       (GRID PTS X ITER)



Computer speeds of 100 million floating point operations per second (MFLOPS) and 1000

operations per grid point per time step are assumed. For Reynolds number of 10 million, 77.8

hours of VPS-32 time is required to calculate a single flutter point.        This points out that

routine aeroelastic analysis of complex configurations using Navier-Stokes aerodynamics is not

feasible using the VPS-32.

       Table Ill shows the CPU times required to calculate a flutter boundary for a

wing/body/canard (tail) configuration with increasingly complex aerodynamic methods.          The

boundary is assumed to consist of flutter points at ten Mach numbers with each point requiring

the calculation of a steady, loaded condition and three aeroelastic responses. The steady condition

and each response can be calculated in 1000 time steps. The computation speed on the VPS-32

is assumed to be 100 MFLOPS, and that on the NAS is taken to be 250 MFLOPS. Computational

grids for the TSD, full potential, and Euler calculations are assumed to have 750 000 points,

and its estimated that a grid with 14.5 million points is required for the Navier-Stokes




                                                  11
calculations.   Also, it is assumed that the TSD calculations require 200 operations per grid

point per time step, the full potential calculations require 300 operations per grid point per

time step, the Euler calculations require 600 operations per grid point per time step, and the

Navier-Stokes calculations require 1000 operations per grid point per time step.     The times

shown for the TSD and full potential calculations are 180 percent of the inviscid flow times.

The 80 percent increase in run time (compared to inviscid calculations) has been observed for

potential flow coupled with boundary layer methods (ref. 13).      Coupling a boundary layer

method with an Euler solution increases the required CPU time by approximately 30 percent.

Thus the times shown in Table Ill for the Euler solutions are 1.3 times the inviscid Euler

requirements.    Because of the differences in the multiplicative factors--l.8 versus 1.3-4he

ratio of required times for Euler and TSD solutions decreases. The TSD method with boundary

layer can be used for problems in region I and for some problems in region II. Using this flow

model, 30 hours and 12 hours on the VPS-32 and NAS, respectively, are required to define a

flutter boundary.   Full potential with boundary layer also can be used in regions I and It.

Estimated CPU requirements are 45 hours on the VPS-32 and 18 hours on NAS.             An Euler

method with viscous modeling can be used in regions I and II and for some problems in region Ill.

Sixty-five hours of VPS-32 time and 26 hours of NAS time are required to define the flutter

boundary using this flow model. Navier-Stokes methods can be used in regions II and 111.     At a

Reynolds number of 100 million, 1611 hours on the VPS-32 and 644 hours on NAS are

required to calculate the flutter boundary. Sufficient experience with NAS has not been obtained

to make a judgement on turnaround time, but it is expected to be significantly better than that

experienced with the VPS-32.       However, for the simplest of flow models, the computer

requirements will not allow routine analysis of complex aircraft configurations.           Future




                                               12
generation supercomputers are required to predict aeroelastic responses of complex

configurations.



                                      Recommendations

   The development of computational aeroelastic methods should proceed on two fronts--at the

Euler/Navier-Stokes level and at the potential flow level. The CFL2D and CFL3D codes for

solving the unsteady 2-D and 3-D EuleVNavier-Stokes equations are available in the NASA

Langley Computational Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. The CFL2D code (Navier-Stokes option)

presently is being used to correlate with unsteady pressure data measured at transonic speeds,

cryogenic temperatures, and Reynolds numbers up to 35 million (ref. 18). Results from the

unsteady CFL3D code (Euler option) are being compared with results from unsteady TSD codes.



RECOMMENDATION:            INCORPORATE THE AEROELASTIC ANALYSIS METHODS

                           INTO AV AI LABLE EULER/NAVI ER-STOKES CODES.



   Since the aerodynamic codes are available, this effort should proceed immediately. This will

allow analysis of some aeroelastic phenomena where vortex and separated (mixed) flows are

important.    Such problems of current interest include the DAST ARW-2 nonclassical flutter

response, wingktore limit amplitude flutter, and B-1 vortex-induced oscillations.     These will

be limitations of the resulting method. One of the most important is the limitation of turbulence

models.      Present turbulence models yield poor results for flows in which 3-D effects are

important and do not do a good job in regions of massive separation, large-scale unsteadiness,

and transition from laminar to turbulent flow.         Aeroelasticians are dependent upon

aerodynamicists to develop turbulence models that are valid in these regions.       Until this is




                                                13
accomplished, aeroelastic phenomena such as those due to vortex bursting cannot be modeled

accurately using existing Navier-Stokes methods.        Problems of current interest that fall into

this category include vertical tail buffet of twin-tail fighters.

    Euler/Navier-Stokes codes currently are too expensive to use for routine aeroelastic

analysis.   For a large class of problems, potential flow or potential flow/boundary layer is

adequate. An effort is needed to determine when the Euler/Navier-Stokesmethods are needed.

The only way to accomplish this is to construct a full potential code for evaluation purposes.



RECOMMENDATION:            DEVELOP AN AEROELASTIC ANALYSIS CAPABILITY BASED

                           ON THE FULL POTENTIAL FLOW EQUATIONS.



   A logical step is to extend the FP method discussed above to three dimensions. It would be an

improvement upon TSD methods because of improved accuracy of the calculated aerodynamic

loads. Full Potential methods can be used for analysis of thick, blunt bodies such as blended

wing/fuselage configurations that are characteristic of Advanced Technology Fighters. Because

grids used in unsteady FP methods can follow the vehicle motion, body boundary conditions are

applied at the instantaneous surface locations. In TSD methods, the boundary conditions are

applied on mean surfaces that must not be much different than the actual surfaces. Thus, FP

methods should be useful in predicting aeroelastic responses that involve larger amplitude

motions.

    This should be done by developing a CAP-FP code that, initially, treats isolated wings. The

resulting code can be used to evaluate the advantages of FP over TSD methods without developing

a complete aircraft code. If it is determined that those advantages warrant further development

of FP methods, a code for complex configurations should be developed. This capability should be




                                                  14
    developed in conjunction with the development of Euler/Navier-Stokes aeroelastic analysis

    capability.



    RECOMMENDATION:            COMPLETE DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSONIC SMALL

                               DISTURBANCE CODE FOR COMPLETE VEHICLE AEROELASTIC

                               ANALYSIS.



        This code will provide the first capability for complete vehicle computational aeroelastic

    analysis. The initial goal should be to use the TSD code for analysis of vehicles in level flight at

    maximum speed. At such conditions, aircraft operate in attached flow (region I) or attached

    flow with mildly separated regions (region 11).

       The TSD and FP methods should be augmented by including nonisentropic effects. In addition,

    the inviscid flow methods (potential and Euler) should be coupled with direct and inverse

    boundary layer methods.

       A list of activities directed at accomplishing these recommendations is shown in Table IV.

    Correlation of CFL2D with transonic cryogenic data is underway. This will serve to validate

    this higher equation level code for unsteady flow about oscillating airfoils. In parallel with this

    effort, initial calculation of flutter of an isolated wing using Navier-Stokes aerodynamics is

    proceeding.   In addition, a full potential code for the analysis of isolated wings is under

    development which will be used to evaluate the utility of such a code for more complex

    configurations.   The initial version of CAP-TSD (Version 1.O) including nonisentropic and

    vorticity corrections is available, and a version with viscous boundary layer modeling
3
    (Version 2.0) is under development.




                                                      15
                                         Conclusions

    The status of computational unsteady aerodynamics methods for aeroelastic analysis is

summarized and recommendations for future research activities are made.             Aeroelastic

problems of current interest are discussed. These include (a) the minimum flutter speed, (b)

the nonclassical aeroelastic response of the DAST ARW-2, (c) wing/store limit amplitude

flutter, (d) vortex-induced oscillations on the B-1 wing, and (e) tail buffet of twin-tail

fighters. The aerodynamic methods available to analyze various aeroelastic phenomena and the

computer requirements to use those methods are discussed. The requirements for aeroelastic

analysis of complex configurations using even relatively simple flow models are quite

restrictive.   Recommendations for future research activities include (a) incorporating

aeroelastic analysis methods into available EulerINavier-Stokes codes, (b) developing a pilot

full potential code, and (c) completing development of a transonic small disturbance code for

complete vehicle aeroelastic analysis.



                                         References


    1 . Borland, C. J.; and Rizzetta, D. P.: Nonlinear Transonic Flutter Analysis, AIAA Journal,
VOI. 20, NO. 11, pp. 1606-1615, 1982.

   2. Batina, John T.; Seidel, David A.; Bland, Samuel R.; and Bennett, Robert M.: Unsteady
Transonic Flow Calculations for Realistic Aircraft Configurations, AlAA 87-0850, 1987.

    3. Osher, S.; Hafez, M.; and Whitlow, W., Jr.:             Entropy Condition Satisfying
Approximations for the Full Potential Equation of Transonic Flow, Mathematics of Computation,
VOI. 44, NO. 169, pp. 1-30, 1985.

    4 . Hafez, M.; Whitlow, W., Jr.; and Osher, S.:    Improved Finite Difference Schemes for
Transonic Flow Calculations, AIAA 84-0092, 1984.

   5. Whitlow, Woodrow, Jr.; Hafez, Mohamed M.; and Osher, Stanley, J.: An Entropy                 c

Correction Method for Unsteady Full Potential Flows with Strong Shocks, NASA TM 87769,
1986.




                                               16
   6 . Steinhoff, John; and Jameson, Antony: Multiple Solutions of the Transonic Potential
Flow Equation, AlAA Journal, Vol. 20, No.11, pp. 1521-1525, 1982.

   7 . Salas, M. D.; and Gumbert, C. R.:     Breakdown of the Conservative Potential Equation,
AlAA 85-0367. 1985.

    8 . Fuglsang, Dennis F.; and Williams, Marc H.: Non-Isentropic Unsteady Transonic Small
Disturbance Theory, AlAA 85-0600, 1985.

   9 . Gibbons, M. D.; Whitlow, W., Jr.; and Williams, M. H.: Nonisentropic Unsteady Three
Dimensional Small Disturbance Potential Theory, AlAA 86-0863, 1986.

    1 0. Rumsey, C. L.: Time-Dependent Navier-Stokes Computations of Separated Flows over
Airfoils, AlAA 85-1684, 1985.

   1 1 . Thomas, J. L.; Taylor, S. L.; and Anderson, W. K.:Navier-Stokes Computations of
Vortical Flows over Low Aspect Ratio Wings, AlAA 87-0207, 1987.

   1 2 . Anderson, W. Kyle; Thomas, James L.; and Rumsey, Christopher L.: Extension and
Applications of Flux-Vector Splitting to Unsteady Calculations on Dynamic Meshes, AIAA 87-
1152-CP. 1987.

   1 3 . Howlett, J. T.:
                       Efficient Self-Consistent Viscous-Inviscid Solutions for Unsteady
Transonic Flow, AlAA 85-0482, 1985.

  1 4 . Whitlow, Woodrow, Jr.: XTRAN2L: A Program for Solving the General-Frequency
Unsteady Transonic Small Disturbance Equation, NASA TM 85723, 1983.

   15.Weinberg, Bernard C.; and Shamroth, Stephen J.: Three-Dimensional Unsteady Viscous
Flow Analysis Over Airfoil Sections, NASA CR 172368, 1984.

   1 6 . Kandil, 0. A.; Chuang, A.; and Chu, L.-C.: Finite-Volume and Integral-Equation
Techniques for Transonic and Supersonic Vortex-Dominated Flows, ICAS-86-1.5.4, 1986.

   17. Gallman, J. W.; Batina, J. T.; and Yang, T. Y.:       A Computational Transonic Flutter
Boundary Tracking Procedure, NASA TM 87708, 1986.

   1 8 . Hess, Robert W.; Seidel, David A.; Igoe, William B.; and Lawing, Pierce L.: Highlights of
Unsteady Pressure Tests on a 14 Percent Supercritical Airfoil at High Reynolds Number,
Transonic Condition, AIAA 87-0035, 1987.




                                                17
u,
0    X
5
a
z
*n
0
U
W
a    X
>
n
a
W
I-
m
z
3
J
a
z
0
F    X
a
I-
3

0
0
z
I




u,
W
F
3
F
0
a
0
U
CU
I.
I-
z
W
U
U
3
0
-
W
J        I   L   L   L   I
m
a
I-       I   1
I-
-
Z
-                   U
0                   U
n                   co
U                   t-
W
I-                  t-
I-
3
A
LL
W


U    i=
W    z
I-
W
     5
     n         H
n
     U         t-   O
0    W
I-   c         0    t-

                                   cn
                                    n
                    cn
                    W              0
                                   A
                                   LL
                                   E
                                   0
                                   0
          J                        F
          W
          P                        LL
          0                        0
          z                        n
                                   W
          0    n                   W
               cn                  a
               I-                  cn
                              v)
                              W
                              v)
                              a
                              0
                              A
          z
               ta   t
                    a
                              a
                              3
          0    U    U         I-
          F    0    0         o
          a    U    U         a
          U    z    z         z
                                   cn
          =I
          (3   W
               I-
               W
                    I-
                              0
                              n
                    W         W    3
                    A
                    n
                              cn   cn
                    E
                              a
                              mU   cn
          0
          1
                    0
                                   a
                                   U
                                   U
                    0


                         19
                        cn                   n
                        [I                   z
>                  0
                   v)
                        8
                        I
                                             3X
U                       cu                   CD
a                  3    r                    N
n                  v)
                   a
                   z
U
W
I-
I-
3
4
u.
           d            m               cn   n
                                        U    X
     uu
           E
           W
                        U
                        8               8    3X
     3 w   X            I               I
            z
            w
                        0
                        c
                        7
                                        Lo   v)
                                             CD


           m X
           q
               9             U
               d
                             LLJ
W
0
[r                 4
                   W
                             3
3
0                  n
cn                 0
W
U
                   H


       0
       r




                                   20
        TABLE IV.   ACTIVITIES IN COMPUTATIONAL
                    UNSTEADY AERODYNAMICS



0 CORRELATION OF NAVIER-STOKES AND TRANSONIC CRYOGENIC
   PRESSURES

0 NAVIER-STOKES FLUTTER ANALYSIS

0 FULL POTENTIAL (ISOLATED WINGS)

0 FULL POTENTIAL (CONFIGURATIONS)

0 CAP-TSD (LEVEL 1.0)

0 CAP-TSD (LEVEL 2.0)




                            21
     L
     0
     rc




     Iu
     P
     aJ
     v)




     aJ
     L




22
     CI

     .-0
      t
     a




23
A
!)/
T3

0
 3                            n
                              m
                              c,
                              v)



4




L
a                             I-
                              v,
a                             Q
                              n
 t
.-
1
                              aJ
                              L
              0     0     0   3
     0    0   0     0
                              07

     0    0   d-
     00   a         c\1




               24
             *I-
             ?
              P
              E
              a




         0




a

    25
              b




         aJ
         L
         3
     0




0




26
         0
         (D




         0
         w-


              v)
              U



         0
         a
              U
              Q)




              I
              X
              a,
              c,
              L
         0    0
              >

   c.
    c         a,
              L
    a,
   .-         S

.- -0
4=
-I=
   a,
   0
  0




   27
                                         Report Documentation Page
1. Raport No.                                 2. Government Accession No.                     3. Recipient's Catalog No.

 NASA TPI- 100523
                                          -
                                                                                              5. Report Date


                                                                                               Decem be r 1987
                                                                                              6. Performing Organization Code



7. Authods)                                                                                   8. Performing Organization Report No.
Woodrow Whitlow, J r .
                                                                                             10. Work Unit No.

9. Performing Organization Name and Address
                                                                                               505-63-21-01
NASA Langley Research Center                                                                 11. Contract or Grant No.
Hampton, Vi r g i n i a 23665-5225
                                                                                             13. Type of Report and Period Covered
'2. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address
                                                                                               Technical Memorandum
National Aeronautics and Space Admi n i s t r a t ion
                                                                                             14. Sponsoring Agency Code
Washington, DC 20546

5. Supplementary Notes




6. Abstract
         This report summarizes the status of computational unsteady aerodynamics
methods f o r aeroelastic analysis and makes recommendations for future research
a c t i v i t i e s . The f l i g h t conditions f o r which various types of flows e x i s t are
described and the aeroelastic phenomena that can occur i n those f l i g h t regimes a r e
discussed. Some important acroelastic problems of current i n t e r e s t are described,
and the aerodynamic methods needed t o analyze them are presented. The c a p a b i l i t i e s
and limitations of existing unsteady aerodynamics methods are discussed. Computer
resources required t o perform aeroelastic analysis of various f l i g h t vehicle
configurations are presented. Recommendations f o r future research a r e made, and
schedules f o r completion of proposed research tasks are presented.




7. Key Words (Suggested by Authork))                                  18. Distribution Statement

 Computational Aeroelasticity                                          Unclassified - Unlimited
 Unsteady Aerodynamics                                                 Subject Category - 02


9. Security Classif. (of this report)     20. Security Classif. (of this page)               21. No. of pages      22. Price

 Unclassified                                 Uncl ass i f i ed                                    28                A03

