---
title: Review of Computational Stirling Analysis Methods
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 20040171934
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20040171934
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Glenn Research Center
publication_date: 2019-08-14
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 7ad76262ff894e09abc0c787be3b39144032a677202a8b7bceda7f66a9dd656a
pages: 28
words: 9076
cv_look_pages: 6
---

NASA/TM—2004-213300                      AIAA–2004–5582




Review of Computational Stirling
Analysis Methods
Rodger W. Dyson
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Scott D. Wilson
Sest, Inc., Middleburg Heights, Ohio

Roy C. Tew
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio




October 2004
                                   The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile


Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to                 •   CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
the advancement of aeronautics and space                           papers from scientific and technical
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical                         conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part                  meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
in helping NASA maintain this important role.                      NASA.

The NASA STI Program Office is operated by                     •   SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for                       technical, or historical information from
NASA’s scientific and technical information. The                   NASA programs, projects, and missions,
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the                     often concerned with subjects having
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of                       substantial public interest.
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’s institutional                •   TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
mechanism for disseminating the results of its                     language translations of foreign scientific
research and development activities. These results                 and technical material pertinent to NASA’s
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report                       mission.
Series, which includes the following report types:
                                                               Specialized services that complement the STI
•   TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of                          Program Office’s diverse offerings include
    completed research or a major significant                  creating custom thesauri, building customized
    phase of research that present the results of              databases, organizing and publishing research
    NASA programs and include extensive data                   results . . . even providing videos.
    or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
    of significant scientific and technical data and           For more information about the NASA STI
    information deemed to be of continuing                     Program Office, see the following:
    reference value. NASA’s counterpart of peer-
    reviewed formal professional papers but                    •   Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
    has less stringent limitations on manuscript                   at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
    length and extent of graphic presentations.
                                                               •   E-mail your question via the Internet to
•   TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific                               help@sti.nasa.gov
    and technical findings that are preliminary or
    of specialized interest, e.g., quick release               •   Fax your question to the NASA Access
    reports, working papers, and bibliographies                    Help Desk at 301–621–0134
    that contain minimal annotation. Does not
    contain extensive analysis.                                •   Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
                                                                   301–621–0390
•   CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
    technical findings by NASA-sponsored                       •   Write to:
    contractors and grantees.                                      NASA Access Help Desk
                                                                   NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
                                                                   7121 Standard Drive
                                                                   Hanover, MD 21076
NASA/TM—2004-213300                                                   AIAA–2004–5582




Review of Computational Stirling
Analysis Methods
Rodger W. Dyson
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Scott D. Wilson
Sest, Inc., Middleburg Heights, Ohio

Roy C. Tew
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio




Prepared for the
Second International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference
sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Providence, Rhode Island, August 16–19, 2004




National Aeronautics and
Space Administration


Glenn Research Center




October 2004
                                           Acknowledgments




 This work was performed for NASA Headquarters, Office of Space Science (Code S), under Project Prometheus,
                                     the Nuclear Systems Program.




                       Trade names or manufacturers’ names are used in this report for
                         identification only. This usage does not constitute an official
                          endorsement, either expressed or implied, by the National
                                    Aeronautics and Space Administration.




                                               Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information                                     National Technical Information Service
7121 Standard Drive                                                                        5285 Port Royal Road
Hanover, MD 21076                                                                          Springfield, VA 22100


                             Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
                  Review of Computational Stirling Analysis Methods
                                              Rodger W. Dyson
                                National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                           Glenn Research Center
                                           Cleveland, Ohio 44135

                                               Scott d. Wilson
                                                  Sest, Inc.
                                        Middleburg Heights, Ohio 44130

                                                Roy C. Tew
                                National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                           Glenn Research Center
                                           Cleveland, Ohio 44135



        Nuclear thermal to electric power conversion carries the promise of longer duration
     missions and higher scientific data transmission rates back to Earth for a range of missions,
     including both Mars rovers and deep space missions. A free-piston Stirling convertor is a
     candidate technology that is considered an efficient and reliable power conversion device for
     such purposes. While already very efficient, it is believed that better Stirling engines can
     be developed if the losses inherent in current designs could be better understood. However,
     they are difficult to instrument and so efforts are underway to simulate a complete Stirling
     engine numerically. This has only recently been attempted and a review of the methods
     leading up to and including such computational analysis is presented. And finally it is
     proposed that the quality and depth of Stirling loss understanding may be improved by
     utilizing the higher fidelity and efficiency of recently developed numerical methods. One
     such method, the Ultra HI-FI technique is presented in detail.


                                            I.   Introduction
    ower conversion with free-piston Stirling engines1, 2 has the potential to deliver high efficiency, low mass
P   solutions for longer and more varied space missions.3, 4 NASA’s goal of achieving 35% system efficiency
(approximately 45% convertor efficiency) will require increasing the percentage of Carnot efficiency that
is achievable to 55%. In addition to using advanced high-temperature materials to increase the Carnot
temperature ratio, it is anticipated that advanced computational fluid dynamics (CFD) will help to identify
the following losses6, 7, 8 (also shown in figure I):

  1. Inefficient heat exchange and pressure loss in the regenerator, heater and cooler,
  2. Gas spring and working space loss due to hysterisis and turbulence,
  3. Appendix gap losses due to pumping and shuttle effects,
  4. Mixing gas losses from nonuniform temperature and flow distributions perpendicular to primary engine
     flow axis,
  5. Conduction losses from the hot to cold regions




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    1
  6. Losses due to combined radiation, conduction and convection in hollow spaces
  7. And in general, inaccurate loss representations due to use of 1-D flow design codes to account for
     flow and heat transfer through area changes (between components) where phenomena such as flow
     separation and jetting from tube into regenerator may occur.

   In addition, the following artificial numerical losses must be considered when computational simulations
are performed (also shown in figure 1I):

  1. Moving/deforming mesh losses from repeated low order flow field interpolations,
  2. Transient/Unsteady heat transfer and flow loss from inconsistent and inaccurate time discretization,
  3. Flow loss from low order approaches resulting in effectively adding artificial dissipation terms along
     sliding interfaces, at structured/unstructured grid interfaces, and within interior.

   Minimizing those artificial losses is best accomplished through higher order approaches.9 While this
approach is common in aeroacoustics, computational electromagnetics, and exterior flow problems, high
order techniques have not yet been applied to simulating a Stirling device. Moreover, the following difficulties
are often encountered when using high-order approaches:

  1. Generation of high-order, smooth, body-fitted grids around complex configurations can be difficult.10

  2. High-order formulations can lack nonlinear robustness.10
  3. The general usefulness of high-order methods is limited by first order accurate shock capturing.11

   Fortunately, with the exception of the possibly random geometry in the regenerator, the free-piston
design is essentially smooth and admits curvilinear structured grids. The issue of nonlinear robustness is an
open issue, but a proposed approach is detailed later. And finally, the working gas is subsonic and shockless
throughout the entire region.12 For these reasons, a high-order approach should be investigated for ”whole
engine” Stirling analysis.
   This paper will highlight the past and present Stirling analysis techniques and discuss their relative
merits.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    2
         Figure 1. Schematic of Actual and Artificial Numerical Losses in a Free-Piston Convertor



                                 II.    Description of the Problem
   The dual opposed configuration shown in figure 2 13, 17, 18 is being developed for multimission use (i.e., for
use in atmospheres and space), including providing electric power for potential missions such as unmanned
Mars rovers and deep space missions.19




                 Figure 2. Dual Opposed Stirling Convertors Reduce Vibration (Schreiber)

   An example of the desired full Stirling engine simulation is shown in Fig. 3.16 The pseudo design is
presented to avoid export control issues. It is anticipated that full 3D simulations will provide a level of
geometric and flow detail necessary for further design improvements. For example, hardware experiments




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    3
have shown that large performance gains can be made by varying manifolds and heat exchanger designs to
improve flow distributions in the heat exchangers.13, 14, 15
   The kinds of flow and geometry that occur in a Stirling engine for
which a modeling technique must address are as follows:8, 7

     1. Oscillating flow which changes the effective conduction, flow friction
        coefficients and heat diffusion.20
     2. Low mach number flow (no shocks),

     3. Compressible flow due to enclosed varying volumes and heat transfer
        effects,
                                                                                 Figure 3.   Example Transient
     4. Laminar, Transitional, and Turbulent flow with Reynolds numbers          Simulation of Pseudo Stirling
        from 100 to 10000 (based on various length scales pertinent to the       Convertor-Colored by Velocity
        flow region),                                                            Magnitude

     5. Conjugate heat transfer, thermal dispersion and local thermal
        nonequilibrium in the porous media regenerator,
     6. Micron to Millimeter scale geometry21

     7. Sliding Interfaces in the appendix gap
     8. Deforming Flow Regions Due to Compression and Expansion

                             III.    Stirling Cycle Analysis Approaches
    The techniques of analysis for Stirling engines can be categorized with Martini’s22, 23 nomenclature as
follows:

A.     Zeroth Order Analysis
William Beale observed24 that most modern engines operate under similar conditions of the parametric
ratios: dead volume ratio, temperature ratio, swept volume ratio, displacer-piston phase angle advance.
Thus correlating the experimental data available on various engines, he found that one could represent the
engine performance as:

                                              P0 = 0.015pmean Vsw f                                        (1)



B.     First Order Analysis
The first analysis of Stirling engines was done in 1871 by Gustav Schmidt in which he obtained closed-form
solutions for the special case of sinusoidal volume variations and isothermal hot and cold spaces.25 In Fig. B
(a), the model equations from the isothermal assumption shown in Fig. 4 is shown. These can be integrated
with a computer but a closed form solution is available in which sinusoidal motion is assumed.
    The relative volume changes can be calculated using the phasor diagram and schematic in Figs. 5 (b and
c). This analysis is loss-free and a correction factor is normally applied in practical designs to account for
the losses.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                      4
                                  Figure 4. Ideal Isothermal Model (Urieli)




     (a) Ideal Isothermal model set of equations                      (b) Volume Vector Diagram


                              Figure 5. Closed Form Solution Process (Urieli)




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                  5
C.    Second Order Analysis
This level of analysis may be based on an adiabatic
analysis that subtracts losses caused by heat trans-
fer and flow power losses. It relies on a modified
Schmidt analysis (Schmidt analysis normally implies
isothermal hot and cold spaces) and requires nonlin-
ear time integration of the model equations. It as-
sumes adiabatic expansion and compression regions
as shown in Fig. 6(a).

1.   Heat Transfer Losses
Heat transfer loss occurs throughout the system but
notably in the appendix gap region (space between
displacer and heat exchangers) through the follow-                     (a) Ideal Adiabatic Model
ing processes:24

     • Shuttle heat transfer in which a conduction
       loss down the displacer or piston and associ-
       ated cylinder is enhanced by one wall’s oscil-
       latory motion27

     • Gas enthalpy transfer (pumping) which is the
       net enthalpy transport down the gap by virtue
       of the working gas motion, pressure and tem-
       perature.
     • Hysteresis heat transfer which is the net heat
       transfer from the gas to the cylinder due to
       temperature gradients set up by the pressure
       variations in the expansion space.

   In addition, conduction losses through the wall
and displacer must be accounted for.

2.   Flow Power Losses
Flow power loss occurs mostly in the regenerator re-
gion due to pressure drop across the matrix (which
may be enhanced by non-uniform flow). The vis-
cosity of the working gas and gas spring hysteresis
losses must also be accounted for.
                                                                  (b) Ideal Adiabatic Model Equations
3. Berchowitz Dynamic and Thermondynamic
Closed Form                                                 Figure 6. Adiabatic Solution Process (Urieli)

A closed form expression (Fig. 7) which included
masses for dynamic as well as thermodynamic anal-
ysis was derived by Berchowitz.26




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                     6
D.    Third Order Analysis
Third order analysis uses control volumes or nodes
to directly solve one-dimensional governing equa-
tions. Some of the first analysis at this level
of fidelity was by Finkelstein,28 Urieli,29 and
Berchowitz.30
    The codes by David Gedeon referred to
as GLIMPS31, 32 and Sage33, 34, 35 are one-
dimensional and solve the governing equations
implicitly in space and time. The grid in-
cludes all time because a periodic solution is as-
sumed/forced. Therefore, it is not possible to
model transient startup behavior.
    The linearized harmonic analysis code re-
ferred to as HFAST36 solved a steady-state pe-
riodic problem in the frequency domain. Again,
transient behavior is not modeled.
    The code by Martini engineering37 was never
validated but claimed transient modeling capa-
bility. It is not clear the governing equations are
being solved since it appears many simplifications
based on experimental correlations are used.
    Another unvalidated but interesting code by
Renfroe38 attempted a one-dimensional analysis      Figure 7. Closed Form Adiabatic Solution (Schreiber)
using explicit Runge-Kutta time stepping and a
Newton solver to solve the nonlinear equations.
    Finally, the Stirling dynamic model (SDM),39 uses a one-dimensional analogy of an entire Stirling con-
vertor by linking together representative elements within the Simplorer(TM) commercial software package
by Ansoft Corp. This tool enables approximate whole convertor dynamic analysis. Recent work attempts
to incorporate thermodynamics via David Gedeon’s Sage code described earlier.

E.   Fourth Order (Multi-Dimensional) Analysis
At this level of analysis, relatively little has been completed because the third order analysis is faster and for
the most part has been an adequate engineering tool. However, to improve efficiency further (to understand
and reduce losses) it will likely require a better understanding of the actual flow features and heat transfer
throughout the engine.

1.   Modified Computer Aided Simulation of Turbulence (CAST)
The modified CAST code40 is based upon the Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations SIM-
PLE41 method but is restricted to two dimensions.42 It was modified to include oscillatory boundary condi-
tions and conjugate heat transfer. It has been used to model Stirling components but has not been extended
to a whole engine simulation tool.
    A pressure-splitting technique was added43 to reduce the computational requirements. It was based on
separating the thermodynamic and hydrodynamic pressures so that these widely varying scales could be
solved with less round-off error and better efficiency.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                     7
2.   CFD-ACE
This commercial code has been used to model a two-dimensional representative Stirling engine.44, 45 It is
also based upon the SIMPLE technique. The regenerator is not currently modeled correctly since thermal
equilibrium is assumed between the gas and solid. The code does not currently support sliding interfaces on
parallel computers which is critical for modeling the appendix gap region.
    This finite volume code can utilize both structured and unstructured grids.

3.   Fluent
This commercial code is also based upon the SIMPLE method (and PISO method for high speed flows). It
currently has similar regenerator modeling limitations in that it is designed for non-oscillating flows. It does
however have a sliding interface that could be used for appendix gap modeling on parallel computers. It
is being used by several commercial manufacturers for this purpose (references are proprietary). It is also
finite volume based and can utilize both structured and unstructured grids.

4.   STAR-CD
The Simulation of Turbulent Flow in Arbitrary Regions (STAR)46 code also uses SIMPLE and PISO methods.
Its companion product (STAR-HPC) is the parallel computer version. It also has sliding interfaces and
deforming mesh capability. It has been used in the related field of internal combustion engine piston modeling,
and some Stirling engines have been modeled with it.47

5.   CFX
This code also used SIMPLE and PISO methods on unstructured grids. It also has sliding interfaces imple-
mented, but no stirling engine modeling with this software has been publicly published.48

6.   Others
While there are other in-house codes, they are usually limited to modeling only specific regions of the Stirling
engine such as the regenerator, or the displacer.

                                   IV.     Whole Engine Modeling
    The use of two-dimensional CFD models can significantly extend the capabilities, compared to third-order
analysis, for the more detailed analysis of the complex heat transfer and gas dynamical processes which occur
in the internal gas circuit.52 A standard κ −  turbulence model has been used for such two-dimensional
simulations, but the flow is constantly transitioning from laminar to turbulent and back. A better numerical
model would be large eddy simulation due to the transient nature of the flow. More recently, full 3-D
calculations have been performed with a commercial code.53 The temperature results are similar to the
second order method results.54 The multidimensionally computed power, however, was about half of the
second order prediction. Moreover, along the axis of the compression space it was found the change of the
temperature of the working gas was quite different from harmonic in time. Third order modeling efforts can
resolve higher harmonics of periodic time functions and therefore if enough grid points are available in time
they can achieve similar results. However, turbulence is inherently a-periodic and it is not clear if third order
modeling efforts which assume periodic solutions can fully capture this.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    8
                                   V.    Regenerator Modeling
                                                  A very important specific area of modeling difficulty is the
                                              regenerator. As shown in Fig. 8, since the regenerator (depend-
                                              ing upon one’s definition of effective) has roughly 3 to 40 times
                                              more effective heat transfer than the heater,55 any inefficiency
                                              of the regenerator represents a significant loss for the entire
                                              Stirling engine. Hence, any numerical losses in this region will
                                              disproportionately influence the entire Stirling simulation. A
                                              new low loss numerical method will be proposed later to ad-
                                              dress this.

                                              A.    Manifest
                                              The code referred to as Manifest21 solved the porous medium
                                              model equations shown below:
                                                             k
Figure 8. Importance of Properly Modeling      ∂M     J ∂     G
the Regenerator for System Studies (Urieli)    ∂τ + β∂yk     J k
                                                                    =0
                                                                                                                     
                                                  n                        β       ∂yk
                                               ∂G         ∂     G                              ∂    P ∂yk                 ∂yn
                                                ∂τ  +  J ∂yk    J  u j −  J τ eij ∂xi   + βJ ∂yk   J ∂xj   + βψ jk u k   ∂xj = 0
                                                                                                              
                                               ∂E    J ∂      E    k     1          k    1           k    β k
                                               ∂τ + β ∂yk     J βu + J (P βV ) − J (τe − βV ) + J qe − Q = 0
                                               ∂
                                               ∂τ (λTs ) + Q = 0
                                                                                                      (2)
                                             where M = ρ, G = βρV, E = ρe, using the Beam and Warm-
                                             ing56 implicit time stepping approach. This code was written
in curvilinear coordinates and seemed to perform well for low Reynolds number jets impinging the matrix.
It was not developed further because of excessive computational time.




      (a) Idealized Geomertry             (b) Regularized Geometry                  (c) Photographed Geometry


                                     Figure 9. Regenerator Geometry


   Another important issue is the geometrical shape of the matrix in the regenerator. As shown in Fig. 9,
most regenerator models don’t assume a precise geometrical shape for the elements of the regenerator.
However, as reported in Park,49 a simple-to-fabricate woven mesh, consisting of bonded laminates of two-
dimensional plain-weave conductive screens can be manufactured to have a wide range of porosity and a
highly anisotropic thermal conductivity vector. In addition to providing superior performance in many




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    9
cases,50 the regular geometry greatly simplifies the analysis. However, those mesh sheets are not woven wire
screens formed by etching used in regenerators which may in practice not be as precisely formed as mesh
sheets.

                               VI.     Numerical Error and Efficiency
     The critical issues in simulating a Stirling engine are:

     1. The artificial numerical losses should be a small percentage of the actual losses

     2. The simulation must complete in a reasonable amount of time.

    The first issue is a problem with many commercial codes that utilize low order methods. For example,
this problem can be observed with a simple first order approximation of the first derivative:

                                        dF (t)   ∆F   F (t + ∆t) − F (t)
                                               ≈    =                                                         (3)
                                         dt      ∆t          ∆t
   We may assume we are computing the derivative of a simple harmonic function, F (t) = eiωt . We find
the first order derivative approximation in Eq. (3) results in the solution:
                                                            ∆t              ∆t
                                                                                  ∆t 
                            ∆F    eiωt (eiω∆t −1)      iωt    eiω 2 −e−iω 2          eiω 2
                            ∆t =         ∆t       = iωe               2i              ω ∆t
                                                                                        2
                                                                            
                                                                 sin( ω∆t
                                                                           )       ∆t
                                                    = iωeiωt         ω∆t
                                                                        2
                                                                               eiω 2
                                                                      2
                                                                              !                    (4)
                                                                sin ω∆t
                                                                            
                                                      dF (t)             2          iω ∆t
                                                    = dt            ω∆t
                                                                                  e| {z2}
                                                                      2
                                                             |       {z       } Dispersion
                                                                Dissipation

     Higher order approximations of the derivative introduce similar errors, but their relative effect is less.

A.     Time Advance Error
In addition to the spatial and temporal discretizations which produce the dispersive and dissipative errors
as discussed, another form of error which is important for oscillating flows is improperly modeled multi-
dimensionsal boundary conditions.
    As an example, consider the pressure near the displacer wall. The numerical approach can be expanded
as a Taylor series in time:

                                                                   ∂p ∆t2 ∂ 2 p
                               p(x, y, t + ∆t) = p(x, y, t) + ∆t      +         + ...                         (5)
                                                                   ∂t   2! ∂t2

     If the time derivatives are written as space derivatives (for simplicity consider 2D Euler flows):
                                                                         
                                    ∂p         ∂p      ∂p         ∂u ∂v
                                       =− u        +v     + γp        +                                       (6)
                                    ∂t         ∂x      ∂y         ∂x ∂y

   Then clearly these spatial derivatives must be properly defined at a surface for the time derivative to be
correct. Unfortunately, most commercial codes only impose the no-flow condition and these spatial derivative
terms are not properly posed at the boundary.51 This error represents the wrong time-accurate physics near
walls. If the walls are moving (such as in a displacer) this error is more pronounced.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                      10
    Higher time derivatives have many more terms in them that
are generally incorrectly modeled at surfaces. For example
in Fig. 10, the colored terms represent commonly improperly
posed terms. The pink represents first order or dispersive error,
the green represents diffusive error, and the blue represents an
error in the entropy terms. In an oscillating flow loss study,
these terms can become significant as time accumulates.

B. Description of the SIMPLE method commonly
used
The Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations
(SIMPLE) is used in most of the commercial codes today. An
understanding of its effect on Stirling simulations is important
for interpreting the losses found from present computational
analysis.                                                               Figure 10. Second Time Derivative

C.   Improving Efficiency
One of the primary limitations of using commercial codes today
for three-dimensional analysis of Stirling cycle engines is the
time it takes for second order accurate analysis. A recent trend which improves this situation is relatively
low-cost parallel computers (pictured in Fig. 11(a)). The trend is for more processors on a single board and
for higher speed communications linking many boards together. Many commercial codes using the SIMPLE
method can now utilize parallel computing, however, there still seems to be a practical limit due to the
implicit nature of the method. Further improvement in performance can be expected by utilizing high order
methods as shown in Fig. 11(b). The higher order methods in conjuction with parallel computing offer the
promise of design speed analysis. An explicit method with these properties is presented in the next section.




     (a) Cluster Computing                                      (b) Efficiency Chart


                             Figure 11. Enhancing Simulation Performance




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                   11
      VII.     Proposed Computational Stirling Analysis Numerical Approach
                                                   Computational Stirling Analysis (CSA) requires efficient,
                                              high-resolution simulation tools. Most current CSA techniques
                                              utilize low order finite-volume approaches because high order
                                              accuracy is considered too difficult or expensive to achieve and
                                              hopefully unnecessary for some problems. As shown in Fig. 12,
                                              these low order techniques require a relatively dense grid com-
                                              pared to the high order approaches. Two notable exceptions
                                              are the finite-volume WENO and finite element Discontinuos
                                              Galerkin Methods (DGM).57 However, they tend to be inef-
                                              ficient computationally due to their use of unstructured grids
                                              and complicated mathematics.
                                                   Although finite difference techniques have been developed
                                              which maintain low losses over time, they have great difficulty
Figure 12. Points Per Wavelength Compar- insuring flow conservation in crucial locations (i.e. appendix
ison                                          gap, moving geometry). Moreover, the finite difference form
                                              produces grid singularities at block corners of a multiblock
curvilinear grid. In three dimensions, grid singularities become lines of only first order accuracy which
swirling turbulent flow will force convected disturbances through.
    It’s accepted common practice to use low-order finite volume techniques in computational fluid dynamics58
precisely because of the drawbacks of finite-difference techniques in complex geometry. CSA has focused on
low order finite-volume techniques because it is not currently clear how to extend finite-volume techniques
to very high order. Only recently have modest improvements in the accuracy been achieved. For example,
Agarwal59 has developed a fourth order finite volume technique for the Euler equations on unstructured
grids. And, Wang60 developed a fourth order optimized structured/curvilinear finite-volume technique. And,
Rezgui61 has developed a third-order finite-volume Euler solver. A low dispersion finite volume technique
by Nance62 used Tam’s dispersion relationship preservation on the interpolated flux to improve spatial
resolution. And most recently, Z.J. Wang63 developed a spectral volume method in which more degrees of
freedom are made available by using subcells within a cell. As shown in Figs. 13 and 14, the third order
method produced better results while using exactly the same number of degrees of freedom.
    These recent developments demonstrate the feasibility and importance of high order low dissipation low
dispersion finite-volume techniques. But their basic approaches severely limit their potential for very high-
order extensions which are known to produce significant performance improvements51 without the need for
special optimizations.
    Building upon previously established Hermitian finite-difference approaches,51 this work utilizes the spa-
tial derivatives of the convective fluxes to insure exceptionally high resolution and efficiency in complex
geometries. The technique can be used to model a complete Stirling engine.

                                   VIII.      Numerical Approach
    For pedagogical simplicity, the two-dimensional Euler equations will be shown, but the extension to fully
viscous flows is straight-forward. The finite-volume form of the Euler equations is normally solved in physical




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                   12
       (a) 2nd Order Faceted                       (b) 2nd Order Curved                (c) 3rd Order


Figure 13. Density Contour-Comparing faceted geometry (a), curved geometry (b), and curved geomtry higher
order (c)




       (a) 2nd Order Faceted                       (b) 2nd Order Curved                (c) 3rd Order


Figure 14. Entropy Production-Comparing faceted geometry (a), curved geometry (b), and curved geomtry
higher order (c)



coordinates and can be written as:58
                                       ∂~ dΩ +     F~ dS = Ω QdΩ
                                                              ~
                                           R   H            R
                                    ∂tW     Ω ∂Ω c 
                              ρ                ρV
                             ρu  ~       ρuV + nx p 
                                                    
                        ~ =
                        W       , Fc =               , V ≡ ~v · ~n = nx u + ny v                   (7)
                            ρv          ρvV + ny p 
                             ρE             h ρHV       i    2   2
                                   p = (γ − 1)ρ E − u +v
                                                      2              , H = E + ρp

   However, recently structured multiblock grid generators have become available that can generate a very
smooth curvilinear grid. Therefore, the following finite-volume form of the Euler equations can be used
with many advantages over the traditional physical coordinate system finite volume (used in commercial
packages) and the curvilinear multiblock finite difference methodologies.67, 68
                               R  ∂W~1
                                                       R  ∂ F~1   ∂G~1
                                                                         
                                Ω   ∂t    dξdη   =    −  Ω   ∂ξ   +  ∂η    dξdη
                                                        H                                           (8)
                                                 = − ∂Ω F~1 dη − G     ~ 1 dξ




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                        13
where
                                  ~1
                                  W       = JW ~
                                  F~1          ~ ∂ξ
                                          = J F ∂x  + JG~ ∂ξ = F~ ∂y − G
                                                          ∂y      ∂η
                                                                       ~ ∂x
                                                                         ∂η                                (9)
                                  G~1     = J F~ ∂η + J G
                                                        ~ ∂η = −F~ ∂y − G~ ∂x
                                                   ∂x          ∂y         ∂ξ       ∂ξ
The jacobian determinant, J, is defined by:
                                                                ∂x   ∂y
                                            J ≡ ∂(x,y)
                                                ∂(ξ,η) ≡
                                                                ∂ξ
                                                                ∂x
                                                                     ∂ξ
                                                                     ∂y                                   (10)
                                                                ∂η   ∂η

   And the original Cartesian solution and flux vectors are:
                                                                         
                           
                              ρ           
                                                   ρu     
                                                                 
                                                                       ρv    
                                                                              
                                                 2
                                                                            
                              ρu                 ρu   + p              ρuv
                                                                         
                     ~
                     W =                ~
                                      , F =                    ~
                                                             , G=                                         (11)
                           
                           
                             ρv 
                                  
                                             
                                             
                                                  ρuv     
                                                           
                                                           
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                    ρv 2 + p 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                              ρE                ρuE + pu            ρvE + pv
                                                                         

                                                                                                2
E is total energy (internal energy plus kinetic energy) per unit mass, E = e + V2 .
    The surface integrals can be simply performed in the computational space since all cells have unit spacing.
Since derivatives of the solution are also available one can assume a polynomial shape function69 and the
integrals become:
                      R1
                         F~1 (ξ, η)dη =
                                          R
                       0
                                            (~a00 + ~a10 ξ + ~a01 η + ~a11 ξη)dη
                                       = ~a00 ∆η + ~a10 ξ∆η + ~a01 12 (∆η)2 + ~a11 12 ξ(∆η)2
                      R1                                                                                   (12)
                          ~ 1 (ξ, η)dξ =
                                          R
                       0
                         G                  (~a00 + ~a10 ξ + ~a01 η + ~a11 ξη)dξ
                                       = ~a00 ∆ξ + ~a10 12 (∆ξ)2 + ~a01 (∆ξ)η + ~a11 12 (∆ξ)2 η
where ∆ξ = ∆η = 1. The ai,j coefficients can be found using Hermitian divided differences51 As was done by
Agarwal59 and similar to Goodrich70 the governing equations may be differentiated as follows in curvilinear
coordinates:            R  ∂ m+n+1 W               H  m+n ~                     
                                      ~1                               m+n ~

                         Ω  ∂ξ m ∂η n ∂t   dξdη = − ∂Ω ∂∂ξm ηFn1 dη − ∂∂ξm ηGn1 dξ                     (13)
   The fluxes may be calculated either using Jameson71 style centered, but high order flux differences or by
using a pseudo one-dimensional Riemann solution between the left and right states as follows:59
                                                                                
                                1
                        F~1m,n = F~1m,n + F~1m,n −S|∆|∆−1 S −1 (F~1m,n − F~1m,n )                       (14)
                                                                                  
                                2 | {z } | {z }                  | {z } | {z }
                                        Right     Lef t                        Right    Lef t

where S is the similarity matrix for diagonilizing the Jacobian ∂ F~1m,n /∂Wm,n , ∆ is the eigenvalue diagonal
matrix, and |∆| refers to the spectral radius of ∆.
    With these developments many arbitrary accuracy finite volume schemes can be implemented to arbitrary
order accuracy in space. The time advancement may be implemented with Runge-Kutta schemes for low
frequency Stirling simulations that contain high wavenumber requirements (steep flow gradients). Or the
recursive time advance technique51 could be used to achieve arbitrary accuracy in time as well.

                                   IX.          Curvilinear Grid Issues
   One of the primary advantages of this finite-volume formulation over the common finite difference ap-
proach is in resolving grid singularity issues as shown in Fig. 15.
   For the following reasons, a structured curvilinear multiblock arbitrary accuracy finite volume CSA code
should be developed:




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                       14
          (a) Metric Term Gradient Distribution               (b) Grid Singularity Avoided With Finite Volume


Figure 15. Grid singularities are unavoidable in complex geometries and act as a source of 1st order noise for
finite difference methods. For example, calculating a derivative with a 7-point stencil (marked with ”A” or
”B”) is indeterminate. A finite volume (with volumes ”V”) method communicates through faces and hence
this grid poses no problems for it.



   • Calculating spatial derivatives is reduced to 1st order accuracy at grid singularities with a finite-
     difference method. However, a finite-volume method communicates through cell faces only and for the
     grid singularity shown all faces are uniquely defined.
   • In three-dimensions this advantage is significant because grid singularities become lines of first order
     error. The swirling turbulent flow in the expansion and compression spaces will cause all convected
     disturbances to travel through this region with many undesirable side effects.
   • In addition to enabling high accuracy everywhere this formulation will resolve high curvature without
     requiring as many grid points when the fluxes are written in strong conservation form.
   • Parallel implementation is direct as well and does not require changing the wave propagation speeds
     that converting from an implicit compact to an explicit centered scheme does.
   • Flat plates are easily solved and therefore code validation can be performed on standard oscillating
     flow flat plate heat exchanger before trying more complex problems.

                                     X.     Time-Stepping Options
    One significant difference with time-stepping finite-volume cells relative to finite-difference and finite-
element cells is the time derivatives are actually cell averages. So it is possible to contain physical shocks
within a cell and its cell average derivatives still are defined. Thanks to the property that integration ignores
singularities, it seems plausible to have both high order accuracy and shocks without sacrificing either.
    Standard Runge-Kutta time-stepping can be used, but it’s not recommended because fidelity and stability
is sacrificed since currently available methods effectively widen the stencil because they do not properly
account for the presence of spatial derivative information on the grid.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                    15
 A.     Arbitrary Time Accuracy
 If higher operating frequencies in Stirling devices are encountered then a recursive51 technique of time-
 stepping can be used on each cell. Again, since the mixed space-time derivatives are actually cell averages,
 they are still defined even in shocked flow.

                                          XI.      Flux Interpolation
     It is necessary to convert the spatially-averaged cell quantities to a form for interpolating the fluxes at the
 cell edges. The spatially averaged flow variables can be used as constraints as done by Lomax.72 This requires
 solving a matrix system for a polynomial that when volume integrated matches the spatially-averaged cell
 quantity. If Hermite data is on the grid, then for example, a single cell interpolation with f, fx , fxx produces
 a fourth order technique if the left and right interpolated fluxes are averaged. However, by using data from
 two neighboring cells we can get 6th order accuracy.
     If we have up to s derivatives in each cell, as shown in the figure 16,


                                                  j-1/2               j+1/2
                                                             ∆x
                                                                 -

                                       t          t      t     t               t
                                       j-2        j-1    j     j+1             j+2
                                                     L R   L R




                                   Figure 16. Control volume in one dimension


      we can assume that the polynomial interpolating the flow variables looks like for cells j and j + 1:
                                                             2s+1
                                                             X
                                                    u(ξ) =          ai ξ i                                     (15)
                                                              i=0

      The following constraints are applied to find the coefficients ai :
                                                1
                                                   R ∆x/2 ∂ m u(ξ)   ∂ m u¯j
                                              ∆x −∆x/2 ∂xm dξ = ∂xm
                                              1
                                                  R 3∆x/2 ∂ m u(ξ)  ∂ m uj+1
                                                                          ¯                                    (16)
                                             ∆x ∆x/2        ∂xm dξ = ∂xm

 with m=0 up to s.
    The flux can then be calculated at the cell faces using the high order interpolant.
    A 41st order method using two cells would require inverting a 41 × 41 matrix which gets expensive.
 The problem is worse in multiple dimensions. Instead, we can use the extended divided differences51 and a
 process known as reconstruction via the primitive function64 or RP (see Colella and Woodward.73
    Steps are for all m=0 up to s:
Step 1 Find Fm (x−1/2 ) = 0, Fm (x1/2 ) = ∆xf¯m j Fm (x3/2 ) = ∆xf¯m j + ∆xf¯j+1
Step 2 Use Hermitian divided differences on the data in Step 1 to create an interpolation polynomial. Choose
       a local coordinate system with ξ = 0 somewhere in the two cells. The coefficients of P (ξ) = b0 + b1 ξ +
       1     2
       2 b2 ξ + . . . can be found. This function is also easily differentiated.




 NASA/TM—2004-213300                                         16
Step 3 And then, since the sample function f (ξ) = ∂F
                                                   ∂x and F (x) ≈ P (x), a function approximating f(x) is
       p(x) = dPdx(x)
     For constant ∆x can use reconstruction via deconvolution.
     With these developments high order finite volume integration is possible. The spatial accuracy is high
 via the previous step. Now we can time advance by converting higher order cell averaged time derivatives
 to first order cell averaged time derivatives using the Cauchy-Kowalewski approach.
     So we time advance the averages (using the fluxes and their derivatives). We get new cell-averaged
 quantities at the next time level. We repeat the reconstruction to get new flux interpolants.

                                            XII.     Conclusion
     A review of the techniques used for analyzing the Stirling cycle has been presented. As the fidelity of this
 analysis has improved, so has the efficiency of the cycle in realized designs. Recent attempts at modeling
 a full Stirling engine have utilized commercial codes which have recently enhanced their ability to simulate
 moving, deforming, and sliding meshes. Further improvements in the analysis will require additional research
 in the key areas of regenerator modeling and higher fidelity numerical approaches.
     The regenerator is perhaps at the same time the most difficult and important region to model. A
 combination of direct numerical simulation, better theoretical representations, and high efficiency numerical
 methods on parallel computers will be required. Some of the more recent higher fidelity simulations of porous
 media were presented and appeared to indicate a trend towards modeling with higher order methods.
     Also, a review of the advantages of recently developed high fidelity finite volume methods was presented
 and a novel numerical approach for achieving extraordinary levels of fidelity in Stirling engine simulations
 was described. And, for completeness, the bibliography contains additional references that expand upon the
 review presented but due to the constraints of space and time have not been specifically commented on here.




 NASA/TM—2004-213300                                   17
                                                       References
       1 Beale, W.T.:”Free Piston Stirling Engines - Some Model Tests and Simulations”, [Preliminary investigation of free-piston

Stirling engines.], SAE International Automtive Engineering Conference, Jan. 1969
       2 : Wood, J.G. : ”Status of Free-Piston Stirling Technology at Sunpower, Inc.”, 1st IECEC, AIAA 2003-6056, Aug. 2003
       3 Thieme, L.G.; Schreiber, J.G. : ”NASA GRC Stirling Technology Development Overview”, NASA/TM-2003-212454,

Aug. 2003
       4 Oleson, S., Benson, S., Gefert, L., Patterson, M., Schreiber, J. : ”Radioisotope Electric Propulsion for Fast Outer

Planetary Orbiters”, NASA/TM-2002-211893, Sept. 2002
       5 Cengel, Y.A.; Boles, M.A. : ”Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach”, McGraw-Hill, 1989
       6 Tew, R.C., Thieme, L.G., Dudenhoefer, J.E. : ”Recent Stirling Engine Loss-Understanding Results”, 25th IECEC,

NASA TM 103122, 1990
       7 Hirata, K., Kagawa, N., Takeuchi, M., Yamashita, I., Isshiki, N., Hamaguchi, K. : ”Test Results of Applicative 100 W

Stirling Engine”, 96204.
       8 Ibrahim, M.B., Tew, R.C., Zhang, Z., Gedeon, D. Simon, T. : ”CFD Modeling of Free-Piston Stirling Engines”,

NASA/TM-2001-211132, IECEC2001-CT-38, Sept. 2001.
       9 Dyson, R.W., ”Technique For Very High Order Nonlinear Simulation and Validation”, J. Comp. Acoustics, Vol. 10, No.

2, pp. 211-229, 2002.
      10 Carpenter, M.H., Nordstrom, J., Gottlieb, D. ”A Stable andConservative Interface Treatment of Arbitrary Spatial

Accuracy”, Institute for Computer Applications in Science and Engineering (ICASE) Report No. 98-12, 1998.
      11 Carpeneter, M.H., Casper, J.H. ”The Accuracy of Shock Capturing in Two Spatial Dimensions”, AIAA 97-2107, July

1997.
      12 Tew, R.C., Ibrahim, M.B. : ”Two-dimensional Compressible Non-Acoustic Modeling of Stirling Machine-Type Compo-

nents”, J. of Prop. and Power, Vol. 19, No. 5, Sept.-Oct. 2003
      13 Thieme, L.G., Schreiber, J.G., Mason, L.S. : ”Stirling Technology Development at NASA GRC”, NASA/TM-2001-

211315/REV1, Jan. 2002
      14 Tew, R.C., Cairelli, J.E., Ibrahim, M., Simon, T.W., Gedeon, D.: ”Overview of NASA Multi-Dimensional Stirling

Convertor Code Development and Validation Effort”, NASA/TM-2002-211997, Dec. 2002.
      15 Tew, R., Ibrahim, M., Simon, T., Mantell, S., Gedeon, D., Qui, S., Wood, G.: ”Overview 2003 of NASA Multi-D

Stirling Convertor Code Development and DOE & NASA Stirling Regenerator R & D Efforts”, NASA TM-2004-212908, Space
Technology Applications Int. Forum 2004.
      16 Widmann, J.F. : Developed while author at Fluent training in Lebanon, N.H., 2004
      17 Schreiber, J. : ”Tutorial on Free-Piston Stirling Power Conversion Technology (How Does it Work?), Space Technology

and Applications International Forum, Feb. 2001
      18 Schreiber, J.G., Thieme, L.G., Mason, L.S.: ”Status of Free-piston Stirling Power Conversion in the United States Space

Program”, 10th International Stirling Engine Conference, Osnabruk, Germany, Sept. 2001.
      19 Furlong, R., Shaltens, R. : ”Technology Assessment of DOE’s 55-We Stirling Technology Demonstrator Convertor

(TDC)”, NASA/TM-2000-210509, Oct. 2000
      20 Kaviany, M. : ”Performance of a Heat Exchanger Based on Enhanced Heat Diffusion in Fluids by Oscillation: Analysis”,

J. of Heat Transfer, Vol. 112 (49), Feb. 1990
      21 Gedeon, D. : ”Manifest: A Computer Program for 2-D Flow Modeling in Stirling Machines”, NASA CR-182290, 1989
      22 Martini, W.R.: ”Stirling Engine Design Manual, 2nd Ed.”, NASA CR-168088, Jan. 1983
      23 West, C.D. : ”Principles and Applications of Stirling Engines”, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1986.
      24 Urieli, I., Berchowitz, D.M. : ”Stirling Cycle Engine Analysis”, Adam Hilger Ltd., Bristol, 1984.
      25 Schmidt, G. : ”The Theory of Lehmann’s Calorimetric Machine Z. Ver. Dtsch Ing.”, Vol. 15, Part 1, 1871
      26 Berchowitz, D.M. : ”Stirling Cycle Engine Design and Optimization”, Aug. 1986
      27 Zimmerman, F.J. and Longsworth, R.C. : ”Shuttle Heat Transfer”, Cryogenic Engineering Conference paper H-5 Boul-

der, CO.
      28 Finkelstein, T. :”Computer Analysis of Stirling Engines”, Proc. 10th IECEC, Aug. 1975.
      29 Urieli, I., Rallis, C.J., Berchowitz, D.O.M.: ”Computer Simulation of Stirling Cycle Machines”, Proc. 12th IECEC, Aug.

1977.
      30 Berchowitz, D.M. : ”A Computer and Experimental Simulation of Stirling Cycle Machines”, Master’s Thesis, University

of Witwatersrand, March 1978.
      31 Gedeon, D. : ”GLIMPS Version 4: User’s Manual”, Gedeon Associates, July 1992.
      32 : Geng, S.M., Tew, R.C. : ”Comparison of GLIMPS and HFAST Stirling Engine Code Predictions with Experimental

Data”, NASA TM-105549, 27th IECEC, Aug. 1992
      33 Gedeon, D. : ”Sage - Object-oriented software for Stirling machine design”, AIAA Paper 94-4106. 1994
      34 Gedeon, D. : ”Sage:Stirling-Cycle Model-Class Reference Guide, Third Ed.”, Gedeon Assocatiates, 1999
      35 Gedeon, D. : ”Sage:User’s Guide, Third Edition” Gedeon Assocatiates, 1999




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                            18
        36 Huang, S.C. :   ”HFAST Version 2.00: User Manual”, Mechanical Technology, Inc., NASA Contract NAS3-25330, Jan.
1993.
     37 Martini, W.R. : ”A Computer Simulation of the Transient Response of a 4 Cylinder Stirling Engine with Burner and

Air Preheater in a Vehicle”, Martini Engineering, DOE/NASA/0226-1, NASA CR-165262, March 1981
     38 Renfroe, D.A. : ”A Computer Model of a Stirling Engine Using a Two-Phase Two-Component Working Fluid”, Ph.D.

Dissertation, Texas A&M University, May, 1981.
     39 : Regan, T.F., Gerber, S.S., Roth, M.E. : ”Development of a Dynamic, End-to-End Free Piston Stirling Convertor

Model”, NASA/TM-2004-212941
     40 Peric, M., Scheuerer, G.: ”CAST - A Finite Volume Method for Predicting Two-dimensional Flow and Heat Transfer

Phenomena”, GRS-Technische Notiz, SSR-89-01, Sept. 1989.
     41 Patankar, S.V., Spalding, D.B. : ”A Calculation Procedure for Heat, Mass, and Momentum Transfer in Three-

Dimensional Parabolic Flows”, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, Vol. 15, p. 1787, 1972
     42 Ibrahim, M., Kannapareddy, M. : ”Computational Heat Transfer Analysis for Oscillatory Channel Flows”, NASA-CR-

199238, 1992
     43 Guo, G., Kurzweg, U.H. : ”2D Numerical Simulation of Heat Transfer in a Stirling Microrefrigerator Model”, AIAA

Paper 96-1807, 31st AIAA Thermophysics Conference, New Orleans, LA, June, 1996
     44 Ibrahim, M., Mittal, M.: To be presented at AIAA IECEC conference, Rhode Island, 2004.
     45 Wilson, S.D., Dyson, R.W., Tew, R.C. : ”Multi-D CFD Modeling of Free-Piston Stirling Convertor at NASA GRC”,

2nd AIAA IECEC, Aug. 2004.
     46 Star    CD,      ”Methology”,Computational        Dynamics      Limited,    2002     http://www.fnb.maschinenbau.tu-
darmstadt.de/de/software/starcd/manuals/method/star method.pdf
     47 Zhang, Z. Posted on the web at http://www.cfdreview.com/jobs.pl?op=view res&rid=264, No specific details since

proprietary, 2003
     48 Computational Fluids Dynamics Company website at http://www-waterloo.ansys.com/cfx.
     49 Park, J., Ruch, D., and Wirtz, R.A. : ”Thermal/Fluid Characteristics of Isotropic Plain-weave Screen Laminates as

Heat Exchange Surfaces”, AIAA 2002-0208, 2002.
     50 Kitahama, D., Takizawa, H., Kagawa, N., Matsuguchi, A., Tsuruno, S.L: ”Performance of New Mesh Sheet for Stirling

Engine Regenerator”, 1st IECEC, Portsmouth, VA, Aug. 2003
     51 Dyson, R.W. : ”Towards Arbitrary Accuracy Inviscid Surface Boundary Conditions”, AIAA Paper 2002-2438, June

2002
     52 Makhkamov, K., Ingham, D.B. : ”Theoretical Investigations on the Stirling Engine Working Process”, A00-37715,

AIAA-2000-2815, 2000
     53 Makhkamov, K., Djumanov, D. : ”Three-dimensional CFD modeling of a Stirling engine”, ST TA1 15, 11th Int. Stirling

Engine Conf., Rome, Italy, Nov. 2003
     54 Mahkamov, K., Djumanov, D., Orunov, B., Korobkov, A. : ”A γ - Type Stirling Engine: Some Results of Second-Order

Numerical Simulations and Experimentals Tests”, 1st Int. Energy Conversion Eng. Conf., AIAA 2003-5933, Aug. 2003
     55 Gedeon, D., Tew, R. : Personal Communication, 2004
     56 Beam, R.M., Warming, R.F. : ”An Implicit Finite-Difference Algorithm For Hyperbolic Systems in Conservation Law

Form”, J. Comp. Phys., Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 87-110, 1976
     57 Shu, C., ”High-order Finite Difference and Finite Volume WENO Schemes and Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for

CFD”, Int. Journal of Comp. FluidDynamics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 107-118, 2003
     58 Blazek, J., ”Computational Fluid Dynamics: Principles and Applications”, Elsevier, New York, 2001
     59 Agarwal, R.K. and Halt, D.W., ”A Compact High-Order Unstructured Grids Method for the Solution of Euler equa-

tions”, Int. Journal For Numerical Methods in Fluids, Vol. 31, pp. 121-147, 1999
     60 Wang, G. and Sankar, L.N., ”Prediction of Rotorcraft Noise with aLow-Dispersion Finite Volume Scheme”, Vol. 38, No.

3, March 2000
     61 Rezgui, A., Cinnella, P., Lerat, A., ”Third-order Accurate Finite Volume Schemes for Euler Computations on curvilinear

meshes”, Computers & Fluids, Vol. 30, pp. 875-901, 2001
     62 Nance, D.V., Viswanathan, K., Sankar, L.N., ”Low-Dispersion Finite Volume Scheme for Aeroacoustic Applications”,

AIAA J., Vol. 35, No. 2, Feb. 1997
     63 Wang, Z.J. : ”The spectral-volume method for the Euler equations with high-order boundary representations”, Com-

putational Fluid and Solid Mechanics, K.J. Bathe (Editor), 2003
     64 Laney, C. B., ”Computational Gasdynamics”, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1998
     65 Stanescu, D., Habashi, W.G., ”2N-Storage Low Dissipation and Dispersion Runge-Kutta Schemes for Computational

Acoustics”, Journal of Computational Physics, Vol 143, no. 2, 1998, pp. 674.
     66 Ralston, A., Rabinowitz, P., ”A First Course in Numerical Analysis”, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1978.
     67 Anderson, J.D., ”Computational Fluid Dynamics: the Basics with Applications”, McGraw-Hill, 1995
     68 Hoffman, K.A., Chiang, S.T., ”Computational Fluid Dynamics ForEngineers – Volume II”, Engineering Education

System, Wichita, Kansas, 1993




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                           19
     69 Ferziger, J.H., Peric, M., ”Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics”, Springer-Verlag, 1999
      70 Goodrich, J.W., ”Accurate finite difference algorithms for computational aeroacoustics, ” in Computational Fluid Dy-

namics Review 1998, ed. M.M. Hafez and K. Oshima (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998).
      71 Jameson, A.; Schmidt, W.; Turkel, E.: ”Numerical Solutions of the Euler Equations by Finite Volume Methods Using

Runge-Kutta Time-Stepping Schemes. AIAA Paper 81-1259, 1981.
      72 H. Lomax, T.H. Pulliam, D.W. Zingg, ”Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics”, Springer-Verlag, 2001
      73 Collela, P., and Woodward, P.R. 1984. ”The Piecewise Parabolic Method (PPM) for Gas-Dynamical Simulations”,

Journal of Comp. Physics,54: 174-201.
      74 Daniele, C.J., Lorenzo, C.F. A Four-Cylinder Stirling Engine Computer Program with Dynamic Energy Equation,

NASA-TM-83053, May, 1983
      75 Lorenzo, C.F. and Daniele, C.J. A Four-Cylinder Stirling Engine Controls Model, NASA-TM-81648, Automotive Tech-

nol. Develop. Contractor Coordination Meeting, Dearborn, MI, Nov. 1980
      76 Daniele, C.J., Lorenzo, C.F. Preliminary results from a Four-Working Space, Double-Acting Piston, Stirling Engine

Controls Model NASA-TM-81569, Intersoc. Energy Conversion Eng. Conf., Aug. 1980
      77 Daniele, C.J., Lorenzo, C.F. Energy-state Formulation of Lumped Volume Dynamic Equations with Application to a

Simplified Free Piston Stirling Engine International Conference on Energy and the Environment, Pittsburgh, PA, May 1979
      78 Chen, N.C.J., and Griffin, F.P. A Review of Stirling Engine Mathematical Models, ORNL/CON-135, August, 1983.
      79 Weisend, J.G. : ”Handbook of Cryogenic Engineering”, Taylor & Francis, 1998
      80 Muskat, M. : ”The Flow of Homogeneous Fluids Through Porous MEdia”, McGraw-Hill, 1937
      81 Spanos, T.J.T. : ”The Thermophysics of Porous Media”, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2002
      82 Cortis, A. : ”Dynamic Acoustic Parameters of Porous Media; a theoretical, Numerical, and Experimental Investigation”,

Delft University Press, 2002.
      83 Ingham, D.B. : ”Transport Phenomena in Porous Media II”, Pergamon, 2002.
      84 Organ, A.J. : ”The Regenerator and the Stirling Engine”, Mechanical Engineering Publications Limited, 1997.
      85 Rizzo, J.G. : ”Modelling Stirling and Hot Air Engines”, Patrick Stephens, Wellingborough, 1985.
      86 Dragutinovic, G.D. and Baclic, B.S.: ”Operation of Counterflow Regenerators”, Volume 4, Computational Mechanics

Publications, Boston, 1998
      87 D. Y. Goswami, Kreith, F., Kreider, J.F. : ”Principles of Solar Engineering, 2nd Ed.”, Taylor & Francis, 2000
      88 Bauwens, L. : ”Numerical Modeling of Stirling Crycoolers”, AIAA 94-0130, 32nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit,

Jan., 1994.
      89 Hargreaves, C.M. : ”The Philips Stirling Engine”, Elsevier, New York, 1991.
      90 Organ, A.J. : ”Thermodynamics and Gas Dynamics of the Stirling Cycle Machine”, Cambridge University Press, 1992
      91 Bastian, P. : ”Higher Order Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Flow and Transport in Porous Media”, 2003
      92 Simon, T.W. and J.R. Seume : ”A Survey of Oscillating Flow in Stirling Engine Heat Exchangers”, NASA-CR-182108,

Mar. 1988.
      93 Gedeon, D. : ”Computational Techniques for the two-dimensional Gasdynamic Equations in Stirling Engine Regenerators

and Associated Manifolds”, 1985.
      94 Niu, Y., Ibrahim, M., Tew, R., Gedeon, D. : ”Measurements of Unsteady Convective Heat Transfer Rates Within a

Stirling Regenerator Matrix Subjected to Oscillatory Flow”, AIAA, 2003
      95 Niu, Y., Ibrahim, M., Tew, R., Gedeon, D. : ”Jet Penetration into a Stirling Engine Regenerator Matrix with Various

Regenerator-to-Cooler Spacings”, AIAA, 2003
      96 Adolfson, D.A., Simon, T.W., Ibrahim, M.B., Gedeon, D.: ”Unsteady Fluid Dynamics Simulation of a Stirling Engine

Heater Head”, AIAA, 1st Int. Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, Aug. 2003
      97 Bartolotta, P.A., Bowman, R.R., Krause, D.L., and Halford, G.R. : ”Long-term Durability Analysis of a 100,000+ HR

Stirling Power Convertor Heater Head”, AIAA, A00-37736, 2000
      98 Yuan, S.W.K. and Spradley, I.E. : ”A Third Order Computer Model for Stirling Refrigerators”, Advanced in Cryogenic

Engineering, Vol. 37, Part B, Plenum Press, New York, 1992
      99 Chung T.J.: ”Computational Fluid Dynamics”, Cambridge University Press, 2003
     100 Daniele, C.J., Lorenzo, C.F. : ”Preliminary Results from a Four-Working Space, Double-Acting Piston, Stirling Engine

Controls Model”, 15th IECEC, Aug., 1980.
     101 Taylor, D.R. : ”The method of characteristics applied to Stirling engines”, 19th IECEC, Aug. 1984
     102 Simon, T.W., Niu, Y., Sun, L. : ”Some Comments on Dynamic Similitude as Applied to Our Physical Simulations of

Stirling Engines”, Memorandum, Sept. 2003.
     103 Bauwens, L. : ”Pressure Gradients in Stirling Engines”, AIAA Paper 94-3956, 29th IECEC, 1994.
     104 Gogineni, S.P., Joslin, R.D., Gaitonde, D.V. : ”Fluid Dynamics”, Aerospace America, Dec. 2003.
     105 Guidry, D.J., Parker, J.T., McCandless, A.B., Motakef, S., Kelly, K.W. : ”X-Ray Lithography Fabricated Microchannel

Regenerators for Cryocoolers”, International Mezzo Technologies Report.
     106 : Tomlinson, B.J. : ”Parametric Cryocooler Performance Prediction Modeling”, AIAA 99-4626, Sept. 1999




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                          20
     107 : Qui, S., Peterson, A.A. : ”Linear Dynamic Modeling and Numerical Simulation of an STC Stirling Convertor”, 1st

Int. Energy Conv. Eng. Conf., Aug. 2003
     108 : Regan, T. : ”Free-Piston Stirling Convertor Controller Development at NASA Glenn Research Center”, 1st IECEC,

AIAA Paper 2003-5931, Aug. 2003
     109 : Guo, G., Kurzweg, U.H. : ”2D numerical simulation of heat transfer in a Stirling microrefrigerator model”, AIAA,

Thermophysics Conference, June, 1996.
     110 Ibrahim, M.B., Tew, R.C., Dudenhoefer, J.E. : ”Two-Dimensional Numerical Simulation of a Stirling Engine Heat

Exchanger”, NASA TM-102057, 24th IECEC, Aug. 1989.
     111 Allen, D.J., Cairelli, J.E. : ”Test Results of a 40-kW Stirling Engine and Comparison with the NASA Lewis Computer

Code Predictions”, NASA TM-87050, 20th IECEC, Aug. 1985.
     112 Oseid, K.L. : ”Numerical Prediction of Turbulent Oscillating Flow and Heat Transfer in Pipes with Various End

Geometries”, NASA CR 198416, Oct. 1995
     113 Koehler, W.J., Patankar, S.V., Ibele, W.E. : ”Numerical Prediction of Turbulent Oscillating Flow and Associated Heat

Transfer”, NASA CR 187177, Aug. 1991.
     114 Morgan, P.E., Visbal, M.R., Sadayappan, P. : ”Development and Application of a Parallel Implicit Solver for Unsteady

Viscous Flows”, Int. J. of Comp. Fluid. Dyn., 2002, Vol. 16(1), pp. 21-36
     115 Yonglin, J., Jiang, Y., Zhou, Y. : ”Experimental study of the oscillating flow Characteristics for a Regenerator in a

Pulse Tube Cryocooler”, Elsevier, Cryogenics, Vol. 38, pp. 649-656, 1998
     116 Gedeon, D. : ”Numerical advection errors in Stirling cycle nodal analyses”, IECEC, Aug. 1984.
     117 Walker, G., Senft, J.R. : ”Free Piston Stirling Engines”, Stirling Machine World, Springer-Verlag, 1985.




NASA/TM—2004-213300                                          21
                                                                                                                                               Form Approved
                       REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE                                                                                               OMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)                        2. REPORT DATE                               3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
                                                                   October 2004                                               Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE                                                                                                             5. FUNDING NUMBERS

       Review of Computational Stirling Analysis Methods

                                                                                                                                       WBS–22–972–30–01
6. AUTHOR(S)

       Rodger W. Dyson, Scott D. Wilson, and Roy C. Tew

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                                                8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
                                                                                                                                     REPORT NUMBER
       National Aeronautics and Space Administration
       John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field                                                                                    E–14747
       Cleveland, Ohio 44135 – 3191

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                                           10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
                                                                                                                                      AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
       National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                                                                                                                       NASA TM—2004-213300
       Washington, DC 20546– 0001
                                                                                                                                       AIAA–2004–5582

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

       Prepared for the Second International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference sponsored by the American Institute
       of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Providence, Rhode Island, August 16–19, 2004. Rodger W. Dyson and Roy C. Tew,
       NASA Glenn Research Center; Scott D. Wilson, Sest, Inc., 18000 Jefferson Park, Suite 104, Middleburg Heights,
       Ohio 44130. Responsible person, Rodger W. Dyson, organization code 5490, 216–433–9083.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT                                                                                          12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

       Unclassified - Unlimited
       Subject Categories: 20, 64, and 91                                           Distribution: Nonstandard
       Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
       This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301–621–0390.
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

       Nuclear thermal to electric power conversion carries the promise of longer duration missions and higher scientific data
       transmission rates back to Earth for both Mars rovers and deep space missions. A free-piston Stirling convertor is a
       candidate technology that is considered an efficient and reliable power conversion device for such purposes. While
       already very efficient, it is believed that better Stirling engines can be developed if the losses inherent its current designs
       could be better understood. However, they are difficult to instrument and so efforts are underway to simulate a complete
       Stirling engine numerically. This has only recently been attempted and a review of the methods leading up to and
       including such computational analysis is presented. And finally it is proposed that the quality and depth of Stirling loss
       understanding may be improved by utilizing the higher fidelity and efficiency of recently developed numerical methods.
       One such method, the Ultra HI-Fl technique is presented in detail.




14. SUBJECT TERMS                                                                                                                             15. NUMBER OF PAGES
                                                                                                                                                                   27
       High resolution; Efficient radioisotope; Prometheus                                                                                    16. PRICE CODE


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION                    18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION                      19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION                    20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
    OF REPORT                                      OF THIS PAGE                                     OF ABSTRACT
             Unclassified                                    Unclassified                                    Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500                                                                                                                      Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
                                                                                                                                          Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
                                                                                                                                          298-102

