---
title: U.S. Materials Science on the International Space Station: Status and Plans
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 20100005064
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20100005064
rights: Public-use permitted (NTRS copyright determination PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED); no third-party material
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONFERENCE_PAPER
center: Marshall Space Flight Center
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 6c3192e135c3920891025d22ea2b319778a8d795a600c1cba89f8032be4fdb03
pages: 21
words: 2456
cv_look_pages: 6
---

                U.S. Materials Science on the
             International Space Station: Status
                         and Plans
Presenter: Frank R. Szofran
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
                                      frank.szofran@nasa.gov
Francis P. Chiaramonte, Program Executive for Physical Sciences, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC 20546
Kenneth F. Kelton, Department of Physics, Washington U, St. Louis, MO 63130
Douglas M. Matson, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tufts U, Medford, MA 02155
David R. Poirier, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, U of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721
Rohit K. Trivedi, Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa State U, Ames, IA 50011
Ching‐Hua Su, EM30, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL 35812
Martin P. Volz, EM30, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL 35812
Peter W. Voorhees, Materials Science and Engineering Department , Northwestern U, Evanston, IL 60208
                               Status
• Current NASA plans for materials science on the ISS include seven
  current and two planned investigations
• All except one are or will be collaborations with European investigation
  teams—seven with ESA and one with CNES
• Two investigations have experiments that were launched to the ISS in
  2009
• The sole US‐only investigation will be launched in 2010 to be carried
  out in the Microgravity Science Glove Box
• Two levitator investigators have collaborated with ESA teams on
  proposals that have passed the science review and been
  recommended for funding—EML launch scheduled on ATV3 in October
  2011
• Experiments for two crystal growth investigations will be launched
  later, dates TBD
• ESA has invited two additional US investigators to join ongoing
  investigations
04 January 2010             AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                2
                  Current Plans
• Continue to participate in six ongoing
  collaborative investigations with ESA and
  CNES
• Carry out the MSG investigation
• Select and fund the two investigators
  recently invited by ESA
• Plan for a possible Materials Science
  NASA Research Announcement (NRA) in
  spring 2010
04 January 2010     AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida   3
      Investigations launched in 2009
• Dynamic Selection of Three-Dimensional Interface
  Patterns in Directional Solidification (DSIP)
      – This investigation will use the CNES-built DECLIC with the
        Directional Solidification Insert


• Comparison of Structure and Segregation in Alloys
  Directionally Solidified in Terrestrial and Microgravity
  Environments (MICAST/CETSOL)
      – This investigation will use the ESA-built Materials Science
        Laboratory and Low-Gradient Furnace which are contained in
        the Materials Science Research Rack built by NASA


• Both the DECLIC and the MSRR/MSL/LGF were
  launched on August 28 and both have completed
  commissioning of the hardware
04 January 2010             AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida             4
                  DECLIC in an EXPRESS Rack
                          DECLIC
DECLIC is a multi‐user facility to
investigate low and high temperature
critical fluids behavior, chemical
reactivity in supercritical water,
directional solidification of transparent
alloys, and more generally transparent
media under micro‐gravity environment
on board the International Space Station
(ISS).
                              DECLIC ‐ Dispositif pour
                              l'Etude de la Croissance
                              et des LIquide Critiques
                              (DEvice for the study of
                              Critical LIquids and
                              Crystallization).


                  Graphics and description taken from CNES web sites
04 January 2010                      AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida     5
        Dynamical Selection of Three‐Dimensional Interface
           Patterns in Directional Solidification (DSIP)
U.S. PI: Prof. Rohit Trivedi, Iowa State University
CNES Team Coordinator: Dr. B. Billia, Université Paul Cézanne, Marseille, France

Objective:                                                                                Ground‐based Research:

•   Understanding of dendrite evolution
•   Understand the dynamics that lead to uniform and
    reproducible three‐dimensional pattern formation                    Pertinent data
•   Obtain benchmark data establishing detailed dynamics                            are
    of interface pattern selection during the solidification of       overwhelmed by
    alloys                                                                gravitational
Relevance/Impact:                                                       effects in bulk
                                                                              samples.
•   Many industrial applications involve directional
    solidification
•   Pattern formation is vital for controlling microstructure
    in high temperature, high strength alloys
Development Approach:
•   Transparent alloy of succinonitrile will be used as an                ISS Accommodation            DECLIC
    analog of metallic alloys                                             Launch                       Shuttle flight 17A, August 28, 2009
•   Sample will be observed by microscopy, interferometry                 Experiments                  January 2010
    with a resolution of 5 microns with a sampling rate – up
    to 25Hz                                                         DECLIC ‐ Dispositif pour l'Etude de la Croissance et des Liquide
                                                                    Critiques.
•   Samples can be re‐run with different experimental
    conditions.                                                     •Accommodation will be CNES’s DECLIC equipment housed within an
                                                                    EXPRESS rack.
                                                                    •DSI, Directional Solidification Inert will be used.
    04 January 2010                             AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                          6
     Materials Science Research Rack (MSRR)
                                                                   Marshall Space Flight Center
   Project Manager: Jimmie Johnson/MSFC

Status:
• Operational aboard the ISS
Purpose:
• To provide a facility onboard the
  ISS to conduct materials science
  research/technology experiments
Relevance/Impact:
• The MSRR can be utilized for multi‐
  Program tasks
• The MSRR will accommodate the
  operation of the European Space
  Agency Materials Science
  Laboratory (MSL)
   04 January 2010                 AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                  7
              Materials Science Laboratory
          Built by EADS Astrium for ESA

Status:
• Operational aboard the ISS
  with the LGF
Purpose:
• Provide operational
  support for furnaces
  including
    – Low Gradient Furnace
    – Solidification and
      Quenching Furnace
Relevance/Impact:
• The MSL can be utilized for                            http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/materials/facilities/facilities/msl.html

  multi‐Program tasks
   04 January 2010                        AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                       8
         Comparison of Structure and Segregation in Alloys Directionally Solidified in
              Terrestrial and Microgravity Environments (MICAST/CETSOL)
U.S. CSS PI: Prof. David Poirier, The University of Arizona
ESA MICAST Team Coordinator: Dr. L. Ratke, Inst. of Materials Physics in Space, DLR, Germany
ESA CETSOL Team Coordinator: Prof.Charles‐André Gandin, ARMINES‐ENSMP‐CEMEF, France

NASA Objectives and Contributions:
• Defects in directionally solidified dendritic
                                                              Development Approach:
  alloys result in production losses.                         • The MICAST team will focus on microstructure
  Misalignment of dendrite arms and                             control during directional solidification,
  macrosegregation are produced by                              particularly in Al‐Si alloys.
  uncontrolled convection.                                    • CETSOL will investigate pattern formation in
• NASA’s interest is in enhancing the                           castings, particularly the transition from
  mathematical modeling of solidification with                  columnar to equiaxed.
  global objectives.
Relevance/Impact:                                                 ISS Accommodation                LGF & MSL within MSRR
• Many industrial applications involve directional
                                                                  Launch                           Shuttle flight 17A, August 2009
  solidification. Convective effects are significant,
  particularly in today’s more complex alloys.                    Experiments                      February and June 2010

                                                                  LGF – Low Gradient Furnace, MSL – Materials Science Laboratory

                       Flight Samples                             MSRR – Materials Science Research Rack




     04 January 2010                        AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                          9
    Coarsening in Solid‐Liquid Mixtures‐2 Reflight (CSLM‐2R)


                     MSG has
                     been
                     performing
                     research on
                     ISS since
                     2002


                                                       CSLM‐2 in the Microgravity Science
                                                       Glovebox on board the ISS




                                         ISS Accommodation        Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG)
                                         Launch                   Shuttle Flight 19A, March 2010
                                         Return                   May 2010




04 January 2010        AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                           10
                                     CSLM-2R
  PI: Peter W. Voorhees, Northwestern University

Objective:
• Support the development and improve the                               Ground‐
  accuracy of theoretical models of the                                 Based
  Ostwald Ripening (coarsening) process.                                Sample
• Determine the factors controlling the
  morphology of solid‐liquid mixtures during
  coarsening.
• Determine the kinetics of the coarsening
  process, the spatial distribution of the
  particles, and the particle size distribution as
  function of the volume fraction of solid.
Relevance/Impact:                                                       CSLM‐2 30%
• CSLM‐2 R results will provide input that will                         high volume
  improve design codes that are based on                                sample from
  incomplete models and databases.
                                                                        ISS Increment
• CSLM‐2 R will thus aid in the development
  of new high‐temperature materials, such as                            16
  those used in nuclear propulsion and waste
  heat coolant loops.


     04 January 2010                    AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida             11
          Crystal Growth Investigations
• The experiments planned for the two crystal
  growth investigations will also use the
  MSRR/MSL/LGF
      – Crystal Growth of Ternary Compound
        Semiconductors (GTS/CdTe)
      – Reduction of Defects in Germanium Silicon (RDGS)




04 January 2010        AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida   12
                        Crystal Growth of Ternary Compound Semiconductors
                                             (GTS/CdTe)
                         Crystallization of Cadmium‐Telluride and Related Compounds
    US CGT/CdTe PI: Dr. Ching‐Hua Su, NASA MSFC
    ESA Team Coordinator: Dr. Michael Fiederle, Freiburg, Germany

NASA Objectives and Contributions:                                               Ground‐based Research
• In crystal growth there is a need to understand the relation
  between processes in the fluid phase, both liquid and vapor,
  such as buoyancy driven convection, the incorporation of
  impurities, and defects in the resulting crystal
• Relation between fluid phase processes and the generation
  of defects in a grown crystal is an outstanding problem in
  materials growth
• Studies in microgravity will be compared with modeling and
                                                                      Crystal terraces on this ZnSe (110) facet are
    will be used to optimize ground‐based experiments
                                                                      separated by ~0.5 mm on the freshly grown surface
Relevance/Impact:                                                     and were measured between 20 and 60 nm height.
                                                                      Facets tend to align parallel to gravity vector.
• Ternary compound semiconductors are of vital national
  interest as sensors in x‐ray telescopes and for homeland
  security, and as substrate materials for infrared sensors.
                                                                                        ISS Accommodation          LGF & MSL within MSRR
Development Approach:                                                                   Launch                     TBD
•  Vapor transport and directional solidification will be
  investigated in CdZnTe.                                                       LGF – Low Gradient Furnace, MSL – Materials Science Laboratory,
• Phase equilibria and other thermodynamic properties are                       MSRR – Materials Science Research Rack
  being studied on the ground.
      04 January 2010                           AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                       13
            Reduction of Defects in Germanium Silicon (RDGS)
   U.S. RDGS PI : Dr. Martin P. Volz, NASA MSFC
   ESA Team Coordinator : Dr. Arne Cröll, University of Freiburg, Germany
NASA Objectives and Contributions:                            Float Attached Detached
                                                              Zone Solidification Solidification
• Partially detached crystals can be grown on Earth
• Test the theory that solidification free of wall                feed
                                                                   rod
                                                                                                                        Detached
  contact reduces defect density.
• Evaluate competing theories for the production of              melt
                                                                 zone
                                                                            melt      melt

  critical materials by testing different growth
  configurations and using the space environment                                                                        Attached
                                                                           crystal
                                                                 crystal             crystal
Relevance/Impact:
• Defects in semiconductor substrates propagate
  into the final electronic devices thereby reducing                                               Two order of magnitude
  their performance                                                                                reduction in etch pits when
• Ideal is a breakthrough in understanding and                                                     grown detached.
  control of detached terrestrial growth in many
  materials of technological and commercial
  interest.

Development Approach:
• NASA will concentrate on Bridgman growth, with             ISS Accommodation                 LGF & MSL within MSRR
  the German team working on float zone.                     Launch                            TBD
• German teams will make use of free flyers (FOTON)
                                                             LGF – Low Gradient Furnace, MSL – Materials Science Laboratory
• Flight experiments will be done in LGF/MSL/MSRR
                                                             MSRR – Materials Science Research Rack

     04 January 2010                      AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                       14
                  Levitator Investigations
• Two US investigators have written joint
  proposals with European investigators to use
  the DLR‐ESA Electromagnetic Levitator
  planned for the Columbus Orbiting
  Laboratory.
• Proposals were submitted to the ESA 2009 AO
  and have passed the science
  review.


04 January 2010          AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida   15
            Quasi‐Crystalline Undercooled Alloys for Space
                        Investigation (QUASI)
U.S. PI: Dr. Kenneth Kelton, Washington University in St. Louis
ESA Team Coordinator:
Objectives:
•   Tests of Nucleation Theories
•   Determine influence of liquid solid short‐range order on thermophysical properties
•   Determine dependence of growth mechanism on the complexity of the crystallizing phase
•   Study the influence of fluid flow on the growth kinetics and microstructure formation during solidification
    of structurally complex solid phases
Fundamental Scientific Questions:
• What are the local structures of undercooled metallic liquids?
• Does the evolving liquid structure underlie novel behavior such as mode‐coupling and fragile‐to‐strong
  transitions, and the glass transition?
• Does the liquid local structure couple with the nucleation barrier as predicted by Frank?
• Do predictions from the Classical and Coupled‐Flux Theories agree with data for undercooled liquid alloys?
• What influence does fluid flow have on the crystal growth velocity during solidification of undercooled
  liquids and on the microstructure formation?
Practical Importance:
• Provide data for numerical modeling of thermophysical materials properties in the stable and undercooled
  liquid
• Provide insight for development of new advanced products to reduce energy consumption and
  environmental pollution and guarantee sustainable growth.
                                                                       ISS Accommodation   Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) in
                                                                                           Columbus Orbiting Facility
                                                                       Launch              ATV3 in October 2011

    04 January 2010                          AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                           16
          The Role of Convection and Growth Competition in
            Phase Selection in Microgravity (LODESTARS)
    U.S. PI: Dr. Douglas Matson, Tufts University
    ESA Team Coordinator:

Objectives:
• Obtain a comprehensive understanding of the processes
  involved in phase selection and the transformation kinetics          Ground‐based Research (Electrostatic Levitator)
  for developing models to control properties in commercially                                                         200
                                                                                                                                      y



  important structural materials solidifying from the
  undercooled melt.
                                                                                                                      150




                                                                                                    Pixel Intensity
• Propose a new transformation theory to explain the                                                                  100




  influence of convection on phase selection                                                                          50
                                                                                                                            0   50       100
                                                                                                                                     Frame Number
                                                                                                                                                    150     200




                                                                         Austenite (yellow) growth from primary ferrite (red)
Relevance/Impact:                                                                                                                      y




• Applicable to alloys including ternary austenitic Fe‐Cr‐Ni
  steel alloys, soft magnetic FeCo peritectic alloys, and
  titanium aluminide compositions used in turbine blade
  applications.                                                                                                        0        50       100          150         200
                                                                                                                                     Frame Number


                                                                      Austenite growth directly from supercooled liquid (grey)
Development Approach:
• Using containerless techniques establish a data base to test
  dendritic growth models over a wide range of undercoolings
• Determine the mechanism for stable phase nucleation by
  defining how convection influences the delay time over a                ISS Accommodation         Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) in
                                                                                                    Columbus Orbiting Facility
  broad range of fluid flow conditions
• Determine the relationship between alloy composition and                Launch                    ATV3 in October 2011
  kinetics of the transformation from metastable phase
  formation to final stable phase microstructure to define the
  solidification path for these important alloy systems
      04 January 2010                           AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                                                                           17
   Planned Additional Investigations

• ESA has invited NASA to provide US investigators
  for two additional ongoing investigations
      – SETA (Solidification along an Eutectic path in Ternary
        Alloys, Dr. Stephan Rex, team coordinator)
      – METCOMP (Metastable solidification of Composites:
        Novel peritectic structures and in‐situ composites,
        Prof. Michel Rappaz, team coordinator)
• NASA is working to identify and fund investigators
  for SETA and METCOMP

04 January 2010          AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida           18
                              SETA
• The work of SETA is the investigation of
  morphological transitions and coupled growth
  configuration in two‐phase (univariant) and
  three‐phase (nonvariant) eutectics growing
  from a ternary liquid. The investigation
  includes:
      – Solidification of ternary aluminum alloys
      – Solidification of transparent model materials
      – Modeling calculations


                                                        MSRR/MSL SCA

04 January 2010         AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                  19
                   METCOMP

• The aim of METCOMP is
  to improve the processing
  of commercial peritectic
  alloys through
  microstructure control,
  e.g. through the
  development of a phase
  selection model, and of a
  model predicting the
  pushing/ engulfment of
  particles by a growing
  dendritic front.
                                                    Astronaut Frank De Winne works with MSRR on‐
                                                    orbit

04 January 2010     AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida                                         20
                  Materials Science NRA

A NASA Research Announcement (NRA) for materials science is
   possible in the spring of 2010. This will be for ground‐based work
   with the possibility of transitioning to a flight investigation.
• Therefore, investigations based on experiments compatible with
   the Low Gradient Furnace (LGF) or the Solidification and Quenching
   Furnace (SQF) will be solicited. Depending on the ingenuity of the
   proposer, subject areas might include, among others:
      – Metals and alloys
      – Electronic Materials
      – Ceramics
      – Glasses
• Use of other International Partner hardware may also be offered
• Among proposals rated excellent for science, preference will be
  given to those judged more likely to support the advancement of
  NASA and other nationally needed technologies

04 January 2010                AIAA ASM‐48, Orlando, Florida        21

