---
title: Swept-Wing Ice Accretion Characterization and Aerodynamics
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 20140009586
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20140009586
rights: Public-use permitted (NTRS copyright determination PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED); no third-party material
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Glenn Research Center
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 54fb3ba40e3176fa3a509e9693c7680434839bd9995928b2fe9657a2e4d1d965
pages: 34
words: 13217
cv_look_pages: 6
---

NASA/TM—2013-216555                                                         AIAA–2013–2824




Swept-Wing Ice Accretion
Characterization and Aerodynamics
Andy P. Broeren and Mark G. Potapczuk
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

James T. Riley
FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center, Atlantic City Airport, New Jersey

Philippe Villedieu
ONERA, The French Aerospace Laboratory, Toulouse, France

Frédéric Moëns
ONERA, The French Aerospace Lab, Meudon, France

Michael B. Bragg
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois




September 2013
                                        NASA STI Program . . . in Profile



Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the            •   CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The                 papers from scientific and technical
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI)                   conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain                 meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
this important role.
                                                              •   SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices                  technical, or historical information from
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects,             NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates               concerned with subjects having substantial
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access                  public interest.
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports              •   TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections             language translations of foreign scientific and
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world.               technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which              Specialized services also include creating custom
includes the following report types:                          thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
                                                              and publishing research results.
•   TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
    completed research or a major significant phase           For more information about the NASA STI
    of research that present the results of NASA              program, see the following:
    programs and include extensive data or theoretical
    analysis. Includes compilations of significant            •   Access the NASA STI program home page at
    scientific and technical data and information                 http://www.sti.nasa.gov
    deemed to be of continuing reference value.
    NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal                  •   E-mail your question to help@sti.nasa.gov
    professional papers but has less stringent
    limitations on manuscript length and extent of            •   Fax your question to the NASA STI
    graphic presentations.                                        Information Desk at 443–757–5803

•   TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific                          •   Phone the NASA STI Information Desk at
    and technical findings that are preliminary or                443–757–5802
    of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
    reports, working papers, and bibliographies that          •   Write to:
    contain minimal annotation. Does not contain                  STI Information Desk
    extensive analysis.                                           NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
                                                                  7115 Standard Drive
•   CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and                             Hanover, MD 21076–1320
    technical findings by NASA-sponsored
    contractors and grantees.
NASA/TM—2013-216555                                                         AIAA–2013–2824




Swept-Wing Ice Accretion
Characterization and Aerodynamics
Andy P. Broeren and Mark G. Potapczuk
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

James T. Riley
FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center, Atlantic City Airport, New Jersey

Philippe Villedieu
ONERA, The French Aerospace Laboratory, Toulouse, France

Frédéric Moëns
ONERA, The French Aerospace Lab, Meudon, France

Michael B. Bragg
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois


Prepared for the
5th Atmospheric and Space Environments Conference
sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
San Diego, California, June 24–27, 2013




National Aeronautics and
Space Administration


Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135




September 2013
                                                    Acknowledgments




The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of their respective organizations in this collaborative research effort. Specific
contributions to this paper were provided by the University of Illinois under NASA Cooperative Agreement NNX12AB04A and
FAA Cooperative Agreement 10-G-004. The authors thank Jeff Diebold, Gustavo Fujiwara, Brock Wiberg and Brian Woodard
at University of Illinois and Cris Bosetti, Abdi Khodadoust, Adam Malone, Ben Paul and John Vassberg at the Boeing Company
for their contributions to this paper. Eric Kreeger and Mary Wadel at NASA Glenn Research Center provided additional technical
and management review. The NASA-support portion of this research effort is funded under the Atmospheric Environment Safety
Technologies Project of the NASA Aviation Safety Program.




                              Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identification
                                 only. Their usage does not constitute an official endorsement,
                                 either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and
                                                    Space Administration.


                   Level of Review: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.



                                                        Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information                                                   National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive                                                                                       5301 Shawnee Road
Hanover, MD 21076–1320                                                                                  Alexandria, VA 22312


                                      Available electronically at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
                             Swept-Wing Ice Accretion
                         Characterization and Aerodynamics
                                Andy P. Broeren and Mark G. Potapczuk
                             National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                        Glenn Research Center
                                        Cleveland, Ohio 44135

                                             James T. Riley
                                FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center
                                Atlantic City Airport, New Jersey 08405

                                         Philippe Villedieu
                                  ONERA, The French Aerospace Lab
                                     F-31055, Toulouse, France

                                         Frédéric Moëns
                                  ONERA, The French Aerospace Lab
                                     F-92190, Meudon, France

                                            Michael B. Bragg
                               University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
                                         Urbana, Illinois 61801

                                               Abstract
     NASA, FAA, ONERA, the University of Illinois and Boeing have embarked on a significant,
collaborative research effort to address the technical challenges associated with icing on large-scale,
three-dimensional swept wings. The overall goal is to improve the fidelity of experimental and
computational simulation methods for swept-wing ice accretion formation and resulting aerodynamic
effect. A seven-phase research effort has been designed that incorporates ice-accretion and aerodynamic
experiments and computational simulations. As the baseline, full-scale, swept-wing-reference geometry,
this research will utilize the 65 percent scale Common Research Model configuration. Ice-accretion
testing will be conducted in the NASA Icing Research Tunnel for three hybrid swept-wing models
representing the 20, 64 and 83 percent semispan stations of the baseline-reference wing. Three-
dimensional measurement techniques are being developed and validated to document the experimental
ice-accretion geometries. Artificial ice shapes of varying geometric fidelity will be developed for
aerodynamic testing over a large Reynolds number range in the ONERA F1 pressurized wind tunnel and
in a smaller-scale atmospheric wind tunnel. Concurrent research will be conducted to explore and further
develop the use of computational simulation tools for ice accretion and aerodynamics on swept wings.
The combined results of this research effort will result in an improved understanding of the ice formation
and aerodynamic effects on swept wings. The purpose of this paper is to describe this research effort in
more detail and report on the current results and status to date.

                                             Nomenclature
c        chord length
s        surface distance measured from leading edge
x        chordwise coordinate



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                 1
y     spanwise coordinate (vertical coordinate for airfoils)
z     vertical coordinate
AR    aspect ratio
Cl    sectional lift coefficient
Cd    sectional drag coefficient
CP    pressure coefficient
M     Mach Number
Re    Reynolds Number
V     velocity
α     angle of attack
λ     taper ratio
Λ     sweep angle
CFD   Computational Fluid Dynamics
CRM   Common Research Model
CRM65 Common Research Model geometry at 65 percent scale
FAA   Federal Aviation Administration
IRT   Icing Research Tunnel
LWC   Cloud liquid water content
MVD   Median volumetric diameter
NACA National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
ONERA Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aérospatiales
RPM   Rapid Prototyping Manufacturing
WSU   Wichita State University

1.0     Introduction
    Ice accretion and its aerodynamic effect on highly three-dimensional swept wings are extremely
complex phenomena important to the design, certification and safe operation of small and large transport
aircraft. There is increasing demand to balance trade-offs in aircraft efficiency, cost and noise that tend to
compete directly with allowable performance degradations over an increasing range of icing conditions.
Computational fluid dynamics codes have reached a level of maturity that they are being proposed by
manufacturers for use in certification of aircraft for flight in icing. However, sufficient high-quality data
to evaluate their performance on iced swept wings are not currently available in the public domain.
Significant knowledge gaps remain for swept-wing geometries and supercooled, large-droplet icing
conditions including freezing drizzle and freezing rain. NASA, in collaboration with FAA, ONERA and
University of Illinois, has developed a multi-phase research effort to address some of these knowledge
gaps. This paper provides an overview of this research effort and a summary of progress to date.
    This research effort is modeled after a previous successful international collaboration that
investigated aerodynamic effects and ice accretion simulation for airfoils and straight wings (Refs. 1 to
18) The overall goal of the previous collaboration was to provide high-fidelity, full-scale, iced-airfoil
aerodynamic data and validated subscale-model simulation methods that produce the essential full-scale
aerodynamic characteristics. The research was organized into six phases involving icing wind tunnel and
aerodynamic wind tunnel experiments with both subscale and full-scale models using the NACA 23012
airfoil. An important initial step in this research was the classification of ice accretion according to the
aerodynamic effect on the flowfield. This provided a framework within which the ice accretion and
aerodynamic testing was conducted. The NASA IRT was used to generate the ice accretion using both


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   2
subscale and full-scale models. Aerodynamic testing was performed at the ONERA F1 pressurized wind
tunnel using a 72 in. (1.83 m) chord, full-span, unswept, NACA 23012 airfoil model with high-fidelity,
three-dimensional castings of the IRT ice accretions. Performance data were recorded over a large range
of Reynolds number, up to 15.9×106 and Mach numbers from 0.10 to 0.28. This generated a large, high-
quality, benchmark, iced-airfoil aerodynamic database. Lower-fidelity simulation methods were
developed and tested on an 18 in. (0.46 m) chord NACA 23012 airfoil model at the University of Illinois
wind tunnel at lower Reynolds number. The aerodynamic accuracy of the lower-fidelity, subscale ice
simulations was validated against the full-scale results for a factor of 4 reduction in model scale and a
factor of 8 reduction in Reynolds number. Methods were developed for designing lower-fidelity artificial
ice shapes for subscale models. The completed research defined the level of geometric fidelity required
for artificial ice shapes to yield aerodynamic performance results to within a known level of uncertainty.
This previous work has led to a more complete understanding of ice contamination aerodynamic effects
on airfoils. This is an important building block, but a fundamental question remains as to how relevant
these 2-D data are to 3-D swept-wing geometries.
     Swept-wing icing has been a significant research area of interest for many years. This work has
mostly focused on icing physics studies aiding in the development of computational simulation tools
(Refs. 19 to 30). Icing physics studies have been conducted to understand the physics of formation of ice
accretions on swept wings and to develop models that allow their prediction. The development of
computational simulation tools centers on the continuous improvement of codes such as LEWICE3D
which predict particle trajectories and ice accretions for 3-D configurations. While this work is critical to
understanding the relevant physical factors, it has mostly been conducted on small-scale geometries, often
using NACA 0012 airfoil sections or circular cylinders. In order to continue the advancement of 3-D icing
simulation tools, new validation data are needed for large-scale, modern, swept-wing configurations.
Relevant 3-D ice accretion geometries must be documented in order to continue the validation efforts for
the current array of icing simulation tools.
     There exist in the public domain a small number of aerodynamic studies for iced-swept wings. A
fundamental study of the flowfield on a subscale rectangular swept wing using a NACA 0012 airfoil
section was conducted with a simulated, glaze-ice accretion (Refs. 31 to 34) The 3-D velocity
measurements on the iced wing were complemented with CFD simulations to develop a good
understanding of the ice-shape effect on the flowfield. In 2001, a research program involving FAA,
NASA and WSU was conducted to develop an experimental database of ice accretion effects on
aerodynamic performance of a finite swept wing (Refs. 35 to 37). An icing test was conducted in the
NASA IRT on a subscale wing having 28° sweep and GLC-305 airfoil section. High-fidelity ice casting
simulations were generated for aerodynamic testing in the WSU 7- by 10-ft wind tunnel at a Reynolds
number of 1.8×106. While this study utilized high-fidelity artificial ice shapes, the small model scale and
low-Reynolds number limit the applicability of the results to a full-scale airplane. Reehorst et al. (Refs. 38
and 39). also conducted a low-Reynolds number aerodynamic study of icing effects on a realistic, fully
three-dimensional, 12.5 percent scale model of a twin-engine, short-haul commercial transport. The
authors considered various roughness size scaling approaches for the small-scale and low-Reynolds
number investigation. Despite the low-Reynolds number at which the data were acquired, this effort
resulted in a large database of icing effects on a full-aircraft configuration. Aerodynamic testing of a full-
scale, swept-wing, business jet, T-tail model was performed under the auspices of the NASA/FAA
Tailplane Icing Program, Phase II (Ref. 40 and 41). While the T-tail model results are, in general,
certainly applicable to the swept-wing icing aerodynamics research described here, no 3-D ice-shape
configurations were tested.
     The very brief literature review contained herein has cited a number of significant research efforts in
swept-wing ice accretion characterization and aerodynamics. There are a number of low-Reynolds
number aerodynamic databases for relatively simple geometries. The ice-accretion research conducted has
also led to a good fundamental understanding of the important physical processes, but mostly at small
scale. There is very little ice accretion geometry information for large-scale, modern design, swept wings
in the public domain known to the authors. For example, the mean aerodynamic chord length can range


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   3
from approximately 10 ft (3 m) for regional jets to 30 ft (9.1 m) for wide-body airplanes. Similarly, the
authors are also unaware of any high-Reynolds number aerodynamic performance and flowfield data
illuminating the effect of ice on swept-wing aerodynamics that is available in the public domain.
     Three-dimensional computational and experimental icing simulation tools are becoming increasingly
common in icing analysis for modern transport airplanes. Manufacturers are proposing the use of CFD
codes for certification of aircraft for flight in icing conditions. However, validation data are very limited,
particularly for large-scale swept wings that are typical of modern commercial airplanes. Thus it is
difficult to determine how much confidence can be placed in results from CFD codes used in design, and
particularly in certification. Furthermore, an understanding of the icing effects on swept-wing
aerodynamics is critical to evaluating the accuracy to which ice accretion must be predicted by
computational tools or simulated in aerodynamic testing. For example, it is known for some cases that
swept-wing ice accretion can be highly three dimensional (e.g., “scallops” or “lobster tails”), which is
discussed below in Section 2.1. An important question is how much detail of that three-dimensionality is
critical to the aerodynamic performance and therefore must be accurately simulated. In addition, basic
swept-wing aerodynamic effects such as the spanwise flow and configuration dependence play an
important role. An understanding of scale effects, including Reynolds and Mach number, is needed in
order to develop lower cost aerodynamic test techniques for iced swept wings. Valid tests conducted at
smaller scale and lower Reynolds number hold potential for developing a more complete understanding of
the aerodynamics. Both full-scale and subscale research is needed to develop and validate computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation tools used to predict the aerodynamics of iced-wing configurations. All
of these factors have provided motivation for collaborative research effort in this arena.
     NASA, FAA, ONERA, the University of Illinois and Boeing, have embarked on a significant,
collaborative research effort to address the technical challenges associated with swept-wing icing. The
overall goal of ensuring continued flight safety will be achieved by improving the fidelity of experimental
and computational simulation methods for swept-wing ice accretion formation and resulting aerodynamic
effect. There are three specific objectives:

    •   Generate a database of 3-D, swept-wing, ice-accretion geometries for icing-code development
        and validation and for aerodynamic testing.
    •   Develop a systematic understanding of the aerodynamic effect of icing on swept wings including:
        Reynolds and Mach number effects, important flowfield physics and fundamental differences
        from 2-D.
    •   Determine the level of ice-shape geometric fidelity required for accurate aerodynamic simulation
        of swept-wing icing effects.

     A seven-phase research effort has been designed that incorporates ice-accretion and aerodynamic
experiments and computational simulation to address these objectives. This is depicted schematically in
Figure 1. Phase I is a review of the technical literature associated with iced swept-wing aerodynamics
with emphasis on classifying ice accretion based upon key aerodynamic features of the flowfield. This
research provides an organizational framework for the icing and aerodynamic experiments conducted in
later phases. The research conducted in Phase II will identify the baseline swept-wing model to be used
for the experiments and computational analysis. In addition, measurement techniques will be developed to
document, in 3-D, the experimental ice-accretion geometries. Aerodynamic measurement techniques
suitable to iced swept-wing experiments will also be investigated. The icing tests conducted in Phase III
will generate a large database of ice-accretion geometries on realistic large-scale swept wings. Artificial
ice shapes of varying geometric fidelity will be developed for aerodynamic testing over a large Reynolds
number range in Phases IV and V. Exploring the effects of geometric fidelity and Reynolds number will
require final validation tests in Phase VI. The research conducted in Phase VII will explore and further
develop the use of computational simulation tools for ice accretion and aerodynamics on swept wings.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   4
            Figure 1.—Seven-phase research effort designed to investigate large-scale swept wing ice
              accretion and aerodynamics.

Each phase has a number of technical challenges that must be overcome in order for the research
objectives to be achieved. The purpose of this paper is to describe these technical challenges in more
detail and report on the current results and status to date.

2.0     Initial Research Results and Plans
2.1     Phase I: 3-D Ice Accretion Classification
     Ice accretion is often described in terms of its appearance or composition, such as glaze, rime, clear,
mixed, runback, beak, and intercycle among others. While this terminology may be useful for
characterizing the visual attributes of ice accretion, it may not be as useful when the objective is to
understand the aerodynamic effects. Bragg et al. (Refs. 3 and 4) examined the icing aerodynamics
literature and developed four fundamental types or categories based upon the flowfield physics that was
unique to each category. This research was directed at the essentially 2-D aspects of iced airfoils.
Categorizing ice accretion in this way provided an aerodynamic framework for the research designed to
quantify the effects of geometric fidelity on iced-airfoil aerodynamics. This proved to be a successful
approach and was identified as an important part of the swept-wing icing research effort.
     Ice accretion formations on swept wings can have unique characteristics. Depending upon specific
icing conditions and sweep angle, the region of the attachment line on the ice accretion may not be
smooth as is often the case for straight wings. This is depicted in Figure 2 that shows an example of initial
roughness and a large rime-ice accretion on a swept wing. For glaze icing, certain combinations of icing
conditions and sweep angle can lead to the formation of highly 3-D features called “scallops” or “lobster
tails” that do not exist for ice accretions on airfoils. An example of this type of swept-wing ice accretion
is shown in Figure 3. It is also possible to have glaze ice accretion with no scallops or incomplete scallop
formations on swept wings (Ref. 19).



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                    5
        Figure 2.—Photographs of initial roughness (left) and rime ice (right) accreted on a NACA 0012
          wing having 45° leading-edge sweep in the NASA Glenn Icing Research Tunnel.
                                                                                          3
          Aerodynamic and icing conditions were V = 200 kn, α = 0°, LWC = 0.45 g/m , MVD = 32 μm,
          total temperature = 20 °F (left) and 1 °F (right), exposure time = 2 min (left) and 20 min (right);
          adapted from Broeren et al. (Ref. 42).




        Figure 3.—Photographs of complete scallop glaze ice accreted on a NACA 0012 wing having
          45° leading-edge sweep in the NASA Glenn Icing Research Tunnel. Aerodynamic and icing
                                                               3
          conditions were V = 200 kn, α = 0°, LWC = 0.45 g/m , MVD = 32 μm, total temperature =
          20 °F, exposure time = 20 min; after Broeren et al. (Ref. 42).



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                      6
    Broeren et al. (Ref. 42) have prepared an extensive review of the existing data on swept-wing ice
accretion and aerodynamics. The existing data tend to be: (1) mostly at low-Reynolds number and (2)
applicable to simple swept-wing geometries that do not have high-lift systems, wing-mounted engines,
fuselages and other features of actual airplane wings. These factors can significantly alter the iced
aerodynamics for particular configurations and so extreme caution must be exercised in terms of making
general conclusions based upon the current, limited database. Given what is known from the existing data,
the same four classifications, or fundamental categories used for iced airfoils were suggested: (1)
roughness, (2) horn ice, (3) streamwise ice and (4) spanwise-ridge ice. Instead of relying upon ice-
accretion terminology such as rime and glaze, the four aerodynamic groups have names associated with
ice-shape geometry. Broeren et al. (Ref. 42) describe the unique flowfield features of each group that
determine the iced-swept-wing aerodynamics.

      •   Ice roughness represents initial leading-edge ice accretion and a key aerodynamic characteristic is
          that the scale of the boundary-layer separation is of the same order as the size of the roughness.
          How this small, separated flow region interacts with the spanwise flow is unknown.
      •   Horn ice is large, leading-edge ice accretion that can be associated with glaze icing conditions.
          The flowfield is characterized by large-scale, boundary-layer separation originating at the horn.
          This separation leads to the formation of a spanwise-running, leading-edge vortex that is similar
          to that found on clean swept wings with leading-edge separations. The small amount of existing
          data indicate that there are fundamental flowfield differences between nominally 3-D horn ice
          characterized by no scallop formations versus highly 3-D horn ice characterized by fully
          developed scallop formations. Diebold et al. (Ref. 43) provide a more detailed description of this
          complex flowfield.
      •   Streamwise ice can be associated with rime icing conditions and is generally conformal to the
          wing leading edge, or may form a horn-like feature (or protuberance) oriented into the flow
          direction. The only example of this group cited by Broeren et al. (Ref. 42) showed an increase in
          wing maximum lift coefficient with the streamwise ice. While this effect is thus known to be
          possible, it is not expected to hold for most cases and illustrates the need for further wing
          performance data and flowfield information with realistic streamwise ice simulations.
      •   Spanwise-ridge ice can be associated with droplet impingement and ice formation aft of the area
          covered by an ice-protection system in supercooled, large-droplet icing conditions or with
          incomplete evaporation of impinging water. The leading edge is free of ice with an ice ridge
          located downstream often in the range of 10 to 15 percent chord. Broeren et al. (Ref. 42) describe
          data from only one low-Reynolds number study for very simple geometric representations of
          spanwise-ridge ice on a swept wing.

The lack of data noted for streamwise and spanwise-ridge ice was also true to a lesser degree for
roughness and horn ice. The result was an inability to fully develop the classification system. Therefore,
Broeren et al. (Ref. 42) make a number of specific recommendations where more data are needed and
thus provide additional guidance for this research effort. It is likely that the classification system will be
revisited as more data become available. In this sense, the Phase I research is an ongoing effort
throughout the course of the project.

2.2       Phase II: Ice Accretion and Aerodynamic Measurement Methods Development
    The research conducted in Phase II provides the necessary foundation for the experimental and
computational work to be conducted in the latter phases. The Phase II research is organized into three
areas:

      1. Defining the baseline, full-scale, swept-wing model geometry to be used for the research effort;
      2. Developing and validating methods to measure highly 3-D ice accretion;


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                    7
      3. Developing the appropriate measurement methods to quantify the iced-swept wing aerodynamics.

Significant progress has been achieved in each of these areas and is briefly described here.

2.2.1      Baseline Model Selection
     For this research to be useful and relevant, it is important to select a baseline, swept-wing model
geometry that is representative of current, modern design civilian transport airplanes. The selection
process was complex given the large number of variables, such as sweep angle, aspect ratio, mean
aerodynamic chord and wing span. An additional requirement was for all of the geometry to be non-
proprietary and non-export controlled. After reviewing the available options, the Common Research
Model geometry was selected (Ref. 44). The Boeing Company provided the design of the CRM for a
previous joint experimental effort with NASA which fabricated test articles and conducted aerodynamic
testing (Refs. 45 and 46). The CRM geometry was also used as part of the AIAA Drag Prediction
Workshops (Ref. 47). The model, shown in Figure 4 with and without the engine nacelle/pylon, includes a
fuselage that is representative of a wide-body commercial transport airplane. The 35° swept wing has a
contemporary transonic supercritical design that is well behaved with and without the nacelle/pylon
structure. Table I provides a comparison of the CRM wing geometry with existing wide-body airplanes. A
key advantage to the CRM is that all of the geometry information, CFD analysis and experimental data
are available in the public domain. This fact, coupled with its modern design, make the CRM an ideal
baseline reference model for this research.
     The fact that the CRM is representative of a wide-body transport airplane means that the physical size
is very large compared to that of many other swept-wing airplanes such as single-aisle commercial
transports including regional and business jets. The large physical size of the CRM wing presents specific
challenges to both the ice-accretion and aerodynamic testing. Large-scale wing ice-accretion testing
requires the design of “hybrid” or “truncated” models where the full-scale leading-edge geometry is
matched to a shortened or truncated afterbody. This design process is the subject of Phase III of the




Figure 4.—Conceptual design of the Common Research Model with and without engine nacelle/pylon, after Vassberg
  et al. (Ref. 44).

         TABLE I.—COMPARISON OF CRM WING GEOMETRY WITH EXISTING WIDE-BODY AIRPLANES(a)
         Airplane       Span,     Mean aerodynamic Area,      Aspect     Taper     Sweep
                          ft           chord,        ft2      ratio(b)  ratio(b)  angle, c/4
                                         ft
  CRM                   192.8           23.0       4,130        9.0      0.28        35°
  Airbus A330-200/300   198.0           23.9       3,892        9.5      0.22        30°
  Boeing 777-200        199.9           26.5       4,389        8.7      0.27        31°
  Boeing 787-9          197.0           20.6       3,880        9.6      0.18        32°
  Boeing 747-400        211.4           29.8       5,417        7.7      0.28        37°
(a)
  Data for existing wide-body airplanes was compiled from publically available sources that may use different conventions to define the
geometric parameters.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                                    8
research effort described in Section 2.3. The large physical size of the CRM wing requires a very
aggressive design for the hybrid model that presents greater risk of adverse effects when installed in the
NASA IRT. For aerodynamic wind-tunnel testing, the full-scale CRM wing can be scaled to an
appropriate size for the facility. In the case of the ONERA F1 wind-tunnel, an 8 percent scale model of
the CRM would be of appropriate size. While this is not unreasonable for the clean, baseline model
geometry, such a large scale reduction becomes challenging when the goal is to accurately simulate ice-
accretion geometry that typically includes small roughness. Typical ice-roughness sizes on the full-scale
model ice accretion could be in the range of 0.04 to 0.08 in. (1 to 2 mm) which is equivalent to 0.003 to
0.006 in. (0.08 to 0.16 mm) on the 8 percent scale aerodynamic model. Small roughness features of this
size are very challenging to accurately reproduce on the artificial ice shapes developed for aerodynamic
testing. Based upon these factors, the research team decided to use a 65 percent scale version of the CRM
as the full-scale, baseline, reference geometry for this research. Table II provides a comparison of the
CRM65 geometry with that of existing single-aisle commercial transport airplanes. The geometries are
similar in scale with only the CRM65 sweep angle being considerably larger. More detailed geometry
information for the CRM65 wing semispan is shown in Figure 5. Using the CRM65 as the full-scale,
baseline, reference geometry for this research reduces potential risks associated with the ice-accretion and
aerodynamic testing while still being representative of current transport airplanes.

     TABLE II.—COMPARISON OF CRM65 WING GEOMETRY WITH EXISTING SINGLE-AISLE AIRPLANES(a)
        Airplane       Span,    Mean aerodynamic Area,     Aspect      Taper       Sweep
                         ft          chord,        ft2     ratio(b)    ratio(b)   angle, c/4
                                       ft
  CRM65                125.3          15.0       1,745       9.0        0.28         35°
  Airbus A320          112.0          14.1       1,320       9.5        0.21         25°
  Boeing 737-800       112.6          13.0       1,341       9.5        0.16         25°
  Boeing 757-200       124.8          16.7       1,847       7.8        0.21         25°
(a)
    Data for existing single-aisle airplanes was compiled from publically available sources that may use different conventions to define the
geometric parameters.



  CRM 65 Wing Geometry
    • Semispan = 62.7 ft
    • Root chord (symmetry plane) = 29.0 ft
    • Root chord (fuselage side of body) = 25.4 ft
    • Tip chord = 5.8 ft
    • Mean aerodynamic chord = 15.0 ft
    • Semispan area = 873 ft2
    • Aspect Ratio = 9.0
    • Taper Ratio = 0.28
    • Sweep angle (c/4) = 35°


                                                                                             Yehudi break, 37% semispan




                                                                                          Fuselage side of body, 10% semispan

                                                                                         Symmetry plane
         Figure 5.—Summary of CRM65 wing geometric characteristics, adapted from Vassberg et al. (Ref. 44)




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                                      9
2.2.2   3-D Ice Accretion Measurement
     Generating a database of 3-D experimental ice-accretion geometries and associated artificial ice
shapes for subsequent aerodynamic testing requires a robust measurement system. Standard ice-accretion
documentation methods are generally 2-D, such as cross-sectional tracings and qualitative, such as
photographs. While these methods have been used for many years, they have significant shortcomings
when used for the potentially highly 3-D ice accretions that can occur on swept wings (cf. Figure 2 and
Figure 3). For example, Bosetti et al. (Ref. 48) show a comparison of three dissimilar tracings of the same
ice shape along the span of a swept wing. The best current technology for capturing 3-D features of ice
accretion is the mold and casting method. This has been used for many years using various materials and
was improved at NASA Glenn during the 1980s using more robust materials to improve accuracy and
durability (Ref. 49). A significant disadvantage to this method is that there is no digitized record of the ice
accretion. Therefore, the present objective is to develop a method to accurately and efficiently digitize ice
accretion in 3-D. Furthermore, the data must be processed and archived so that: (1) comparisons to ice-
accretion code results can be performed; (2) artificial ice shapes can be readily fabricated for aerodynamic
testing; and (3) the geometry may be readily adapted for CFD simulations.
     NASA is leading the effort to adapt commercial laser-based scanning methods that can quantify the
full three-dimensional features of ice accretion in the IRT. Lee et al. (Ref. 50) describe the significant
progress that has already been made in accomplishing this task. Demonstration tests of several different
scanning systems and software were conducted in the IRT and evaluated against a set of pre-defined
criteria. It was found that the scanning technology and capability was similar over the range of systems
evaluated. An articulated-arm based system was selected because it required minimal modifications to the
existing IRT test-section resulting in fewer risks during use.
     Several different software packages were considered for post-processing of the data. The processing
steps included combining individual scans, developing a surface mesh and filling holes or gaps in the scan
data. The most critical software function for working with ice scan data is the ability to create closed,
watertight surfaces of the highly irregular, rough features of ice accretion. Through a series of hardware
demonstrations, it was determined that the Geomagic software package has the capability to process
irregular “organic” surfaces like those typical of ice accretion. The software is also able to create data
files that can be used for various rapid prototyping manufacturing methods. Such methods can be used to
fabricate artificial ice shapes from the scan data. The software also has exact surfacing capability that can
be used to develop grids for computational analysis. Having selected and purchased the scanner and
software system, the next step was conducting validation research to define the capability.
     The scanner system validation research was divided into two parts: one for straight wing ice shapes
and another part dedicated to swept-wing ice shapes. Both of these activities are currently underway. In
the former case, an aerodynamic validation will be conducted. Ice-accretion testing has been completed
using an 18-in. chord NACA 23012-airfoil, straight-wing model in the IRT. Several different ice
accretions were generated ranging from small roughness to large, glaze-horn shapes. The ice accretion
was measured with the scanning system and then a mold was made of that ice accretion. Subsequently,
artificial ice shapes were fabricated using the casting method from the molds and from RPM methods
based upon the 3-D scan data. These artificial ice shapes will be mounted to the leading edge of a NACA
23012 airfoil model for aerodynamic testing at the University of Illinois Low-Speed, Low-Turbulence
wind tunnel. The result will be an aerodynamic effect comparison between artificial ice shapes produced
from molds and castings vs. shapes produced from 3-D scans and RPM methods. Figure 6 shows a
comparison of pencil tracing of the ice castings to cross-sections extracted from the scan data. A common
feature in the comparison is that the pencil tracings tend to be much smoother than the scan data. This was
expected since the pencil tracing does not have high enough resolution to capture small geometry
variations in the ice accretion. More significant differences such as that observed for the ED1978 case on
the upper surface near x/c = 0.0 can usually be attributed to spanwise variation in the ice accretion
geometry combined with small differences in the spanwise location of a pencil tracing vs. the scan-data
cross section. Overall, there is excellent agreement in Figure 6 between the digitized pencil tracings and
the cross-sections extracted from the scan data.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   10
                                NACA 23012                                           NACA 23012
                                ED1978 Scan                                          ED1977 Scan
                                ED1978 Tracing                                       ED1977 Tracing
            0.06
                                                                     0.10

            0.04

            0.02                                                     0.05
      y/c




                                                               y/c
            0.00
                                                                     0.00
         -0.02

         -0.04                                                   -0.05
             -0.04 -0.02 0.00     0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08                 0.00     0.05              0.10     0.15
                                  x/c                                                     x/c
                                NACA 23012                                           NACA 23012
                                ED1966 Scan                                          ED1967 Scan
                                ED1966 Tracing                                       ED1967 Tracing
            0.10                                                     0.10


                                                                     0.05
            0.05
      y/c




                                                               y/c



                                                                     0.00

            0.00
                                                                 -0.05


         -0.05                                                   -0.10
                      0.00       0.05      0.10        0.15          0.00   0.05   0.10         0.15     0.20   0.25
                                  x/c                                                     x/c
            Figure 6.—Comparison of ice accretion cross-sections taken from digitized pencil tracings and
              3-D digital scan data for four IRT runs (ED1966, ED1967, ED1977 and ED1978) on an 18-in.
              chord NACA 23012 straigt wing model.




    The validation plan for swept-wing ice shapes includes a geometric comparison between the 3-D laser
scan data and 3-D obtained from other methods such as commercial computed tomography (CT)
scanning. A significant challenge associated with swept-wing ice accretion is obtaining scan data within
the highly 3-D features such as “scallops” or “lobster tails.” The arm-based, laser-scanning system uses a
“line-of-sight” method that cannot acquire data within small surface gaps. In this case, more manual
intervention during post-processing is required in order to create closed or watertight surfaces. As shown
in Figure 7, reasonable qualitative results can be obtained. Non-line-of-sight based scanning methods will
be investigated to evaluate the accuracy of the laser-based system for highly 3-D ice geometries. The
results of this work will be presented in future reports and papers.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                       11
          Figure 7.—Comparison of 3-D scan data (left) with photograph (right) of an IRT ice accretion,
            after Lee et al. (Ref. 50).

2.2.3   Aerodynamic Measurement Methods
      An aerodynamic framework for classifying swept-wing ice accretion based upon unique flowfield
features was described in Section 2.1. Identifying these flowfield features and their contribution to the
resulting aerodynamic performance degradation is key to satisfying the objectives of this research effort
as described in the Introduction (Section 1.0). In addition to analyzing standard performance data such as
lift, drag and pitching moment, it is important to understand the characteristics of the flowfield that drive
the changes in performance. Flowfield information is also required for the continued development and
validation of computational simulation tools. The development of flowfield measurement methods
contributes to the planned high- and low-Reynolds number testing of the scaled CRM swept wing with
artificial ice shapes.
      This methods development effort has been carried out at small scale and very low-Reynolds numbers
at the University of Illinois. Diebold et al. (Refs. 51 to 53) describe the application of pressure sensitive
paint and wake survey techniques to iced swept wings. These experiments were conducted on an
approximately 2 percent-scale, modified CRM wing model with an artificial leading-edge ice shape.
Figure 8 shows a comparison of pressure-sensitive paint results with surface-oil flow visualization on the
iced wing upper surface. The iced wing is stalled at this angle of attack. The flow visualization indicates
that there was a spanwise-running, leading-edge vortex on the inboard portion of the wing. The
reattachment line (also shown in Figure 9) is evident in the sharp streamwise pressure gradient between
the low- and high pressure regions (centered near Cp ≈ –1.2) measured using pressure-sensitive paint. The
surface-pressure data have the ability to quantify the three-dimensional flow separation features observed
in the oil-flow patterns. These results are especially encouraging given the known challenges associated
with pressure-sensitive paint measurements at low-dynamic pressure.
      The wake flowfield surveys were conducted using a 5-hole pressure probe to yield total and static
pressure in addition to all three velocity components. Shown in Figure 9 is again the surface-oil flow
visualization image from Figure 8 along with the velocity measured in the wake. In this figure, the
regions of significant flow separation on the iced wing are correlated to regions of higher streamwise
momentum deficit in the wake. For example, consider the stalled region on the wing nominally located at
0.6 < 2y/b < 0.8 which the wake survey data have quantified. It is expected that the contribution to the
iced wing profile drag measured in this region would be significant.


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                     12
                              CP
                                    -3     -2.5     -2         -1.5      -1     -0.5     0

               Figure 8.—Comparison of surface oil flow visualization (left) with
                 pressure-sensitive paint (right) results for scale swept wing with
                                                               6
                 artificial ice shape at α = 6.5°, Re = 0.6×10 and M = 0.15, after
                 Diebold et al. (Ref. 51).



                                                  Secondary
                                                  Separation


                                                                                Reattachment
                                                                                Lines




                       Attached
                       Inboard
                       Section              Vortex                    Stalled
                                                                      Region
                       0.15
                        0.1                                                                            u/U∞
                       0.05                                                                                   0.99
                                                                                                              0.97
                2z/b




                         0                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                                              0.93
                   -0.05                                                                                      0.91
                       -0.1                                                                                   0.89

                   -0.15
                              0.2    0.3      0.4        0.5      0.6     0.7      0.8       0.9   1
                                                                 2y/b
               Figure 9.—Comparison of surface oil flow visualization (top image) with
                 3-D wake surface data; contours of streamwise velocity with vectors
                 of transverse velocity for scale swept wing with artificial ice shape at
                                        6
                 α = 6.5°, Re = 0.6×10 and M = 0.15, after Diebold et al. (Ref. 51).




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                               13
     In fact Diebold et al. (Ref. 52 and 53) have demonstrated this to be the case through careful
integration of the wake survey data. As shown in Figure 10, the integration yields the spanwise
distributions of lift and both profile and induced drag for the stalled flowfield of the clean and iced wing.
Comparison of the absolute values for the clean and iced configurations is complicated by the significant
difference in angle of attack. The results for the iced configuration, however, can be directly compared to
the results in Figure 8 and Figure 9. The spanwise distribution of lift shows a significant decrease in the
region nominally located at 0.6 < 2y/b < 0.8 identified in Figure 9 as stalled. As indicated, this
corresponds to a significant increase in the profile drag. Data similar to that shown in Figure 8 to Figure
10, acquired for realistic ice shapes at reasonable Reynolds number, have the potential to provide the
flowfield information necessary to understand changes in swept-wing performance due to the artificial ice
shapes as well as the effects of ice-shape geometric fidelity.




     Figure 10.—Comparison of spanwise distributions of lift and drag as measured on the scale swept wing at
                            6
       α = 6.5°, Re = 0.6×10 and M = 0.15, after Diebold (Ref. 52).




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                    14
     These methods have been investigated by many researchers and are well established. What is unique
in this case is the potential challenges presented by the complexities of an iced swept-wing flowfield. For
airfoils, it was found that the addition of artificial ice geometries often resulted in large-scale unsteady,
three-dimensional and separated flow. These situations can challenge the implementation of and
interpretation of results from the selected measurement methods. The research conducted in Phase II will
work to address these concerns while building a foundation of experience in processing and analyzing
these data.

2.3        Phase III: Ice-Accretion Testing
     Ice-accretion testing will be conducted during Phase III generating an ice-accretion geometry
database to be used for icing code validation and aerodynamic experiments. The design of ice-accretion
experiments for the IRT is complicated by the typical large scale of swept wings on transport airplanes
such as the CRM. As previously described in Section 2.2.1, the large chord length of the CRM65 wing
requires a hybrid design approach in order to generate representative, full-scale ice accretion in the 6- by
9-ft IRT test section. A hybrid swept-wing model preserves the full-scale leading-edge geometry in order
to obtain ice accretions representative of the full-scale airplane, but requires a custom-designed aft section
to maintain the droplet impingement and leading-edge flow characteristics and resulting ice shape. Since
the span of CRM65 wing is much larger than the IRT test section, certain spanwise sections of the wing
must be selected for the hybrid model design and subsequent ice accretion testing. The University of
Illinois-Boeing team is leading the research effort to address these technical challenges to help ensure the
successful completion of the ice-accretion testing. This work is being conducted under four main tasks:

      1.   Selection of airplane mission and corresponding flight and icing conditions;
      2.   Simulation of the full-scale icing conditions;
      3.   Design and simulation of hybrid model wing sections in 2-D;
      4.   Design and simulation of hybrid model wing sections in 3-D.

     As described in Section 2.2.1, the full-scale flight baseline airplane selected for this work is the
CRM65. The approach in the first two tasks is to generate flowfield and ice-shape information in realistic
flight and icing conditions. These results, such as the location of the attachment line along the wing,
collection efficiency and ice-shape profiles then become the reference standard for the 2-D and 3-D
hybrid model design studies carried out in the latter two tasks. Significant progress has been achieved in
these areas and is briefly described here. The development of these hybrid model design methods is also a
significant outcome of this phase of the research effort.

2.3.1      Selection of Airplane Mission and Corresponding Flight and Icing Conditions
    A set of icing mission scenarios was defined that were typical of large commercial transport airplanes
and included climb, cruise, hold and descent phases of flight. The selection of airplane weights, flight
speeds, altitudes and angles of attack for each flight phase was appropriate for an airplane of the CRM65
class. The selected icing conditions were based upon the Code of Federal Regulations Part 25 Appendix C
continuous maximum envelope and thus defined droplet MVD, cloud LWC and temperature.

2.3.2      Simulation of Full-Scale Icing Conditions
     The large matrix of flight and icing conditions defined in task 1 were reviewed and a smaller number
of cases were selected for further analysis. This subset of icing scenarios provided for a range of ice
accretion on the full-scale airplane, while significantly reducing the workload associated with analyzing
all cases. Flow simulations were performed at each of the selected flight conditions using the 3-D RANS
code OVERFLOW (Ref. 54), thus generating a large database of flowfield information for the clean,
flight baseline of the full-scale airplane. The flowfield solution was used as input to the LEWICE3D ice-
accretion prediction code to generate ice-shape results for the corresponding flight conditions. Some


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   15
results are shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12 for a flight condition at 10,000 ft altitude, speed = 232 kn,
static temperature = –4 °C, airplane angle of attack = 3.7°, droplet MVD = 20 μm, cloud LWC = 0.55
g/m3 and an exposure time of 45 min. The contours of local collection efficiency in Figure 11 show the
location of water impingement on the nose section of the fuselage and wing leading edge. The close-up
view near the wing tip illustrates the regions of highest local collection efficiency. Figure 12 depicts the
LEWICE3D generated ice shapes at several locations along the span of the wing. Close up views are
shown near the wing root and tip sections. For this case, the predicted ice shape is a large upper-surface
horn. Results of this type were generated for all of the icing cases selected for analysis.




     Figure 11.—LEWICE3D local collection efficiency results for CRM65, droplet MVD = 20 μm, V = 232 kn,
       altitude = 10,000 ft.




       Figure 12.—LEWICE3D ice shape results for CRM65, droplet MVD = 20 μm, V = 232 kn, altitude =
                                  3
         10,000 ft, LWC = 0.55 g/m , static temperature = -4 °C, 45-min exposure.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   16
                  Figure 13.—Normalized horn thickness and horn angle taken from the
                    LEWICE3D results shown in Figure 12.

     The LEWICE3D results were analyzed to understand the spanwise variation in the predicted ice
geometry. The maximum thickness of the ice and the angle associated with that maximum thickness
location were calculated along the span of the wing. For the ice shapes shown in Figure 12, this represents
the length of the ice horn and the angle of the horn with respect to the chord line at each wing station.
These data are plotted in Figure 13 where the horn length and ice thickness are normalized by the local
chord length. In this figure, the horn length is measured from the tip of the horn to the center of the
leading-edge radius whereas the ice thickness is the portion of this length from the wing surface to the
horn tip. The data show that for this case, the normalized ice thickness tends to increase from the root to
about 50 percent semispan, where there is a decrease. The normalized ice thickness then tends to increase
from about 55 percent semispan outward to the wing tip. These plots were generated and scrutinized for
each set of LEWICE3D cases.
     A major outcome of this task was the selection of the spanwise locations to be used for the hybrid
model designs. Determining the number of spanwise locations to select required a balance of competing
factors. In this research effort, each of the selected locations will be used as the basis for the design of a
hybrid swept-wing model to be constructed and tested in the IRT. Selecting a large number of spanwise
locations provides the highest fidelity representation of the ice accretion along the entire wing. Since the
hybrid model design process will result in large and complex models, practical considerations of time and
resources limit the total number that can be successfully constructed and tested in the IRT. Estimates of
model size, time to complete the hybrid-model designs, fabrication cost, number of IRT test days
required, and cost of IRT testing were developed. After reviewing these estimates it was decided that
selecting three spanwise stations for further analysis provided a reasonable balance of the competing
factors.
     An additional factor for selecting three spanwise stations was driven by the expectation that these
stations should be located near the wing: (1) root, (2) midspan and (3) tip. The section near the wing root,
or inboard station, was selected to be at 20 percent semispan because this corresponded to the minimum
horn-ice angle for nearly all of the icing cases analyzed. This is the case for the data shown in Figure 13.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                  17
Figure 14.—Sketches of CRM65 wing showing selected hybrid model design stations at 20, 64, 83 percent semispan.

The midspan station was selected to be at 64 percent semispan because this corresponded to the maximum
horn-ice angle for nearly all of the icing cases analyzed. This is also illustrated in Figure 13. The section
near the tip, or outboard station, was selected to be at 83 percent semispan. This location approximates the
outboard extent of the wing leading-edge ice protection system in some cases, thus making the icing
characteristics significant for that reason. This location is also about halfway between the 64 percent
semispan station and the wing tip. These three wing stations are shown graphically in Figure 14.

2.3.3   Design and Simulation of Hybrid Model Wing Sections in 2-D
     The design of hybrid models for icing tests where the full-scale leading-edge geometry is combined
with a truncated afterbody has been explored by Saeed et al. (Refs. 55 to 57 Past research was conducted
primarily for 2-D wing sections and for moderate model sizes that did not require special consideration of
tunnel wall interference effects. In the current effort, these 2-D design methods were adapted to the
swept-wing geometry and extended to include the effects of the tunnel walls on the large-blockage-model
flowfield. Fujiwara et al. (Ref. 58) provide a detailed description of this process along with the results to
date. Therefore, only a brief example of interim results is provided here. As the design process is
currently on-going, these results are likely to change prior to the completion of this task.
     In simple infinite-swept wing theory, the flow at a spanwise wing station is approximated by the flow
about the leading-edge-normal airfoil section at the appropriate 2-D Mach number and angle of attack.
Since 2-D hybrid airfoil design methods are relatively well developed, the first step in the swept-wing
wind-tunnel model design process takes advantage of these 2-D tools to produce a representative 2-D
hybrid airfoil. Then, in a later process (Section 2.3.4), this is extended into a 3-D swept-wing model and
validated using 3-D simulation tools and results.
     As an example, the hybrid model design process was conducted for the wing station at 64 percent
semispan. The airfoil used for the analysis was taken perpendicular to the leading edge. A comparison of
the airfoil geometries and surface pressure coefficient results are shown in Figure 15. The full-scale
leading edge was maintained in the hybrid airfoil to x/c = 0.05 on the upper surface and x/c = 0.10 on the
lower surface. These limits were set based upon the expected ice accretion limits from the LEWICE3D
results on the full-scale airplane described in the previous section. Downstream of these locations the
hybrid airfoil contour was significantly different from the full-scale airfoil and includes a single-element,
trailing-edge flap. The total chord length of the hybrid airfoil (including the flap) is about half the size of
the full-scale chord length. The flap plays an important role in the hybrid design method since it can be
used to adjust the airfoil circulation and thus the leading-edge flowfield (stagnation point, minimum
pressure coefficient, etc.) and as a result, provides additional means of matching the full-scale conditions.


NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   18
The pressure coefficient comparison in Figure 15 shows what is considered to be typical matching of the
hybrid and full-scale surface pressure in the region of the leading edge and stagnation point which is of
importance for matching the local collection efficiency and resulting ice shape. It is not expected that the
hybrid and full-scale pressures should match downstream of the leading-edge region since the airfoils are
significantly different. The goal of the hybrid airfoil design methodology is to provide the best matching
to the full-scale local collection efficiency and leading-edge flowfield and, as a result, the ice shape. This
comparison is shown in Figure 16 where the agreement is very good for this optimized hybrid design.
These hybrid and full-scale airfoil results were generated using LEWICE (a 2-D code). However, the 3-D,
full-scale, OVERFLOW and LEWICE3D ice-shape results are also used in the hybrid design process.
Figure 16 shows a comparison of the hybrid model and full-scale, LEWICE3D ice shapes. This example
illustrates that the hybrid model design process can effectively simulate the full-scale icing results with a
significantly smaller model. Additional research is underway to address the effects of the tunnel walls in
both 2-D and 3-D simulations.

                                   -3
                                                                                                       Full Scale               - α =4°
                                   -2                                                                  Hybrid+Flap 11° - α =4°
                          Cp




                                   -1

                                   0

                                   1
                                        0       0.1     0.2      0.3      0.4         0.5        0.6     0.7        0.8         0.9


                               0.2

                               0.1
                         y/c




                                   0


                               -0.1

                                            0   0.1     0.2      0.3     0.4      0.5           0.6    0.7     0.8        0.9         1
                                                                                  x/c
                         Figure 15.—Comparison of full-scale and hybrid airfoil geometry and surface
                           pressure distribution for 64 percent semispan station. (Note: these are
                           interim results intended as an illustrative example.)

    0.5
                                                                                       0.04
                                                Full Scale           - α =4°
    0.4                                                                                0.03
                                                Hybrid+Flap 11° - α =4°
                                                                                       0.02
    0.3
                                                                                       0.01                                     Clean
                                                                                y/c
β




                                                                                                                                Full Scale Iced            - α =4°
    0.2                                                                                     0                                   Full Scale Iced (LEWICE3D) - α =4°
                                                                                                                                Hybrid+Flap 11° Iced       - α =4°
                                                                                      -0.01
    0.1
                                                                                      -0.02

                                                                                      -0.03
          -0.1   -0.05         0        0.05      0.1         0.15     0.2                                0           0.02                0.04    0.06
                                        s/c                                                                                     x/c

Figure 16.—Comparison of full-scale and hybrid airfoil local collection efficiency and ice shape results for 64 percent
  semispan station. (Note: these are interim results intended as an illustrative example.)



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                                             19
               Figure 17.—Conceptual sketch of 3-D hybrid swept-wing model in IRT test section.

2.3.4   Design and Simulation of Hybrid Model Wing Sections in 3-D
     Having demonstrated computationally in task 3 that the 2-D hybrid airfoil, coupled with infinite
swept-wing theory, can accurately generate the ice accretion at a section of a finite swept wing, the full-
span, 3-D IRT model can be designed. In the IRT testing, the 3-D hybrid model is used to generate the ice
accretion found at one spanwise station of the full-scale swept wing, which significantly simplifies the
hybrid model design process. The 2-D hybrid airfoil sections are extended and swept to create the 3-D
models for testing in the IRT. Consistent with infinite-swept-wing theory, these models have zero twist
and zero taper greatly simplifying the design and ultimately, the construction of the models.
     Once the models are designed, they must be validated using sophisticated 3-D computational tools
capable of modeling the aerodynamics, droplet impingement and ice accretion in the realistic, highly 3-D,
IRT environment. The analysis to be carried out includes 3-D flow simulations along with LEWICE3D
simulations for the hybrid model in the IRT test section. These results will be evaluated against the full-
scale flight baseline results described in Section 2.3.2 to determine if any design changes are needed. A
conceptual sketch of a 3-D hybrid model in the IRT test section is shown in Figure 17. The large size of
the model relative to the test-section dimensions indicates the importance of the 3-D flow simulations.
This work is currently in progress and the results will be presented in future reports and papers.
     The completion of the hybrid model design tasks will lead to the construction of the three models
representing the 20, 64 and 83 percent semispan stations of the full-scale wing. A series of ice-accretion
test campaigns in the NASA IRT are planned in order to build the database of swept-wing ice accretion
required for validation of icing simulation tools, fabrication of artificial ice shapes for aerodynamic
testing and for CFD simulations of the iced swept wing.

2.4     Phase IV: High-Reynolds Number Aerodynamic Testing
    High-Reynolds number aerodynamic testing will be conducted in Phase IV. A test campaign is
planned for the ONERA F1 wind tunnel to investigate the aerodynamic effect of artificial ice shapes on
the CRM65 wing. The F1 wind tunnel is a large-scale pressure tunnel having a test section 11.5 ft high by
14.8 ft wide. A scaled, semispan model of the CRM65 wing will be designed and built to mount in the
wind-tunnel force balance. A preliminary model sizing analysis has been carried out for the swept wing.
The main constraints on the geometry are the model span relative to the test-section height and the
blockage defined as the ratio of the model planform area relative to the test-section area. While a large
model is desirable to increase Reynolds number and the physical size of the artificial ice-shape
geometries, a small model is desirable to mitigate tunnel-wall interference effects that can compromise
the quality of the aerodynamic data. A sizing study was conducted to investigate these trade-offs. The best
compromise was determined to be a 12.8 percent scale model with semispan that is 70 percent of the test-



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                  20
section height and planform area that is 8.5 percent of the test-section area. Dimensionally, this
corresponds to a semispan of 8 ft and mean aerodynamic chord of 1.8 ft. The model aspect ratio and taper
ratio are the same as for the full-scale CRM65 wing.
     Aerodynamic testing will be performed up to a Reynolds number based upon mean aerodynamic chord
of 10×106 and up to a Mach number of 0.3. In addition to standard force balance and surface pressure
measurements, more detailed measurements are being investigated as described in Section 2.2.3. A series of
full-span artificial ice shapes will be designed and built using the 3-D scan geometries from the IRT tests of
the 20, 64 and 83 percent semispan stations of the CRM65 wing. One technical challenge associated with
this effort is developing the full-span artificial ice shapes based upon the 3-D scan data from only three
discrete spanwise stations tested in the IRT. It is anticipated that different lofting and interpolation methods
will be used to design the artificial ice shapes. In addition, artificial ice shapes based upon the LEWICE3D
simulation results may also be tested. A large number of configurations will be explored with varying levels
of geometric fidelity. An important objective for the Phase IV research is determining the level of geometric
fidelity required for the artificial ice shapes in order to yield accurate iced-wing aerodynamics. This will
result in a large database of high-fidelity, iced-swept wing aerodynamic data at Reynolds numbers
significantly higher than what is currently available in the public domain.

2.5     Phase V: Low-Reynolds Number Aerodynamic Testing
     A series of low-Reynolds number aerodynamic test campaigns are planned for Phase V in order to
develop a lower cost test capability for iced swept wings. There are several closed-return atmospheric wind
tunnels in the United States with test section sizes of approximately 7 ft by 10 ft. One of these facilities will be
selected for a series of low-Reynolds number aerodynamic test campaigns using a scaled, semispan model of
the CRM65 wing that is very similar to that used for testing in the ONERA F1 wind tunnel. It is anticipated
that the maximum Reynolds number based upon mean aerodynamic chord will be 2×106 at a Mach number of
0.25. Aerodynamic measurements similar to Phase IV are planned. An important objective of Phase V is to
quantify the differences in aerodynamic performance and key flowfield features between the low- and high-
Reynolds number testing. If these differences prove to be small, the low-Reynolds number facility can be used
for a variety of other investigations. For example, a series of ice-shape sensitivity tests could be conducted to
explore the effects of ice feature size, shape and location making it possible to identify certain critical cases.
The low-Reynolds number facility could also be used for more detailed flowfield measurements using more
sophisticated methods such as Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV).

2.6     Phase VI: High-Reynolds Number Validation Testing
    For Phase VI, a second high-Reynolds number test campaign using the ONERA F1 wind tunnel is
planned in order to conduct validation testing of critical ice shape cases identified in Phase V. In a large
effort such as this, it is anticipated that all iced-wing configurations of interest cannot be tested in Phase
IV. After conducting more detailed research at low-Reynolds number (in Phase V), it is expected that
more ice-shape configurations of interest will be identified. It is also possible that significant Reynolds
number effects will be identified. Therefore, further tests may be required at the end of this research effort
in order to validate the final conclusions. The research conducted in this phase will “close-the-loop” on
our understanding of swept-wing icing effects, generating an improved understanding and both
experimental and computational simulation tools.

2.7     Phase VII: 3-D Ice Accretion and Flowfield Computational Simulation
    In Phase VII, computational studies will be performed to identify the elements of the computational
simulation process that are critical for accurate ice-shape predictions and reproduction of the
aerodynamics of iced swept-wing geometries. This research is being conducted in parallel with the other
tasks throughout the duration of the project. Computational research efforts will be undertaken using the
geometric data of the CRM, ice shapes and the aerodynamic data from the experiments to evaluate current
CFD capabilities with respect to simulation of iced swept-wing aerodynamics.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                      21
     Prior to any ice-accretion prediction, an accurate evaluation of the aerodynamic performance of the
clean semispan wing as designed for the aerodynamic testing in Phases IV and V has to be performed, as it
will be used as reference for the estimation of the performance degradation due to ice. Therefore, a first part
of the computational activity will consider some parametric studies on the semispan clean wing in the wind-
tunnel configuration. Among the different factors to be considered for simulation are clean aircraft flow
characteristics, proper selection of grid resolution, turbulence models, and steady or unsteady calculations.
Other factors that can have a significant influence on the final solution (experimental set-up, Reynolds
number effect, model deformations under loaded conditions due to pressurization) will also be investigated.
     The added complexity of ice-shape geometries introduces the need to determine the degree of surface
feature fidelity that can be and must be captured in the simulation to produce acceptable computational
results. The evaluation of the aerodynamic performance of the wing with ice shapes will be mainly
investigated using “standard” grid techniques (structured or unstructured meshes), with a detailed
resolution up to the wall.
     An initial look at what might be done with ice shape information from this program is show in Figure
18. This figure demonstrates the process of using 3-D scan data from an actual ice shape as input to a
standard grid generation software package. Figure 18(a) shows the full detail data from a scan of ice
build-up on a NACA 23012 airfoil model. The discrete set of surface geometry coordinates from the laser
scanner were post-processed to produce a watertight surface consisting of numerous triangles which were
provided in a format compatible with most grid generation software. The surface description was then
modified using smoothing algorithms within the post-processing software to obtain a lower resolution
version of the surface, as seen in Figure 18(b). That file was then used as input to the grid generation
software to produce the surface grid shown in Figure 18(c) and the volume grid in Figure 18(d). Different
levels of smoothing will be examined to determine the influence on the aerodynamics very close to the
surface as guidance for CFD modeling of the full CRM model geometry both with and without leading-
edge ice shapes.




                             (a)                                          (b)




                                    (c)                                 (d)
                       Figure 18.—Development of CFD grid from 3-D scanned ice shape.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   22
    In parallel, ONERA will investigate the use of the “Immersed Boundary Conditions” (IBC) method in
order to take the exact ice shape into account without having to mesh it explicitly (Ref. 59). A source term
method will be introduced to accurately take into account the ice-shape boundaries. This IBC technique is
currently under development in the ONERA elsA code (Ref. 60), and the validation phase for an
application to iced wing shapes is planned to be carried out in the current project, according to the
following sequence:

      •   Use of a 2-D configuration for preliminary evaluation, and development/improvement of tools for
          ice-shape problems;
      •   Use a spanwise extension of the 2-D case to investigate the degree of geometrical refinement to
          be considered for ice shapes, and comparison with “standard” RANS computations in 2-D/2.5-D
          flow;
      •   Finally, 3-D applications on the configurations tested in F1, and comparison with “standard”
          RANS computations in 3D flow.

    Concerning ice-accretion prediction, ONERA and NASA will perform calculations using their own
3-D icing suites. Initially, the ice shapes to be generated in the Phase III IRT test campaigns will be
computed. The results of these simulations will be used for refining the definition of the test matrix and
will be compared to the experimental results in a second step. ONERA will also work on the
implementation of an automatic multistep procedure in its 3-D icing suite. With the current version of the
suite (Ref. 61), the generation of new meshes for taking into account the ice-shape growth is done
manually. This is complex and highly time consuming. Therefore the code is often used in a single step
mode, which may not be accurate for complex ice shapes. The objective is to develop an automatic mesh
adaptation and/or a re-meshing technique and to evaluate both its benefits and its range of application for
the computation of 3-D ice shapes on a swept wing. A selected set of the tests performed in the IRT
campaigns will be used for the assessment phase and comparisons with the NASA icing code will also be
performed.

3.0       Summary
    Ice accretion and its aerodynamic effect on highly three-dimensional swept wings are extremely
complex phenomena important to the continued design, certification and safe operation of small and large
transport aircraft. Computational fluid dynamics codes have reached a level of maturity that they are
being proposed by manufacturers for use in certification of aircraft for flight in icing. However, sufficient
high-quality data to evaluate their performance on iced swept wings are not available. Thus, it is difficult
to determine how much confidence can be placed in the results from CFD codes used in design, and
particularly in certification. NASA, FAA, ONERA, the University of Illinois and Boeing, have embarked
on a significant, collaborative research effort to address the technical challenges associated with swept-
wing icing. The overall goal of ensuring continued flight safety will be achieved by improving the fidelity
of experimental and computational simulation methods for swept-wing ice accretion formation and
resulting aerodynamic effect. The purpose of this paper is to describe this research effort in more detail
and report on the current results and status to date.
    A seven-phase research effort has been designed that incorporates ice-accretion and aerodynamic
experiments and computational simulation. Conducted in Phase I was a review of the technical literature
associated with iced swept-wing aerodynamics with emphasis on classifying ice accretion based upon key
aerodynamic features of the flowfield. This research has provided a framework for the icing and
aerodynamic experiments to be conducted in later phases. The research conducted in Phase II has
identified the 65 percent scale Common Research Model as the baseline, full-scale, swept-wing reference
geometry utilized for the experiments and computational research. In addition, 3-D measurement
techniques are being developed and validated to document, the experimental ice accretion geometries.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                  23
Aerodynamic measurement techniques including pressure-sensitive paint and 5-hole probe wake surveys
suitable to iced swept-wing experiments are being investigated. In Phase III, ice accretion testing will be
conducted in the NASA IRT for three hybrid swept-wing models representing the 20, 64 and 83 percent
semispan stations of the baseline wing. Hybrid models preserve the full-scale, leading-edge geometry
combined with a custom-designed truncated afterbody to reduce the overall model size and blockage in
the IRT test section. A significant research effort is currently underway to develop the large-scale, hybrid
swept-wing model design methods. Artificial ice shapes of varying geometric fidelity will be developed
for aerodynamic testing over a large Reynolds number range in Phases IV and V. Exploring the effects of
geometric fidelity and Reynolds number will require final validation tests in Phase VI. The ONERA F1
pressurized wind-tunnel will be used for aerodynamic testing of a 12.8 percent scale semispan model of
the baseline wing in Phases IV and VI. Data will be acquired for Reynolds numbers up to 10×106 and
Mach numbers of 0.3. Lower-Reynolds number aerodynamic testing will also be conducted on a smaller
scale semispan wing model in an atmospheric 7- by 10-ft size wind tunnel in Phase V. The research
conducted in Phase VII will explore and further develop the use of computational simulation tools (CFD
codes) for ice accretion and aerodynamics on swept wings.
     The combined results of this research effort will result in an improved understanding of the icing on
swept wings. The ice accretion testing will generate a large database of ice-accretion geometries on
realistic large-scale swept wings. An additional outcome is the advanced method for designing hybrid
icing wind-tunnel models. The aerodynamic testing will generate a large database of performance and
flowfield information for swept wings with artificial ice shapes of varying geometric fidelity over a large
range of Reynolds number. Concurrent computational research will be conducted to develop and validate
ice accretion and aerodynamic simulation tools for large-scale swept wings. These databases will be
available to manufacturers to evaluate the performance of CFD codes which they propose to use in the
certification of aircraft for flight in icing conditions. These results will be used to determine the accuracy
to which ice accretion must be predicted by computational tools or simulated in aerodynamic testing. For
example, it is known for some cases that swept-wing ice accretion can be highly three dimensional (e.g.,
“scallops” or “lobster tails”). This research will help define how much detail of that three-dimensionality
is critical to the aerodynamic performance and therefore must be accurately simulated.

References
1. Broeren, A.P., Addy, H.E., Jr., Bragg, M.B., Busch, G.T., Guffond, D., and Montreuil, E.,
   “Aerodynamic Simulation of Ice Accretion on Airfoils,” NASA TP—2011-216929, June 2011.
2. Bragg, M.B., Broeren, A.P., Addy, H.E., Jr., Potapczuk, M., Guffond, D., and Montreuil, E., “Airfoil
   Ice-Accretion Aerodynamics Simulation,” AIAA Paper 2007-0085, Jan. 2007.
3. Bragg, M.B., Broeren, A.P., and Blumenthal, L.A., “Iced-Airfoil and Wing Aerodynamics,” SAE
   Paper 2003-01-2098, June 2003.
4. Bragg, M.B., Broeren, A.P., and Blumenthal, L.A., “Iced-Airfoil Aerodynamics,” Progress in
   Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 41, No. 5, July 2005, pp. 323-418.
5. Busch, G.T., Broeren, A.P., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Simulation of a Horn-Ice Accretion on a
   Subscale Model,” AIAA Paper 2007-0087, Jan. 2007.
6. Busch, G.T., Broeren, A.P., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Simulation of a Horn-Ice Accretion on a
   Subscale Model,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 45, No.2, Mar.-Apr. 2008, pp. 604-613.
7. Blumenthal, L.A., “Surface Pressure Measurements on a Three-Dimensional Ice Shape,” M.S. Thesis,
   Dept. of Aerospace Eng., Univ. of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 2005.
8. Busch, G.T., “Ice Accretion Aerodynamic Simulation on a Subscale Model, M.S. Thesis, Dept. of
   Aerospace Engineering, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 2006.
9. Blumenthal, L.A., Busch, G.T., Broeren, A.P., and Bragg, M.B., “Issues in Ice Accretion
   Aerodynamic Simulation on a Subscale Model,” AIAA Paper 2006-0262, Jan. 2006.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                   24
10. Busch, G.T., Broeren, A.P., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Fidelity of Sub-scale Two-Dimensional
    Ice Accretion Simulation,” AIAA Paper 2008-7062, Aug. 2008.
11. Broeren, A.P., Busch, G.T., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Fidelity of Ice Accretion Aerodynamic
    Simulation on a Subscale Model,” SAE 2007 Transactions: Journal of Aerospace, Vol. 116, Aug.
    2008, pp. 560-575; also SAE Paper 2007-01-3285, Sept. 2007.
12. Moens, F., “SUNSET Project: Numerical Investigations for the Preparation of the F1 Test
    Campaign,” ONERA Report Nº RT 1/12405 DAAP, April 2007.
13. CassouDeSalle, D. and Gilliot, A., “SUNSET (Studies on Scaling Effects due to Ice) Tests at High
    Reynolds Number in F1 Wind Tunnel,” ONERA Report Nº PV 4/12361 DSFM, December 2008.
14. CassouDeSalle, D., Gilliot, A., Geiler, C., Monnier, J.-C., Broeren, A.P., and Addy, H.E., Jr.,
    “Experimental Investigations of Simulated Ice Accretions at High Reynolds Numbers in the Onera F1
    Wind Tunnel,” AIAA Paper 2009-4265, June 2009.
15. Broeren, A.P., Bragg, M.B., Addy, H.E., Jr., Lee, S., Moens, F., and Guffond, D., “Effect of High-
    Fidelity Ice-Accretion Simulations on Full-Scale Airfoil Performance,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 47,
    No. 1, Jan.-Feb. 2010, pp. 240-254.
16. Broeren, A.P., Bragg, M.B., Addy, H.E., Jr., Lee, S., Moens, F., and Guffond, D., “Effect of High-
    Fidelity Ice-Accretion Simulations on Full-Scale Airfoil Performance,” AIAA Paper 2008-0434, Jan.
    2008.
17. Busch, G.T., “Experimental Study of Full-Scale Iced-Airfoil Aerodynamic Performance using
    Subscale Simulations,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Aerospace Eng., Univ. of Illinois, Urbana, IL,
    2010.
18. Duclercq, M., Brunet, V., and Moens, F., “Physical Analysis of the Separated Flow Around an Iced
    Airfoil Based on ZDES Simulations,” AIAA Paper 2012-2798.
19. Vargas, M., “Current Experimental Basis for Modeling Ice Accretions on Swept Wings,” Journal of
    Aircraft, Vol. 44, No. 1. Jan-Feb 2007.
20. Vargas, M., “Swept Wing Icing Studies at NASA Glenn Research Center 1996-2006,” SAE Aircraft
    & Engine Icing International Conference, Seville, Spain, 2007, Paper No. 2007-01-3332.
21. Bidwell, C.S. and Mohler Jr., S.R., “Collection Efficiency and Ice Accretion Calculations for a
    Sphere, a Swept MS(1)-317 Wing, a Swept NACA-0012 Wing Tip, an Axisymmetric Inlet, and a
    Boeing 737-300 Inlet,” AIAA Paper 95-0755, Jan. 1995.
22. Bidwell, C.S. and Potapczuk, M.G., “User’s Manual for the NASA Lewis Three-Dimensional Ice
    Accretion Code (LEWICE3D),” NASA TM–105974, Dec. 1993.
23. Potapczuk, M.G. and Bidwell, C.S., “Swept Wing Ice Accretion Modeling,” NASA TM–103114, Jan.
    1990.
24. Potapczuk, M.G. and Bidwell, C.S., “Numerical Simulation of Ice Growth on a MS-371 Swept Wing
    Geometry,” NASA TM 103705, Jan. 1991.
25. Potapczuk, M., Papadakis, M. and Vargas, M., “LEWICE Modeling of Swept Wing Ice Accretions,”
    AIAA Paper 2003-6565, Jan. 2003.
26. Hedde, T., and Guffond, D., “Development of a Three-Dimensional Icing Code, Comparison with
    Experimental Shapes,” AIAA Paper 92-0041, Jan. 1992.
27. Hedde, T., and Guffond, D., “Improvement of the ONERA 3D Icing Code Comparison with 3D
    Experimental Shapes,” AIAA Paper 93-0169, Jan. 1993.
28. Szilder, K., McIlwain, S., and Lozowski, E.P., “Numerical Simulation of Complex Ice Shapes on
    Swept Wings,” ICAS Paper 2006-2.5.1, Sept. 2006.
29. Presteau, X., Montreuil, E., Leroy, A., Guffond, D., Henry, R., and Personne, P, “Experimental Study
    of the Scallop Formation on Swept Cylinder,” SAE Paper 2007-01-3296, Sept. 2007.
30. Presteau, X., Montreuil, E., Chazottes, A., Vancassel, X., and Personne, P, “Experimental and
    Numerical Study of Scallop Ice on Swept Cylinder,” AIAA Paper 2009-4124, June 2009.
31. Bragg, M.B., Kerho, M.F., and Khodadoust, A., “LDV Flowfield Measurements on a Straight and
    Swept Wing with a Simulated Ice Accretion,” AIAA Paper 93-0300, Jan. 1993.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                25
32. Kwon, O.J., and Sankar, L.N., “Numerical Study of the Effects of Icing on Fixed and Rotary Wing
    Performance,” AIAA Paper 91-0662, Jan. 1990.
33. Khodadoust, A., and Bragg, M.B, “Measured Aerodynamic Performance of a Swept Wing with a
    Simulated Ice Accretion,” AIAA Paper 90-0490, Jan. 1990.
34. Bragg, M.B., Khodadoust, A., Soltani, R., Wells, S., Kerho, M., “Effect of a Simulated Ice Accretion
    on the Aerodynamics of a Swept Wing,” AIAA Paper 91-0442, Jan. 1991.
35. Vargas, M., Papadakis, M., Potapczuk, M., Addy, H., Sheldon, D. and Giriunas, J., “Ice Accretions
    on a Swept GLC-305 Airfoil,” SAE Paper 02GAA-43 and NASA TM-2002-211557, April 2002.
36. Papadakis, M., Yeong, H. W., Won, S. C., Vargas, M. and Potapczuk, M., “Aerodynamic
    Performance of a Swept Wing with Ice Accretions,” AIAA Paper 2003-0731, Jan. 2003.
37. Papadakis, M., Yeong, H.W., Wong, S, Vargas, M and Potapczuk, M., “Experimental Investigation of
    Ice Accretion Effects on a Swept Wing,” DOT/FAA/AR-05/39, Aug. 2005.
38. Reehorst, A.L., Potapczuk, M.G., Ratvasky, T.P., and Gile-Laflin, B.E., “Wind Tunnel Measured
    Effects on a Twin-Engine Short-Haul Transport Caused by Simulated Ice Accretions,” AIAA Paper
    96-0871, also NASA TM 107143, Jan. 1996.
39. Reehorst, A.L., Potapczuk, M.G., Ratvasky, T.P., and Gile-Laflin, B.E., “Wind Tunnel Measured
    Effects on a Twin-Engine Short-Haul Transport Caused by Simulated Ice Accretions Data Report,”
    NASA TM–107419, May 1997.
40. Papadakis, M., Yeong, H.W., Chandrasekharan, R., Hinson, M., Ratvasky, T., and Giriunas, J.,
    “Experimental Investigation of Simulated Ice Accretions on a Full-Scale T-tail,” AIAA Paper 2001-
    0090, Jan. 2001.
41. Papadakis, M., Yeong, H.W., Chandrasekharan, R., Hinson, M., and Ratvasky, T. “Effects of
    Roughness on the Aerodynamic Performance of a Business Jet Tail,” AIAA Paper 2002-0242, Jan.
    2002.
42. Broeren, A.P., Diebold, J.M., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Classification of Swept-Wing Ice
    Accretion,” NASA/TM—2013-216381, May 2013, also DOT/FAA/TC-13/21.
43. Diebold, J.M., Broeren, A.P. and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamic Classification of Swept-Wing Ice
    Accretion,” AIAA 5th Atmospheric and Space Environments Conference, San Diego, CA, June 24-
    27, 2013 (submitted for publication).
44. Vassberg, J.C., DeHann, M.A., Rivers, S.M., and Wahls, R.A., “Development of a Common
    Research Model for Applied CFD Validation Studies,” AIAA Paper 2008-6919, Aug. 2008.
45. Rivers, M.B., and Dittberner, A., “Experimental Investigation of the NASA Common Research
    Model,” AIAA Paper 2010-4218, June 2010.
46. Rivers, M.B., and Dittberner, A., “Experimental Investigations of the NASA Common Research
    Model in the NASA Langley National Transonic Facility and the NASA Ames 11-Ft Transonic Wind
    Tunnel,” AIAA Paper 2011-1126, Jan. 2011.
47. Vassberg, J. C., Tinoco, E. N., Mani, M., Rider, B., Zickuhr, T., Levy, D.W., Brodersen, O., Eisfeld,
    B., Crippa, S., Wahls, R. A., Morrison, J. H., Mavriplis, D.J., and Murayama, M., “Summary of the
    Fourth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2010-4547, June 2010.
48. Bosetti, C., Paul, B.P., Jr., and Malone, A.M., “Ice Shape Characterization to Aid in Replicating Ice
    Shapes for Subsequent Analysis,” AIAA Paper 2010-7534, Aug. 2010.
49. Reehorst, A.L., and Richter, G.P., “New Methods and Materials for Molding and Casting Ice
    Formations,” NASA TM-100126, Sept. 1987.
50. Lee, S., Broeren, A.P., Addy, H.E., Jr., Sills, R., and Pifer, E.M., “Development of 3-D Ice Accretion
    Measurement Method,” AIAA Paper 2012-2938, June 2012, also NASA/TM—2012-217702, Sept.
    2012.
51. Diebold, J.M., Monastero, M.C., and Bragg, M.B., “Aerodynamics of a Swept-Wing with Ice
    Accretion at Low Reynolds Number,” AIAA Paper 2012-2795, June 2012.
52. Diebold, J.M., “Aerodynamics of a Swept Wing with Leading-Edge Ice at Low Reynolds Number”
    M.S. Thesis, Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, Aug. 2012.



NASA/TM—2013-216555                                26
53. Diebold, J.M., and Bragg, M.B., “Study of a Swept-Wing with Leading-Edge Ice Using a Wake
    Survey Technique,” AIAA Paper 2013-0245, Jan. 2013.
54. Sclafani, A.J., Slotnick, J.P., Vassberg, J.C., and Pulliam, T.H., “Extended OVERFLOW Analysis of
    the NASA Trap Wing Wind Tunnel Model,” AIAA Paper 2012-2919, June 2012.
55. Saeed, F., Selig, M.S., and Bragg, M.B., “Hybrid Airfoil Design Procedure Validation for Full-Scale
    Ice Accretion Simulation,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 36, No. 5, Sept.-Oct., 1999, pp. 769-776.
56. Saeed, F., Selig, M.S., and Bragg, M.B., “Hybrid Airfoil Design to Simulate Full-Scale Ice Accretion
    Throughout a Given α Range,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 35, No. 2, Mar.-Apr., 1998, pp. 233-239.
57. Saeed, F., Selig, M.S., and Bragg, M.B., “Design of Subscale Airfoils with Full-Scale Leading Edges
    for Ice Accretion Testing,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 34, No. 1, Jan.-Feb., 1997, pp. 94-100.
58. Fujiwara, G.E.C., Woodard, B.S., Wiberg, B.D., Mortonson, A.J., Bragg, M.B., “A Hybrid Airfoil
    Design Method for Icing Wind Tunnel Tests,” AIAA 5th Atmospheric and Space Environments
    Conference, San Diego, CA, June 24-27, 2013 (submitted for publication).
59. Terracol M., Manoha E., and Lemoine B., “Investigation of the Unsteady Flow and Noise Sources
    Generation in a Slat Cove: Hybrid Zonal RANS/LES Simulation and Dedicated Experiment,” AIAA
    Paper 2011-3203, 20th AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference 2011, Honolulu, HI, 27-30,
    June 2011.
60. Reneaux J., Beaumier P. and Giroudroux-Lavigne P. “Advanced Aerodynamic Applications with the
    elsA Software,” The Onera Journal, AerospaceLab Journal, Issue 2, March 2011.
    (www.aerospacelab-journal.org).
61. Villedieu, P., Bobo, D., Guffond, D., Trontin, P. “SLD Lagrangian Modelling and Capability
    Assessment in the Frame of ONERA 3D Icing Suite,” AIAA Paper 2012-3132, New Orleans, 2012.




NASA/TM—2013-216555                                27

