---
title: Robust Exploration and Commercial Missions to the Moon Using Nuclear Thermal Rocket Propulsion and Lunar Liquid Oxygen Derived from FeO-Rich Pyroclasitc Deposits
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 20180002979
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20180002979
rights: Public-use permitted (NTRS copyright determination PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED); no third-party material
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: TECHNICAL_MEMORANDUM
center: Glenn Research Center
publication_date: 2019-07-12
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 9378b6b8c2e9a795e00d653d79f772e589779c8cb07be3be0246767b2f0edf38
pages: 54
words: 21345
cv_look_pages: 6
---

NASA/TM—2018-219725                                        AIAA–2017–4938




Robust Exploration and Commercial Missions to
the Moon Using Nuclear Thermal Rocket Propulsion
and Lunar Liquid Oxygen Derived From FeO-Rich
Pyroclastic Deposits
Stanley K. Borowski, Stephen W. Ryan, and Laura M. Burke
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

David R. McCurdy and James E. Fittje
Vantage Partners, LLC, Brook Park, Ohio

Claude R. Joyner
Aerojet Rocketdyne, West Palm Beach, Florida




April 2018
                                          NASA STI Program . . . in Profile



Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated                     •   CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
to the advancement of aeronautics and space science.                technical findings by NASA-sponsored
The NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI)                 contractors and grantees.
Program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain
this important role.                                            •   CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
                                                                    papers from scientific and technical
                                                                    conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices
                                                                    meetings sponsored or co-sponsored by NASA.
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects,
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates             •   SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI Program provides access                    technical, or historical information from
to the NASA Technical Report Server—Registered                      NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
(NTRS Reg) and NASA Technical Report Server—                        concerned with subjects having substantial
Public (NTRS) thus providing one of the largest                     public interest.
collections of aeronautical and space science STI in
the world. Results are published in both non-NASA               •   TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
channels and by NASA in the NASA STI Report                         language translations of foreign scientific and
Series, which includes the following report types:                  technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.

•   TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of                           For more information about the NASA STI
    completed research or a major significant phase             program, see the following:
    of research that present the results of NASA
    programs and include extensive data or theoretical          •   Access the NASA STI program home page at
    analysis. Includes compilations of significant                  http://www.sti.nasa.gov
    scientific and technical data and information
    deemed to be of continuing reference value.                 •   E-mail your question to help@sti.nasa.gov
    NASA counter-part of peer-reviewed formal
                                                                •   Fax your question to the NASA STI
    professional papers, but has less stringent
                                                                    Information Desk at 757-864-6500
    limitations on manuscript length and extent of
    graphic presentations.
                                                                •   Telephone the NASA STI Information Desk at
                                                                    757-864-9658
•   TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific
    and technical findings that are preliminary or of           •   Write to:
    specialized interest, e.g., “quick-release” reports,            NASA STI Program
    working papers, and bibliographies that contain                 Mail Stop 148
    minimal annotation. Does not contain extensive                  NASA Langley Research Center
    analysis.                                                       Hampton, VA 23681-2199
NASA/TM—2018-219725                                                    AIAA–2017–4938




Robust Exploration and Commercial Missions to
the Moon Using Nuclear Thermal Rocket Propulsion
and Lunar Liquid Oxygen Derived From FeO-Rich
Pyroclastic Deposits
Stanley K. Borowski, Stephen W. Ryan, and Laura M. Burke
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

David R. McCurdy and James E. Fittje
Vantage Partners, LLC, Brook Park, Ohio

Claude R. Joyner
Aerojet Rocketdyne, West Palm Beach, Florida




Prepared for the
Propulsion and Energy Forum and Exhibition
sponsored by the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics
Atlanta, Georgia, July 10–12, 2017




National Aeronautics and
Space Administration


Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135




April 2018
                                                    Acknowledgments




The author (SKB) acknowledges the NTP Project, the Nuclear Power and Propulsion Technical Discipline Team (NTDT),
and Mark Klem (Glenn Branch Chief) for their support of this work. Informative discussions with Carlton Allen are also
acknowledged. The author also expresses his thanks to two outstanding space artists, Bob Sauls (bob.sauls@xp4d.com) and Pat
Rawlings (pat@patrawlings.com). Their work has helped bring the vehicle designs and missions proposed by the author to life.
The NASA-funded images produced by Pat include Figures 1(a) and (b), 4, 8, 17, 25, 26(c), 30, and 34; those by Bob include
Figures 1(c) to (e); 12 to 16; 20 to 24; 26(a), (b), and (d); and 27 to 29.




                  Level of Review: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.



                                                        Available from
NASA STI Program                                                                            National Technical Information Service
Mail Stop 148                                                                                               5285 Port Royal Road
NASA Langley Research Center                                                                                Springfield, VA 22161
Hampton, VA 23681-2199                                                                                              703-605-6000

                This report is available in electronic form at http://www.sti.nasa.gov/ and http://ntrs.nasa.gov/
  Robust Exploration and Commercial Missions to the Moon Using
   Nuclear Thermal Rocket Propulsion and Lunar Liquid Oxygen
           Derived From FeO-Rich Pyroclastic Deposits
                      Stanley K. Borowski, Stephen W. Ryan, and Laura M. Burke
                            National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                       Glenn Research Center
                                       Cleveland, Ohio 44135

                                 David R. McCurdy and James E. Fittje
                                        Vantage Partners, LLC
                                       Brook Park, Ohio 44142

                                           Claude R. Joyner
                                          Aerojet Rocketdyne
                                    West Palm Beach, Florida 33410


                                              Summary
     The nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) has frequently been identified as a key space asset required for the
human exploration of Mars. This proven technology can also provide the affordable access through
cislunar space necessary for commercial development and sustained human presence on the Moon. It is a
demonstrated technology capable of generating both high thrust and high specific impulse (Isp ~900 s)
twice that of today’s best chemical rockets. Nuclear lunar transfer vehicles—consisting of a propulsion
stage using three ~16.5-klbf small nuclear rocket engines (SNREs), an in-line propellant tank, plus the
payload—are reusable, enabling a variety of lunar missions. These include cargo delivery and crewed
lunar landing missions. Even weeklong “tourism” missions carrying passengers into lunar orbit for a day
of sightseeing and picture taking are possible. The NTR can play an important role in the next phase of
lunar exploration and development by providing a robust in-space lunar transportation system (LTS) that
can allow initial outposts to evolve into settlements supported by a variety of commercial activities such
as in-situ propellant production used to supply strategically located propellant depots and transportation
nodes. The use of lunar liquid oxygen (LLO2) derived from iron-oxide- (FeO-) rich volcanic glass beads,
found in numerous pyroclastic deposits on the Moon, can significantly reduce the launch mass
requirements from Earth by enabling reusable, surface-based lunar landing vehicles (LLVs) that use
liquid oxygen and hydrogen (LO2/LH2) chemical rocket engines. Afterwards, a LO2/LH2 propellant depot
can be established in lunar equatorial orbit to supply the LTS. At this point a modified version of the
conventional NTR—called the LO2-augmented NTR, or LANTR—is introduced into the LTS allowing
bipropellant operation and leveraging the mission benefits of refueling with lunar-derived propellants for
Earth return. The bipropellant LANTR engine utilizes the large divergent section of its nozzle as an
“afterburner” into which oxygen is injected and supersonically combusted with nuclear preheated
hydrogen emerging from the engine’s choked sonic throat—essentially “scramjet propulsion in reverse.”
By varying the oxygen-to-hydrogen mixture ratio, LANTR engines can operate over a range of thrust and
Isp values while the reactor core power level remains relatively constant. A LANTR-based LTS offers
unique mission capabilities, including short-transit-time crewed cargo transports. Even a “commuter”
shuttle service may be possible allowing “one-way” trip times to and from the Moon on the order of 36 hr
or less. If only 1% of the extracted LLO2 propellant from identified resource sites were available for use
in lunar orbit, such a supply could support daily commuter flights to the Moon for many thousands of
years! This report outlines an evolutionary architecture and examines a variety of mission types and



NASA/TM—2018-219725                             1
transfer vehicle designs, along with the increasing demands on LLO2 production as mission complexity
and velocity change V requirements increase. A comparison of vehicle features and engine operating
characteristics, for both NTR and LANTR engines, is also provided along with a discussion of the
propellant production and mining requirements associated with using FeO-rich volcanic glass as source
material.

1.0     Introduction
     Today there is considerable discussion within NASA, Congress, and industry regarding the future
direction and focus of the United States’ human space program. According to NASA, the direction and
focus is a “Journey to Mars” (Ref. 1) sometime around the mid-to-late 2030s. However, while NASA’s
sights are set on Mars, there is another destination of interest to the worldwide space community: the
Moon. Located just 3 days from Earth, the Moon is an entire world awaiting exploration, future
settlement, and potential commercialization. It has abundant resources and is an ideal location to test and
demonstrate key technologies and systems (e.g., surface habitation, long-range pressurized rovers, and
surface power and resource extraction systems) that will allow people to explore, work, and live self-
sufficiently on another planetary surface.
     Despite NASA’s past “been there, done that” attitude towards the Moon, a human lunar return
mission has strong appeal to many others who would like to see humans again walk on its surface. With
the upcoming 50th anniversaries of the Apollo 8 orbital mission of the Moon (on December 24 and 25,
1968) and the Apollo 11 landing mission (on July 20 and 21, 1969) fast approaching, lunar missions are
again a topic of considerable discussion both within NASA (Ref. 2) and outside. Plans for human surface
missions and even settlements on the Moon in the 2025 to 2030 timeframe are being openly discussed by
Europe, China, and Russia (Refs. 3 to 5). A number of private companies in the United States—SpaceX
(Ref. 6), Bigelow Aerospace (BA) (Ref. 7), Shackleton Energy Company (SEC) (Ref. 8), United Launch
Alliance (ULA) (Ref. 9), and Blue Origin (Ref. 10)—are also discussing commercial ventures to the
Moon, along with possible public-private partnerships with NASA.
     This past February, Space X announced (Ref. 6) that it would send two tourists on a weeklong “free
return” flyby mission around the Moon in 2018, undoubtedly to capitalize on the significance of NASA’s
historic Apollo 8 mission. In early March, BA discussed its plans (Ref. 7) to launch a private space station
into low Earth orbit (LEO) by 2020 using ULA’s Atlas V launch vehicle. The station would use the
BA–330 habitat module, the numerical designation referring to the 330 m3 of internal volume that each
module possesses once inflated. The company went on to say that a variant of the BA–330 module could
also be placed in low lunar orbit (LLO) to serve as a transportation node and propellant depot for
astronauts and spacecraft making their way to and from the Moon and the lunar surface (LS).
     Lunar-derived propellant (LDP) production—specifically lunar liquid oxygen and hydrogen (LLO2
and LLH2)—has been identified as a key technology offering significant mission leverage (Ref. 11), and
it figures prominently in both SEC’s and ULA’s plans (Refs. 8 and 9) for commercial lunar development.
Samples returned from different sites on the Moon during the Apollo missions have shown that the lunar
regolith has a significant oxygen content. The FeO-rich volcanic glass beads returned on the final Apollo
(17) mission have turned out to be a particularly attractive source material for oxygen extraction based on
hydrogen-reduction experiments conducted by Allen et al. (Ref. 12). Post-Apollo lunar probe missions
have also provided orbital data indicating the possible existence of large quantities of water ice trapped in
deep, permanently shadowed, craters located at the Moon’s poles (Ref. 13). These data have generated
considerable excitement and speculation, including plans for a commercial venture by SEC (Ref. 8) that
proposes to mine lunar polar ice (LPI), convert it to rocket propellant, and then sell it at propellant depots
located in LEO.
     Besides providing an ideal location for testing surface systems and in situ resource utilization
equipment, lunar missions also provide a unique proving ground to demonstrate an important in-space
technology: nuclear thermal propulsion (NTP). With its high thrust and high specific impulse
(Isp ~900 s)—twice that of today’s best chemical rockets—the NTR can play an important role in


NASA/TM—2018-219725                               2
returning humans to the Moon to stay by enabling a reusable in-space lunar transportation system (LTS)
that provides the affordable access through cislunar space necessary for initial lunar outposts to evolve
into thriving settlements engaged in a variety of commercial activities.
     Over the past three decades, engineers at Glenn Research Center have analyzed NTP’s use for lunar
missions, quantified its benefits and developed vehicle concept designs for a variety of exploration and
commercial mission applications (Refs. 14 to 17). A sampling of these vehicle concepts and mission
applications is shown in Figure 1. Also shown is a transition away from vehicles using a single high-
thrust engine (Fig. 1(a)) to vehicles using clustered lower thrust engines (Figs. 1(b) to (e)) to help reduce
development costs and increase mission safety and reliability by providing an “engine out” capability.




Figure 1.—Past and recent examples of crewed, cargo, and commercial lunar transfer vehicles designed by
  NASA Glenn Research Center showing transition away from single large to multiple smaller engines.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                3
    The nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) achieves its high specific impulse by using LH2 to maintain the
reactor fuel elements at their required operating temperature and then exhausting the heated hydrogen gas
exiting the reactor out the engine’s nozzle to generate thrust. Because the NTR is a monopropellant
engine, a key question emerges: “How can the high performance of the NTR and the leverage potential of
LDP best be exploited?” The answer is found in the LO2-augmented NTR (or LANTR), a LH2-cooled
NTR outfitted with an O2 “afterburner nozzle” and feed system (Refs. 18 to 20). Combining NTR and
supersonic combustion ramjet engine technologies, LANTR is a versatile, high-performance engine that
can enable a robust nuclear LTS with unique capabilities and can take full advantage of the mission
leverage provided with using LDPs by allowing bipropellant operation.
    In light of the current interest being expressed in LDPs (Refs. 8 and 9), Glenn engineers have been
re-examining the impact of infusing LANTR propulsion into a nuclear-powered LTS that utilizes LDPs.
The author (Borowski) presented a paper on this topic 20 years ago at the 33rd Joint Propulsion
Conference in Seattle, Washington (Ref. 18). In that work, the primary LDP and feedstock material
considered were LLO2, also referred to as “lunar-derived liquid oxygen (LUNOX),” and FeO-rich
volcanic glass beads, respectively; however, only Earth-supplied liquid hydrogen (ELH2) was used in the
LANTR LTS. The decision to use LUNOX back then was based on an extensive set of hydrogen-
reduction experiments (Refs. 21 and 22) that established ground truth for oxygen release from samples of
lunar soil and volcanic glass beads returned by the Apollo missions. The highest yields—in the range of
4 to 5 wt%—were obtained from the iron-rich volcanic glass samples (Refs. 21 and 22) collected during
the Apollo 17 mission to Taurus-Littrow (Fig. 2). Another important consideration was the identification
of a significant number of large pyroclastic dark mantle deposits (DMDs) containing this glassy material
on the lunar nearside just north of the “equatorial corridor” (Refs. 23 and 24).
    This same degree of certainty cannot be claimed for LPI. Although considerable enthusiasm has been
expressed about mining and processing LPI for rocket propellant and using it to create a space-faring
cislunar economy (Ref. 25), the ground truth about LPI must first be established before this enthusiasm is
warranted. Robotic surface missions will be required to quantify the physical state of the water ice, its
vertical thickness and areal extent, and the levels of soil contamination. Also, the permanently shadowed
craters, where LPI is thought to exist, are deep (~4.2 km for Shackleton Crater near the lunar south pole),
and extremely cold (ranging from ~25 to 100 K), posing major challenges for mining and processing any
cold, ice-bearing regolith that might be uncovered (Ref. 26). These conditions may negate the apparent
advantage that LPI has over volcanic glass as a feedstock material; namely, the ability to provide a source
of LLH2 as well as LLO2.




Figure 2.—Astronaut Harrison Schmitt collects samples of dark mantle material at Shorty Crater (Taurus-Littrow
  landing site on Moon) during Apollo 17 mission.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                4
     There are many scientifically interesting sites on the Moon that are far from the lunar poles. For
example, the Aristarchus Plateau (~27° N, 52° W) is located in the midst of a vast DMD that can supply
the feedstock material needed to produce LUNOX. Access to this nearside, near-equatorial site should
also be relatively easy. If a decision were made to locate a research station or base there, producing
oxygen locally would probably make more sense rather than incurring the added complexity and cost of
transporting it from the poles. Finally, oxygen extraction from iron-rich mare soil or volcanic glass has an
additional benefit: it also produces useful metals (iron and titanium), which using LPI feedstock does not.
     In view of these facts, this report focuses on LUNOX and volcanic glass as the primary LDP and
feedstock material. The potential mission benefits and issues associated with using LPI will be examined
in a follow-on report. This report provides a summary of our ongoing analysis results to date and touches
on the following topics: First, the oxygen extraction process and yields from candidate feedstock
materials, system mass and power requirements, siting locations, and features of a commercial LUNOX
production plant are discussed. Next, a system description of the NTR and the LANTR concept are
presented along with performance projections for the engine as a function of the oxygen-to-hydrogen
mixture ratio (O/H MR) used in the afterburner nozzle. The mission and transportation system ground
rules and assumptions used in the analysis are then provided and used in an evolutionary mission
architecture that illustrates the benefits of using LANTR and LUNOX technologies quantifying them in
terms of reduced vehicle size, launch mass, and required engine burn times. The potential for a robust,
reusable LTS that includes short-transit-time crewed cargo transports (CCTs) and commuter shuttles is
discussed after that along with the refueling needs, LUNOX production rates, and mining requirements
needed to support these more demanding and higher V missions. The report ends with some thoughts on
the possibilities for future human expansion into the solar system using LANTR propulsion and locally
produced extraterrestrial propellant and then some concluding thoughts.
     Acronyms and symbols used in this report are listed in the appendix to aid the reader.

2.0     LUNOX: Its Benefits, Extraction Efficiency, Plant Characteristics, and
        Siting Locations
    Previous studies conducted by NASA and its contractors (Refs. 27 and 28) have indicated a
substantial benefit from using LDPs—specifically LLO2 in the lunar space transportation system. In a
LTS using LO2/LH2 chemical rockets, ~6 kg of mass in LEO is required to place 1 kg of payload (PL) on
the LS. Of this 6 kg, ~70% (4.2 kg) is propellant and ~85.7% of this mass (3.6 kg) is oxygen, assuming
the engines operate with an O/H MR of 6:1. Since the cost of placing a kilogram of mass on the LS is
~6 times the cost of delivering it to LEO (Ref. 11), the ability to produce LUNOX from processed lunar
material can provide a significant mission benefit. By providing a local source of oxygen for use in life
support systems, fuel cells, and chemical rocket engines used on lunar landing vehicles (LLVs), the initial
mass in low Earth orbit (IMLEO), launch costs, and LTS size and complexity can all be reduced. Greater
quantities of higher value cargo (e.g., people, propellant processing equipment, and scientific instruments)
can also be transported to LEO and on to the Moon instead of bulk propellant mass, further reducing LTS
costs.
    LUNOX has also been mentioned as a potential commercial product because of its abundance. From
the analysis of samples brought back on the Apollo missions, nearly half the mass (~43%) of the Moon’s
surface material is oxygen (Ref. 11), and at least 20 different techniques (Refs. 29 and 30) have been
identified for its extraction. The reduction of iron oxide in the mineral “ilmenite” (FeTiO3) or in volcanic
glass using hydrogen gas is among the simplest and best studied. The technique involves a two-step
process in which the FeO is first reduced to metal, liberating oxygen and forming water:

FeTiO3 + H2  Fe + TiO2 + H2O        or    FeO (glass) + H2  Fe + H2O

The water is then electrolyzed to produce oxygen, and the hydrogen is recycled back to the processing
plant to react with more feedstock material (Refs. 29 and 30). In the hydrogen-reduction experiments


NASA/TM—2018-219725                              5
 Figure 3.—Volcanic glass beads from Apollo 17 mission and oxygen yields from full range of Apollo samples
   (Ref. 22).

conducted by Allen et al. (Refs. 21 and 22), oxygen release was measured from samples of lunar soil and
volcanic glass beads returned by the Apollo missions. The results indicated that oxygen can be produced
from a wide range of lunar soils and is strongly correlated with the iron abundance in the soil as shown in
Figure 3. Iron-rich highland soils produced the smallest amount of oxygen, ~1 to 2 wt%, whereas iron-
rich mare soil samples produced ~3.6 wt%. The highest yields—in the range of 4 to 5 wt%—were
obtained from the pyroclastic (volcanic) glass collected at the Apollo 17 Taurus-Littrow landing site. The
glass is extremely iron rich with an Fe content of ~17.8 wt%. The orange and black beads shown in
Figure 3(a) have identical elemental compositions, but the black beads are largely crystalline while the
orange beads are largely glass. Reduction of the orange glass beads produced an oxygen yield of
~4.3 wt% whereas the black crystalline beads produced ~4.7 wt%, the highest for any of the samples
(Fig. 3(b)) (Ref. 22). Assuming the same hydrogen-reduction process, volcanic glass feedstock, and a
conservative oxygen yield of 4 wt%, 1 t (=1000 kg) of LUNOX could be produced by processing ~25 t of
volcanic glass—a significant improvement over previous estimates.
     As mentioned above, one of the most studied concepts for oxygen extraction utilizes hydrogen
reduction of the mineral ilmenite that is found in the lunar soil or mare basalts (lunar rock). LUNOX
production scenarios that use ilmenite exclusively will require processing to separate out the mineral and
minimize the amount of material that must be heated in order to release the oxygen. Processing of soil
requires sizing and magnetic separation. If an ilmenite-rich basalt is used, an initial crushing step will also
be required.
     The key activities involved at a LUNOX production plant are depicted in Figure 4. Tele-operated
front-end loaders (1) and regolith haulers (2) mine and transport the feedstock material to an automated
plant (3) where the ilmenite is beneficiated and chemically reduced by hydrogen gas in a fluidized bed
reactor operating at ~900 to 1050 °C (~1173 to 1323 K). Water is produced along with the process
tailings (4) iron, rutile (TiO2), and residual solids. The water is then piped to electrolysis equipment (5)
where it is separated into hydrogen and oxygen. The hydrogen is recycled back to react with more
ilmenite while the oxygen is liquefied (6) and stored in well-insulated tanks (7). A surface vehicle (8) then
transports individual tanks of LUNOX over to a tanker LLV (9) that delivers the LUNOX from the LS to
a propellant depot in LLO. The LLV then returns with a tank of ELH2. A stack of these tanks (10) supply
the LH2 propellant needed by the LLV and the makeup hydrogen needed by the production plant. The
power to allow 24-hr, 7-day/week plant operation is provided by a nuclear fission reactor located a safe
distance (11) away from the plant and the regolith-covered habitat module (12) occupied by the plant
workers.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                6
 Figure 4.—Activities at future LUNOX production plant: processing ilmenite-bearing feedstock materials (ca. 1983).

     A detailed conceptual design study of a lunar oxygen pilot plant was performed for NASA by
Christiansen et al. of Eagle Engineering in 1988 (Ref. 30). The study selected hydrogen reduction of
ilmenite as the baseline concept because of process simplicity and well understood reaction chemistry. It
developed computer models for the mining, beneficiation, and processing equipment that allowed
estimates of the mass and power required for both a pilot plant producing 24 t/yr of LUNOX and larger
production plants producing up to 1500 t/yr. Key trades and sensitivity analyses were also conducted
including evaluations on (1) soil or basalt feedstock; (2) solar photovoltaic arrays (PVAs) with
regenerating fuel cell reactants or nuclear fission power sources; (3) smaller, modular production units to
increase oxygen production versus constructing larger capacity plants; and (4) the sensitivity of plant
mass and power to the oxygen production rate.
     In the Eagle Engineering study, a three-stage fluidized bed reactor concept (Ref. 31) was baselined
for the ilmenite-reduction process (Fig. 5). The plant is supplied by two telerobotic regolith haulers.
While one hauler is being filled at the mining site, the other hauler travels to and from the plant. At the
plant the hauler (1) dumps its load into the process feed bin (2) and collects a load of either screened soil
or tailings (unprocessed ilmenite, rutile and iron) from the plant’s discharge bin (3). It then dumps these
materials at the appropriate collection area (4) and returns to the mining site to begin the cycle over again.
     From the feed bin a magnetic separator (5) isolates the slightly magnetic ilmenite from the rest of the
bulk soil, which is then discarded. The “enriched” ilmenite feedstock is then transported to the top of the
processing plant (6) by a continuous-flow conveyor system. Here in the top bed of the reactor (7), the
feedstock is preheated by hot, recycled hydrogen gas from the middle bed (8) and the electrolysis cell (9).
Ilmenite reduction takes place primarily in the middle reaction bed. Waste heat from the spent solids is
extracted and used to preheat the hydrogen stream in the bottom bed (10) before the material is
discharged through a gas-solid separator (11). The water produced in the middle bed is then dissociated
into oxygen and hydrogen in a solid-state electrolysis cell (12) operated at the reaction temperature. The
oxygen is then cooled, liquefied, and stored (13), and the hydrogen is used to preheat more ilmenite
feedstock (9). The process heat required in the reaction bed is provided by electric resistance heaters (14)
that heat the hydrogen stream before it enters the bed.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                                 7
Figure 5.—Schematic and Illustration of LUNOX pilot plant utilizing continuous fluidized-bed reactor for ilmenite
  reduction with hydrogen.

    The 24 t/yr LUNOX pilot plant shown in Figure 5 was sized to fit within a shuttle PL bay pallet and
has an outer diameter (OD) of ~4.3 m and a length of ~13.7 m. The pallet serves as a strong back and
mounting structure (15) for the processing unit, allowing it to be delivered to the LS fully integrated.
Once there the unit is lifted into the vertical position (Fig. 5) and stabilized. The vertical orientation is
required for proper plant operation and to take advantage of gravity during material processing. Although
operations are largely autonomous, the facility is human-tended so accommodations are provided for
human access to different plant levels. This includes ground level, the midlevel reaction bed location at
~4.6 m (16) and the upper ilmenite feed location at ~9.2 m (17) along with connecting ladders (18) and
guardrails to allow human inspection and maintenance of the process equipment.
    The Eagle Engineering study considered both an ilmenite-rich basalt feedstock (containing ~33 wt%
ilmenite) and a soil feedstock (~7.5 wt% ilmenite) in assessing plant performance. With basalt feedstock,
~186 t of mined material is required per ton of LUNOX produced. Using lower ilmenite content soil
feedstock eliminated the need to crush and grind tons of rock for ilmenite extraction, but it increased the
mining mass ratio (MMR) to ~327 t of soil per ton of LUNOX. Estimates of LUNOX plant mass and
power consumption levels for a soil feedstock system obtained from the Eagle Engineering study
(Ref. 30) are shown in Figures 6 and 7 as a function of the annual production rate. The 35% duty cycle
assumes that mining operations occur during 70% of the available lunar daylight hours (~3067 per year).
    Unfortunately, the Eagle Engineering study performed in 1988 was unable to benefit from the
subsequent hydrogen-reduction experiments conducted by Allen et al. (Ref. 22) several years later that
indicated significantly higher oxygen yields (~4 to 5 wt%) are achievable using iron-rich volcanic glass.
Oxygen yield was also found to correlate directly with the sample’s iron abundance, suggesting that the
oxygen production potential of any location on the Moon can be determined from orbit (Ref. 32) using
demonstrated and complementary gamma ray spectrometry (Ref. 33) and multispectral imaging (Ref. 34)
techniques.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                  8
          Figure 6.—Variation of LUNOX production plant component mass with annual production rate.




         Figure 7.—Variation of LUNOX production plant power consumption with annual production rate.


     Assuming the same hydrogen-reduction processing plant, volcanic glass as feedstock, and a
conservative oxygen yield of 4 wt%, a ton of LUNOX could be produced by processing ~25 t of volcanic
glass—a significant improvement over the MMR required using the ilmenite-bearing soil discussed
above. According to Allen et al., volcanic glass is an attractive feedstock option because it is uniformly
fine grained, reacts rapidly, and can be fed directly into the LUNOX production plant with little or no
processing prior to reduction. There is another important reason to consider as well: it exists in large
quantities.
     A significant number of large pyroclastic deposits, thought to be the result of continuous,
Hawaiian-style, fire-fountain eruptions from large surface vents, have been identified on the lunar
nearside by Gaddis et al. (Ref. 24). These deposits are of regional extent and are composed largely of
crystallized black beads, orange glass beads, or a mixture of the two. Noteworthy large deposits located
just north of the lunar equator include: (1) the Aristarchus Plateau (~49,015 km2), (2) Southern Sinus
Aestuum (~10,360 km2), (3) Rima Bode (~6620 km2), (4) Sulpicius Gallus (~4320 km2), (5) Southern
Mare Vaporum (~4130 km2), and (6) Taurus-Littrow (~2940 km2).



NASA/TM—2018-219725                               9
       Figure 8.—Conceptual commercial LUNOX facility bordering Taurus-Littrow site dark mantle deposit.

     Just like 20 years ago, our choice for siting a commercial LUNOX facility is the Taurus-Littrow
DMD near the southeastern edge of Mare Serenitatis (~21° N, ~29.5° E), approximately 30 km west of
the Apollo 17 landing site. This deposit of largely black crystalline beads covers ~3000 km2, is thought to
be tens of meters thick, and could yield hundreds of millions of tons of LUNOX using the hydrogen-
reduction process. The facility image (Fig. 8) was developed and first presented in the author’s 1997
33rd Joint Propulsion Conference paper (Ref. 18) and has appeared in publications and magazines
numerous times since then. Depicted in the lower left foreground are two lunar industrialists discussing
planned expansions at the LUNOX facility, and towards the top, modular production units, resembling oil
rigs on Earth, generate copious amounts of LUNOX, which are stored in well-insulated tanks adjacent to
the facility. At the top, a bottom-loaded “Sikorsky-style” LLV lifts off from the surface carrying a tank of
LUNOX to a propellant depot in LLO, while at the adjacent landing pad a second LLV awaits servicing
prior to its next mission. In the right foreground, increased numbers of government and industry
personnel have taxed the capabilities of several previously landed habitat modules, necessitating
construction of an inflatable dome for added living space. The dome is covered on the outside by bagged
regolith to provide shielding against solar flares and galactic cosmic radiation. Lastly, nuclear fission
reactors, positioned within craters and having overhead surface radiators, will be critical to providing a
good return to investors in the LUNOX enterprise. They provide abundant power at low mass to support
continuous operation of the tele-operated surface vehicles, production units, and habitat modules even
during the 2-week lunar night. As production capacity increases, the LUNOX enterprise can expand its
commercial operations to include metals processing (e.g., iron and titanium), power generation,
maintenance, as well as the operations of surface-based LLVs and LLO propellant depots and eventually
even a lunar tourism industry complete with routine commuter flights to and from the Moon.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              10
3.0     NTR and LANTR System Description and Performance Characteristics
     The NTR uses a compact fission reactor core containing enriched uranium- (U-) 235 fuel to generate
hundreds of megawatts of thermal power (MWt) required to heat the LH2 propellant to high exhaust
temperatures for rocket thrust (Ref. 35). In an “expander cycle” engine (Fig. 9), high-pressure LH2
flowing from a turbopump assembly (TPA) is split into two paths, with the first cooling the engine’s
nozzle, pressure vessel, neutron reflector, and control drums and the second path cooling the engine’s
core support tie-tube (TT) assemblies. The flows are then merged, and the heated H2 gas is used to drive
the TPAs. The hydrogen turbine exhaust is then routed back into the reactor pressure vessel and through
the internal radiation shield and upper core support plate before entering the coolant channels in the
reactor’s fuel elements (FEs). Here it absorbs energy produced from the fission of U-235 atoms, is
superheated to high exhaust temperatures (Tex ~2700 K or more, depending on the uranium fuel loading),
and then expanded out a high-area-ratio nozzle (~300:1) for thrust generation.
     Controlling the NTR during its various operational phases (startup, full thrust, and shutdown) is
accomplished by matching the TPA-supplied LH2 flow to the reactor power level. Multiple control drums,
located in the reflector region surrounding the reactor core, regulate the neutron population and reactor
power level over the NTR’s operational lifetime. The internal neutron and gamma radiation shield,
located within the engine’s pressure vessel, contains its own interior coolant channels. It is placed
between the reactor core and key engine components to prevent excessive radiation heating and material
damage.
     Recent studies showing the benefits of NTP for a variety of exploration and commercial lunar
missions (Refs. 16 and 17) have used a common NTP stage (NTPS) employing a cluster of three small
nuclear rocket engines (SNREs). The engine’s reactor core is composed of hexagonal-shaped FEs and
core support TTs developed and tested during the Rover/NERVA program (Ref. 35). Each FE was
fabricated using a graphite matrix material that contained the U-235 fuel in the form of either coated
particles of uranium carbide (UC2) or a dispersion of uranium and zirconium carbide (UC-ZrC) referred
to as “graphite composite” (GC) fuel (Fig. 10).
     This higher performance GC fuel was developed as a “drop-in replacement” for the coated-particle
fuel and was tested in the Nuclear Furnace 1 (NF–1) element test reactor (Ref. 35) near the end of the
Rover program. The GC elements achieved a peak power density of ~5 MWt/L (~5000 MWt/m3) and a
peak fuel temperature of ~2700 K. The GC elements also demonstrated better corrosion resistance than
the standard coated-particle FEs used in the previous Rover/NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle
Applications) reactor tests. This improved resistance of the GC fuel was attributed to its higher coefficient
of thermal expansion that more closely matched that of the protective ZrC coating, thereby helping to
reduce coating cracking. Electrical-heated composite FEs were also tested by Westinghouse in hot
hydrogen at 2700 K for ~600 min—equivalent to ten 1-hr cycles.




                       Figure 9.—Expander cycle NTR engine with dual LH2 turbopumps.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              11
    Figure 10.—Coated particle and graphite composite SNRE fuel element (FE) and tie-tube (TT) arrangement.

     Heritage Rover/NERVA FEs had hexagonal cross sections (~0.75 in. across the flats) and 19 axial
coolant channels (Fig. 10) that were coated with niobium carbide (NbC) initially, then with zirconium
carbide (ZrC), using a chemical vapor deposition process. This protective coating, applied to the FE’s
exterior surfaces as well, helped to reduce coating cracking, hydrogen penetration, and subsequent erosion
of the graphite matrix material. Individual elements were 1.32 m (52 in.) in length and produced ~1 MWt
during steady-state, full-power operation. Also included in the engine’s reactor core were hexagonal-
shaped TT elements that provided structural support for six surrounding FEs (Fig. 10). A coaxial Inconel
tube inside the TT carries hydrogen coolant that is also used to supply a source of heated hydrogen for
turbine drive power in the SNRE’s expander cycle engine design. A sleeve of zirconium hydride (ZrH)
moderator material is also incorporated into each TT (Fig. 10) to help increase core reactivity and allow
construction of smaller, lower thrust engine systems like the SNRE design (Ref. 35) developed by the Los
Alamos National Laboratory near the end of the Rover/NERVA program.
     Although it was not built, the SNRE incorporated all of the lessons learned from the program’s 20
previous reactor designs and test results. The FE had the same hexagonal cross section and coolant
channel number, but was 35 in. long, used GC fuel, and produced ~0.65 MWt. To help increase core
reactivity, the SNRE FE–TT pattern increased the number of TTs so that each FE has three FEs and three
TTs surrounding it (Fig. 10). With the SNRE pattern, the FE-to-TT ratio is ~2 to 1 with each TT
providing redundant mechanical support for six surrounding FEs.
     The baseline SNRE used in this study has a nominal power output of ~365 MWt, an average power
density of ~3.44 MWt/L, and produces ~16.5 klbf (1 klbf = 1000 pounds force) of thrust. The reactor core
has 564 FEs and 241 TTs and is surrounded by a 14.7-cm-thick perimeter neutron reflector, resulting in a
pressure vessel OD of ~98.5 cm. With a fuel loading of ~0.6 g/cm3, the FEs contain ~60 kg of 93%
enriched U-235. The GC fuel operates at a peak temperature of ~2860 K, and the corresponding hydrogen
exhaust temperature is ~2734 K. With a chamber pressure of 1000 psia, a hydrogen flow rate of ~8.30 kg/s




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              12
     Figure 11.—Simplified LANTR schematic and simulated proof-of-concept test article photograph (Ref. 36).

and a nozzle area ratio (NAR) of ~300:1, the engine’s specific impulse Isp is ~900 s. The total engine length
is ~5.8 m with the ~1.8-m-long radiation-cooled, retractable nozzle section fully extended. The nozzle
exit diameter is ~1.53 m and the engine’s thrust-to-weight ratio is ~3.02.
     In order to take full advantage of LUNOX once it becomes available to the LTS, each SNRE is
outfitted with an O2 afterburner nozzle containing the O2 injectors and an O2 feed system. The oxygen is
stored as a cryogenic liquid at low pressure and must be pressurized and gasified prior to its injection into
the nozzle. This is accomplished by diverting a small fraction of the engine’s hydrogen flow (~3%) to an
oxidizer-rich gas generator that drives a LO2 TPA used to deliver the gasified LO2 to injectors positioned
inside the afterburner nozzle downstream of the throat (Refs. 18 to 20). Here it mixes with the hot H2 and
undergoes supersonic combustion, adding both mass and chemical energy to the rocket exhaust—
essentially scramjet propulsion in reverse.
     Downstream nozzle injection in the LANTR isolates the reactor core from oxygen’s damaging
effects, provided the throat retains choked flow. This operating condition can be satisfied by using a
“cascade” scramjet injector developed by Aerojet (currently Aerojet Rocketdyne) (Ref. 20). A three-zone
staged injection approach (Ref. 20) is envisioned using multiple cascade injectors to control the oxygen
addition and heat release within the nozzle while keeping the flow supersonic. This approach also
increases penetration, mixing, and combustion of the injected oxygen within the hydrogen flow while
minimizing shock losses and the formation of high-heat-flux regions, thereby maximizing engine
performance and life. A high reactor outlet pressure is also desirable since it allows the use of a high-area-
ratio nozzle—important for increasing combustion efficiency—at reasonable size and mass.
     A simplified schematic of LANTR engine operation is illustrated in Figure 11. Also shown is a
photograph of a nonnuclear, “proof-of-concept” demonstration test of a LANTR nozzle that used a fuel-
rich 2100-lbf chemical rocket engine operating at an O/H MR < 2 to simulate a NTR. The water-cooled,
copper test nozzle had a NAR of 25:1 and used three wedge-shaped injectors (two of which are visible in
Fig. 11) (Ref. 36). These tests and follow-on tests with a 50:1 NAR indicated that up to 73% of the
injected oxygen burned within these short nozzles, resulting in an augmented thrust level of ~53% as
measured on the engine thrust stand (Ref. 20).
     The LANTR concept has the potential to be an extremely versatile propulsion system. By varying the
O/H MR, the LANTR engine can operate over a wide range of thrust and Isp values (Table I) while the
reactor core produces a relatively constant power output. As the MR varies from 0 to 5, the engine thrust
level for the SNRE increases by over 344%—from 16.5 to ~56.8 klbf—while the Isp decreases by
~57%—from 900 to 516 s—which is still 54 s higher than that achieved by today’s best LO2/LH2
chemical engine, the RL10B–2 (Ref. 37). This thrust augmentation feature means that large-engine
performance can be obtained using smaller, more affordable LH2-cooled NTR engines that are easier to
build and less costly to test on the ground. The engines can then be operated in space in the augmented
high-thrust mode to shorten burn times (thereby extending engine life) and reduce gravity losses, or
g-losses (thereby eliminating the need for and concern over multiple perigee burn Earth departure
maneuvers). Lastly, the increased use of high-density LO2 in place of low-density LH2, and the ability to
resupply, or reoxidize, LANTR vehicles with LUNOX prior to Earth return, are expected to significantly
reduce vehicle size and mass while increasing delivered PL.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                               13
  TABLE I.—SNRE AND LANTR PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS AS FUNCTION OF O/H MIXTURE RATIOa
      O/H mixture    Specific impulse,b   Thrust augmentation         Thrust,         Engine mass,          Engine
         ratio              Isp, s               factor                 lbf               lbm            thrust/weight

           0                900                  1.0                   16,500             5462                3.02
           1                725                  1.611                 26,587             5677                4.68
           2                637                  2.123                 35,026             5834                6.00
           3                588                  2.616                 43,165             5987                7.21
           4                552                  3.066                 50,587             6139                8.24
           5                516                  3.441                 56,779             6295                9.02
   aAcronyms are defined within report and in appendix.
   bFuel exit and hydrogen exhaust temperature = 2734 K, chamber pressure = 1000 psia, and nozzle area ratio = 300:1.




4.0       Mission, Payload, and Transportation System Ground Rules and
          Assumptions
    Specific mission and PL ground rules and assumptions used in this report are summarized in Table II,
which provides information about the different lunar mission scenarios along with the assumed parking
orbits at Earth and the Moon. Specific trajectory details and V budgets for the different missions
examined are provided within the appropriate sections of the report. In addition to the large V
requirements for the primary propulsion maneuvers like translunar injection (TLI), lunar orbit capture
(LOC), trans-Earth injection (TEI), and Earth orbit capture (EOC), smaller V maneuvers are needed for
propellant settling, vehicle midcourse correction maneuvers, orbital operations in LLO (including
rendezvous and docking (R&D) of the lunar transfer vehicle (LTV) with surface-based LLVs or with the
lunar propellant depot), and lastly, LTV-depot separation and station keeping.
    A variety of different PLs are also considered. On initial “all LH2” NTR crewed landing missions, a
forward-mounted saddle truss is used to connect the PL elements to the transfer vehicle’s in-line tank.
The truss is open on its underside, and its forward adaptor ring provides a docking interface between the
multipurpose crew vehicle (MPCV) and the single-stage LO2/LH2 lunar descent and ascent vehicle
(LDAV) (Fig. 12(a)). The LDAV is a “heritage” design (Ref. 38) analyzed in considerable detail during
NASA’s earlier Space Exploration Initiative studies. It carries a crew of four plus 5 t of surface PL stored
in two 2.5-t PL pallets mounted on each side of the crew cab. The LDAV mass breakdown including the
propellant loading and landed PL is shown in Table II. On the lunar landing mission analyzed here, the
crew collects and returns ~100 kg of samples.
    For the reusable, space-based CCT missions using LANTR propulsion and LUNOX on the Earth
return mission leg, the LTV carries a habitat module that supports a crew of four. Two crewmembers
operate the vehicle and manage the unloading of the PL. The other two represent rotating crewmembers
on assignment at the lunar base or the LLO propellant depot. Connecting the habitat module to the rest of
the LANTR LTV is a “star truss” that has four concave sides to accommodate four PL pallets (Fig. 12(b)).
The forward circular truss ring also has a remote manipulator system (RMS) with twin arms attached to it.
Using the habitat module’s rear viewing window, the crew uses these arms to unload and attach the
transport’s cargo to the depot or to a co-orbiting LLV transferring crew and awaiting cargo delivery.
    Using the same LANTR LTV system elements shown in Figure 13, routine commuter flights to and
from the Moon can also be considered. For the commuter shuttle application, the cargo transport’s habitat
module, star truss, and PL pallets are removed and replaced with a passenger transport module (PTM)
(Fig. 12(c)) that carries 18 passengers and 2 crewmembers. It is also possible to deliver a 7.5-t shipping
container carrying 5 t of priority cargo (Fig. 12(d)) on the alternating outbound and inbound legs of the
same mission, which will be discussed later in the report.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                       14
                    TABLE II.—MISSION AND PAYLOAD GROUND RULES AND ASSUMPTIONSa
• Crewed lunar landing using NTR                        • Reusable LTV carries MPCV, reusable LLV and surface PL to
  (3-day transits to and from Moon with 3 to 14 days      LLO; returns MPCV and spent LLV to EEO; Orion capsule used for
  on surface)                                             crew recovery at mission end
• CCT using LANTR                                       • Reusable, LANTR LTV transports habitat module, crew, and
  (1.5- to 3-day transits to and from Moon with           varying amounts of cargo, depending on the transit times to and
  3 days in LLO)                                          from LLO; LTV refuels with LUNOX at LLO depot before
                                                          returning to Earth
• LANTR commuter shuttle carries PTM                    • Reusable, LANTR LTV transport a PTM to LLO for subsequent
  (one-way transit of 36 hr or less)                      delivery to the LS by LLV; LTV refuels with LUNOX at
                                                          LLO depot before returning to Earth with another PTM
• Rapid commuter shuttle and priority cargo delivery    • Reusable LANTR LTV delivers PTM to LLO then returns priority
  system using LANTR                                      cargo back to LEO; LTV refuels with LUNOX at LLO depot before
  (24- and 48-hr transit times for passenger and          returning to Earth; PTM and cargo PLs alternate going out and back
  priority cargo mission legs, respectively)

• NTR and LANTR missions depart from LEO, then          • LEO: 407 km circular
  capture and depart from equatorial LLO                • LLO: 300 km equatorial
• NTR missions return to EEO, and LANTR missions        • 3.24-hr EEO: 407 by 9050 km
  return to LEO                                         • 24-hr EEO: 407 by 71,310 km

• Primary mission velocity change increment V          • V budgets for different missions discussed in relevant sections
  maneuvers: NTR or LANTR engines used                  • Propellant settling burn:               ~1 m/s
• Additional V requirements: AMBR RCS thrusters        • Midcourse correction:                   ~10 m/s
  used to perform nonprimary propulsion maneuvers       • Lunar orbit rendezvous and docking
                                                          and maintenance:                        ~40 m/s
                                                        • Depot separation and station keeping: ~10 m/s

• Crewed landing mission PL masses:                     • Orion MPCV:                             13.5 t
  Reusable NTR LTV delivers Orion MPCV and              • Saddle truss assembly (STA):            7.2 t
  single-stage LO2-LH2 LDAV to LLO; LDAV                • LDAV crew cab and dry mass:             8.6 t
  carries four crew and 5 t of PL to LS; LTV with       • Crew (4) and EVA suits:                 0.8 t
  Orion MPCV, LDAV, and surface samples returned        • LDAV propellant load:                   20.9 to 22.4 t
  to 24-hr EEO                                          • LDAV surface PL:                        5.0 t
                                                        • Returned samples:                       0.1 t

• CCT PL masses:                                        • Habitat module:                         9.9 t
  Reusable LANTR LTV delivers a habitat module,         • Single star truss with RMS:             5.29 t
  crew, and cargo (10 to 20 t, depending on transit     • Outbound PL
  time) from LEO to LLO, then returns to LEO              (4 to 8 cargo pallets)                  2.5 t each
                                                        • Crew (4) and EVA suits:                 0.80 t
                                                        • Returned samples:                       0.25 t

• Commuter shuttle PL mass:
                                                        • PTM:                                    15 t
  Reusable LANTR LTV delivers PTM from LEO to
                                                                                (includes 2 crew and 18 passengers)
  LLO then back again
• PTM and priority cargo masses: Reusable LANTR         • PTM:                                     15 t
  LTV delivers PTM to LLO then returns to LEO                                   (“one-way” transit time for the PTM is 24 hr)
  with priority cargo shipment; PLs alternate out and   • Cargo container:         7.5 t (includes 5.0 t of priority cargo)
  back                                                                          (“one-way” transit time for cargo is 48 hr)
aAcronyms are defined within report and in appendix.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                     15
             Figure 12.—Payload elements carried by NTR and LANTR lunar transfer vehicles.




      Figure 13.—Key elements of LANTR lunar transfer vehicle system: LH2 NTPS and in-line LO2 tank.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                            16
     Table III lists the key ground rules and assumptions used in the NTR and LANTR transportation
system elements. The NTPS carries only ELH2 and uses a three-engine cluster of SNRE-class engines
initially before transitioning over to LANTR operation. The smaller diameter in-line LO2 tank located in
front of the NTPS carries Earth-supplied LO2 on the way out to the Moon but refuels with LUNOX for
the return to Earth. Details on the NTR and LANTR engine design and performance are provided in
Section 2.0 and are summarized in Table III. The total mission LH2 and LO2 propellant loadings consist of
the usable propellant plus performance reserve and tank-trapped residuals. Additional LH2 is also
provided for engine cooldown after each major propulsive maneuver.
     For the smaller auxiliary maneuvers performed, a storable bipropellant reaction control system (RCS)
with Advanced Material Bipropellant Rocket (AMBR) thrusters is used (details in Table III). The
LANTR LTV utilizes a split RCS with approximately half the AMBR thrusters and bipropellant mass
located on the rear NTPS and the other half located at the front end of the in-line LO2 tank just behind the
mission-specific PL.

        TABLE III.—NTR AND LANTR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM GROUND RULES AND ASSUMPTIONSa
NTR and LANTR characteristics                  • Engine (fuel type):     NERVA-derived (UC-ZrC composite)
                                               • Propellants:            LH2 (NTR), LH2 and LO2 (LANTR)
                                               • Thrust level:           16.5 klbf (SNRE-class engine using only LH2)
                                                                         26.5 to 56.8 klbf (LANTR, O/H MR = 1 to 5)
                                               • Fuel element length:    0.89 m (SNRE baseline)
                                               • Exhaust temperature:    ~2734 K (with 2860 K peak temperature)
                                               • Chamber pressure:       ~1000 psi
                                               • Nozzle area ratio:      ~300:1
                                               • Specific impulse range: Isp = 900 to 516 s with LANTR (MR = 0 to 5)

Propellant margins                             • Cooldown:                 3% of usable LH2 propellant
                                               • Performance reserve:      1% on V
                                               • Tank trapped residuals:   2% of total tank capacity

RCS                                            • Propulsion type:          AMBR 200-lbf thrusters
 (propellant settling, midcourse correction    • Propellant:               nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) and hydrazine (N2H2)
 burns, and lunar orbit operations)            • Nominal Isp:              335 s

LH2 cryogenic tanks and passive                 • Material:               Aluminum-lithium (Al/Li)
 thermal protection system                      • Tank
                                                   – Outer diameter (OD): 7.6 m (LH2); 7.6 m and 4.6 m (LO2)
                                                   – Length (L):          15.65 m (core NTPS and in-line LH2 tanks)
                                                                          5.23 to 7.95 m (“in-line” LO2 tank)
                                                • Geometry:               Cylindrical with√2/2 ellipsoidal domes
                                                • Insulation:             1-in. SOFI (~0.78 kg/m2)
                                                                          + 60 layers of MLI (~0.90 kg/m2)

 Active cryofluid management and zero          • Reverse turbo-Brayton ZBO cryocooler system powered by PVAs
  boil-off (ZBO) LH2 propellant system         • ZBO system mass and power requirements driven by core stage size;
                                                  ~760 kg and ~5.26 kWe (for 7.6-m OD tank)

Photovoltaic array (PVA) primary               • Circular PVA sized for ~7 kWe at 1 A.U., two arrays provide power for
 power system                                     ZBO cryocoolers on core stage, PVA mass is ~566 kg for two ~25-m2
                                                  arrays, second set of arrays provides power to mission PLs
                                               • “Keep-alive” power supplied by lithium-ion battery system

Dry weight contingency factors                 • 30% on NTR system and composite structures (e.g., saddle and star trusses)
                                               • 15% on established propulsion, propellant tanks, and spacecraft systems

SLS and SLS upgrade launch requirements:
 – Usable PL delivered to LEO                   • ~70 t (SLS) and 105 to 110 t (upgrade)
 – Cylindrical PL envelope                      • 7.6 m OD by ~26.5 m L
aAcronyms and symbols are defined within report and in appendix.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                    17
     The LH2 propellant carried in the NTPS is stored in the same “state-of-the-art” Al-Li LH2 propellant
tank being developed for the Space Launch System (SLS) or alternative heavy lift vehicle (HLV) to
support future human exploration missions. Sizing of the LH2 tank assumes a 30-psi ullage pressure, 5g
axial and 2.5g lateral launch loads, and a safety factor of 1.5. A 3% ullage factor is also assumed. The in-
line LO2 tank with its rear conical adaptor section uses the same sizing and launch load assumptions. All
tanks use a combination spray-on foam (SOFI) and multilayer (MLI) insulation system for passive
thermal protection. A zero boil-off (ZBO) “reverse turbo-Brayton” cryocooler system is used on the
NTPS to eliminate boil-off after the NTPS has been refueled with ELH2 and during the course of the
mission. A passive thermal protection system is used on the in-line LO2 tank since it is drained after the
LOC burn and is subsequently refueled with LUNOX before the trip back to LEO. The heat load on the
NTPS hydrogen tank is largest in LEO and determines the size of the ZBO cryocooler system. Two sets
of circular solar PVAs—each producing ~14 kWe—are baselined with one set supplying the primary
electrical power needed for all key LTV subsystems and the second set providing power for the different
mission PLs considered here.
     Table III also provides the assumed dry weight contingency (DWC) factors, along with the
requirements for delivered mass to LEO and the shroud cylindrical PL envelope for the upgraded SLS or
HLV. A 30% DWC is used on the NTR and LANTR systems and advanced composite structures (e.g.,
stage adaptors and trusses) and 15% on heritage systems (e.g., Al-Li tanks, RCS, etc.). The NTPS mass
(~70 t) and size (~7.6-m OD and ~26.5-m length (L)) determines the required lift capability and the
usable shroud PL volume for the upgraded SLS. The combined saddle truss (~13.7-m L) and LDAV
(~9.6-m L) used on the crewed landing mission (Fig. 12(a)) has this same approximate length. On the
CCT mission discussed in Section 7.0, the habitat module (~6.5-m OD and ~8.5-m L) and star truss
(~11-m L) can be launched together, or the truss can be launched together with the in-line LO2 tank and
its conical adaptor (~11.5-m L).

5.0     Performance Impact of Integrating LANTR and LUNOX Into the LTS
        Architecture
     As previously mentioned, the author presented a paper on the enhanced mission capability resulting
from the combined use of LANTR propulsion and LUNOX 20 years ago at the 33rd Joint Propulsion
Conference in Seattle, Washington (Ref. 18). In that paper, an evolutionary LTS architecture was
analyzed that began with a LTS using high-performance NTP to maximize delivered PL on each mission.
The increased PL was dedicated to installing modular LUNOX production units with the intent of using
this LDP to supply surfaced-based LLVs initially, then in-space LTVs using LANTR propulsion at the
earliest possible opportunity. This section re-examines this evolutionary LTS architecture to see how
recent nuclear-powered LTV (NLTV) designs and missions (Refs. 16 and 17) are impacted by the
introduction of LANTR and LUNOX.
     The NTPS, with its three 16.5-klbf SNREs, is the “workhorse” element of the cargo and crewed
NLTVs shown in Figures 14(a) and (b), respectively. It has a 7.6-m-OD by ~15.7-m-long Al-Li tank that
carries ~39.8 t of LH2 propellant. Housed within and mounted on the forward cylindrical adaptor section
of the NTPS are the RCS, avionics, batteries, two deployable circular PVAs, a docking system, and a
reverse turbo-Brayton cryocooler system for ZBO LH2 storage. The cryocooler system mass and power
requirements increase with tank diameter and are sized to remove ~42 W of heat penetrating the 60-layer
MLI system while the stage is in LEO, where the highest tank heat flux occurs. To remove this heat load,
the two-stage cryocooler system requires ~5.3 kWe for operation.
     The second major element is an in-line Al-Li propellant tank that connects the NTPS to the forward
PL element. It has the same OD and length LH2 tank as that used in the NTPS and supplies an additional
~39.8 t of LH2 propellant used during for the 2-perigee burn TLI maneuver. The in-line tank element also
includes forward and aft cylindrical adaptor sections that house quick connect propellant feed lines,




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              18
electrical connections, a RCS along with docking and PL adaptors. A ZBO cryocooler system is not used
on the in-line LH2 tank since it is drained during the TLI maneuver. The total length of the in-line element
is ~20.7 m.

5.1     Reusable Lunar Cargo Delivery and Propellant Tanker Missions
     Using the NTPS and in-line tank discussed above, the cargo transport can deliver an ~64.5-t fully
integrated habitat lander with surface mobility to LLO then return to Earth for refueling and reuse. Three
SLS–1B launches deliver the vehicle and PL elements to LEO where assembly occurs via autonomous
R&D. The cargo transport then departs from LEO (characteristic energy C3 ~ –1.678 km2/s2 and TLI
velocity change VTLI ~3.214 km/s including a g-loss of ~117 m/s) and captures into a 300-km circular
LLO (arrival C3 ~1.151 km2/s2 and LOC velocity change VLOC ~906 m/s including g-loss) approximately
72 hr later.
     Once in orbit, the habitat lander separates from the cargo transport (Fig. 14(a)) and descends to the
surface, landing autonomously at a predetermined location on the Moon. The habitat lander uses LO2/LH2
chemical engines and is equipped with either wheels or articulated landing gear, allowing movement in
both the vertical and horizontal directions so the lander can either “drive or walk” short distances from the
landing site. Assuming a LUNOX production plant and lander can be configured to fit within the SLS–1B
PL shroud, the habitat lander can be replaced by a 36-t wet LLV stage capable of delivering ~28 t from
LLO to the LS. According to Figure 6, a LUNOX plant mass of ~28 t corresponds to a production
capacity of ~175 t/yr assuming volcanic glass as feedstock. This mass includes the mining and processing
equipment with a 30% margin but does not include any beneficiation hardware. The fission surface power
system mass is also not included here because it is delivered and predeployed on an earlier mission.
Without any attached PL, the cargo NLTV can also function as a propellant tanker, delivering ~25.6 t of
LH2 to a LLO depot on each round-trip mission.
     After PL separation and a day or so in LLO, the cargo transport performs a TEI burn (departure
C3 ~0.945 km2/s2 and VTEI ~857 m/s including g-loss) and returns to Earth 72 hr later. On final approach,
it performs the EOC burn (arrival C3 ~ –1.755 km2/s2 and VEOC ~366 m/s) and captures into a 24-hr
elliptical Earth orbit (EEO) with a 407-km perigee by 71,310-km apogee. Postburn engine cooldown
thrust is then used to assist in orbit lowering. Afterwards, an auxiliary tanker vehicle operating from a
LEO propellant depot, rendezvous and docks with the cargo vehicle and supplies it with the additional
LH2 propellant needed for final orbit lowering and rendezvous with the LEO transportation node and
propellant depot, where it is refurbished and resupplied before its next mission.
     The cargo NLTV has an IMLEO of ~187.8 t consisting of the NTPS (~68.3 t), the in-line tank
element (~52 t), and the habitat lander (~64.5 t) with its connecting structure (~3.0 t). The mission
requires five primary burns by the SNRE engines that use ~74.8 t of LH2 propellant. With ~49.5 klbf of
total thrust and Isp ~900 s, the total engine burn time is ~50 min. For the propellant tanker mission, the
IMLEO is ~121.2 t and the total engine burn time is ~34 min.




                  Figure 14.—Reusable NTR cargo delivery and crewed lunar landing vehicles.



NASA/TM—2018-219725                              19
5.2     Reusable Crewed Lunar Landing Mission
     On the crewed landing mission, the NLTV (Fig. 15(a)) carries a forward-mounted saddle truss
assembly (STA) that connects the PL elements to the transfer vehicle’s in-line tank. The truss is open on
its underside, and its forward adaptor ring provides a docking interface between the Orion MPCV and the
single-stage LO2-LH2 LDAV as shown in Figure 14(b). The LDAV carries a crew of four plus 5 t of
surface PL stored in two “swing-down” pallets mounted on each side of the crew cab (Fig. 15(b)).
     Three SLS–1B launches are used to deliver the two NTR vehicle elements and the PL element to
LEO for assembly via autonomous R&D. The PL element includes the connecting STA plus the LDAV
with its surface cargo containers. In addition to a front and rear docking capability, the STA’s forward
adaptor ring also carries twin PVAs and a RCS. Once assembled, the Orion MPCV and crew are
launched, and they rendezvous with the NLTV positioning itself inside the STA and docking with the
LDAV using the docking port and transfer tunnel mounted to the STA’s forward adaptor ring
(Fig. 12(a)). After the 2-perigee burn TLI burn (C3 ~ –1.516 km2/s2 and VTLI ~3.214 km/s including a
g-loss of ~110 m/s), the crew begins its 3-day coast to the Moon. Although the crewed NLTV carries a
significant amount of PL mass (the STA, MPCV, and “spent” LDAV) back from the Moon, it uses the
same ~15.7-m-long in-line tank to supply the required amount of LH2 propellant needed for this reusable
mission. After its 72-hr transit, the NLTV performs the LOC burn (arrival C3 ~1.217 km2/s2 and VLOC
~913 m/s including g-loss) inserting itself and its PL into LLO.
     Once in LLO, the crew enters the LDAV and separates from the transfer vehicle. After separation, the
LDAV’s two PL pallets are rotated 180 and lowered into their landing position in preparation for descent
to the LS (Fig. 15(b)). The V budget used in the Martin Marietta LDAV design (Ref. 38) isVdes
~2.115 km/s and Vasc ~1.985 km/s for the descent and ascent velocity changes, respectively. The LDAV
uses five RL10A–4 engines operating with a Isp ~450 s, and ~13.5 t of LO2/LH2 propellant is expended
during the descent to the surface.
     After completing the surface mission, the crew returns to LLO in the LDAV carrying 100 kg of lunar
samples. At liftoff, the LDAV mass is ~15.1 t, and ~5.5 t of propellant is used during the ascent to LLO.
The LDAV then rendezvous with the transfer vehicle, and preparations for the TEI maneuver begin. After
completing the departure burn (C3 ~0.949 km2/s2 and VTEI ~856 m/s including g-loss), the crew spends
the next 3 days in transit readying their vehicle for the final phase of the mission: capture into a 24-hr
EEO (arrival C3 ~ –1.740 km2/s2 and VEOC ~367 m/s). Afterwards, the crew re-enters and lands using the
Orion capsule.
     The crewed lunar landing mission has an IMLEO of ~176.6 t that includes the NTPS (~68.7 t), the
in-line tank assembly (~51.8 t), the STA (~7.2 t), the wet LDAV (~29.5 t) with its surface PL (~5 t), the
Orion MPCV (~13.5 t), consumables (~0.1 t), and four crewmembers (~0.8 t includes suits for lunar
extravehicular activity (EVA)). At departure, the LH2 propellant loading in the NTPS and the in-line tank
are at their maximum capacity of ~39.8 t. The overall length of the crewed NLTV is ~74 m. Like the
cargo mission, the crewed landing mission requires five primary burns by the NTPS using ~74.8 t of LH2
propellant, and the total engine burn time is again ~50 min.




Figure 15.—Crewed lunar landing mission: crewed transfer vehicle capture into LLO and LDAV landing preparation.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                              20
5.3     Impact of Using LUNOX to Refuel Surface-Based LDAVs and In-Space NLTVs
     Figure 16 shows the variation in NLTV size, IMLEO, increased mission capability, and engine burn
time resulting from the development and utilization of LLO2. Figure 16(a) shows the reusable, crewed
NLTV discussed above. It departs from LEO and captures into a 300-km equatorial LLO. At the end of
the mission, the NLTV returns to Earth with the spent LLV and captures into a 24-hr EEO because it has
a much lower V requirement. In order to return to LEO, the NLTV would need an additional ~118 t of
LH2 propellant, requiring the insertion of a star truss with four attached drop tanks between the vehicle’s
in-line tank and forward PL. The additional mass of the extra truss, propellant, and tanks nearly doubles
the vehicle’s IMLEO to ~347.8 t!
     The first significant step in LUNOX production occurs when lunar outpost assets and LLO2
production levels become sufficient to support a LS-based LDAV. By not having to transport a “wet”
LDAV to LLO on each flight, the crewed NLTV now has a lower starting mass in LEO (~146 t) plus
sufficient onboard propellant to allow a single-burn departure from LEO and a return to a lower, higher
energy ~3.25-hr EEO (407-km perigee by 9050-km apogee with VEOC ~1793 m/s including a g-loss of
~35 m/s) as shown in Figure 16(b).




Figure 16.—Variation in NLTV size, IMLEO, mission capability, and engine burn time resulting from development and
  utilization of LLO2 and transition to LANTR operation.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                21
     After entering orbit, a surface-based LDAV, operated autonomously from the LS during liftoff,
R&Ds with the crewed NLTV to pick up the crew and cargo. The cargo, consisting of two 2.5-t PL
pallets, is positioned at the front end of the saddle truss ring so that the pallets readily attach on both sides
of the crew cab and can subsequently be lowered into the “saddlebag” position for descent shown in
Figure 15(b). At liftoff the LDAV carries up to 22.4 t of LO2/LH2 propellant. It uses ~13 t to achieve LLO
and another 9 t returning to the LS after picking up the crew and cargo. Assuming an O/H MR of ~6, the
LDAV uses ~3.2 t of LH2 and ~19.2 t of LO2 propellant during its round-trip mission to LLO and back.
Since a NTR tanker can deliver ~25.6 t of LH2 propellant to a LLO depot in a single mission, it can
provide sufficient LH2 propellant for eight round-trip LDAV missions, provided the LUNOX facility has
a production capacity of ~155 to 160 t/yr.
     As LUNOX production increases further and a propellant depot is established in LLO, it will be
routinely supplied with both LLO2 transported from the LS by specialized LUNOX tanker LLVs and
ELH2 delivered by NTR tanker vehicles operating between LEO and LLO. At this point, the NLTV’s
SNREs are refitted with afterburner nozzles and LO2 feed systems, and the large in-line LH2 tank used in
the two previous vehicles is replaced by a smaller LO2 tank (Fig. 16(c)). The LO2 tank, consisting of two
√2/2 ellipsoidal domes, is ~5.23 m long and has a 7.6-m OD that is compatible with the saddle truss
diameter. The corresponding tank volume can hold ~163.5 t of LO2, which is excessive for the landing
mission under consideration here. Using ~49 t of LEO-supplied LO2 for TLI and LOC, refueling with
~47 t of LLO2 prior to Earth return, and using only ELH2 out and back, a crewed LANTR LTV is smaller
and ~24 t lighter than the NLTV shown in Figure 16(a). It is also capable of returning back to LEO—a
significant advance in performance capability.
     The LANTR engines used in this study are sized with the appropriate hardware mass (pumps,
controls, lines, etc.) for the maximum O/H MR operation to allow the full range of MRs from 0 to 5 to be
accessible during the mission. It is also important to note that with LO2 augmentation, the total engine
burn time for the LANTR LTV option is nearly cut in half. This is because of the fixed LH2 loading in the
NTPS (~39.8 t) and the specified hydrogen flow rate (~8.3 kg/s) through each engine. It is this
bipropellant operation, LUNOX refueling capability, and use of optimized MRs out and back that allow
the LANTR system to achieve its superior performance while also reducing the LTV’s size and mass.

6.0     Growth Mission Possibilities Using Depots and LUNOX Refueling
    Over time we envision the development of a totally space-based LTS with different types of NLTVs
operating between transportation nodes and/or propellant depots located in LEO (Fig. 17(a)) and LLO
(Fig. 17(b)). Because abundant deposits of volcanic glass are located at sites just north of the lunar
equator, we envision that a depot will be established in equatorial LLO initially and will be routinely
supplied with LUNOX from tanker LLVs operating between LLO and the LS. A propellant depot in LLO
could also evolve into a key transportation node, providing a convenient staging location where NTR
tanker vehicles, CCTs, and commuter shuttles can drop off ELH2, cargo, and passengers that would then
be picked up by LLVs for transport to the LS.
    One-way transit times to and from the Moon on the order of ~72 hr would be normal initially.
Eventually, however, as lunar outposts grow into permanent settlements staffed by visiting scientists,
engineers, and administrative personnel representing both government and private ventures, more
frequent flights of shorter duration could become commonplace. As shown in Figure 18, cutting transit
times between LEO and LLO in half to ~36 hr will require the mission’s total V budget to increase by
~25% (from ~8 to 10 km/s). As a result, versatile LANTR engines with adequate supplies of LUNOX for
refueling will be key to ensuring LTVs of reasonable size.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                22
     Figure 17.—Propellant depots in LEO and LLO: critical elements for robust lunar transportation system.




                     Figure 18.—Variation in primary-maneuver V values with flight time.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                               23
7.0     Conestoga—A Reusable, Space-Based Crewed Cargo Transport
    The original Conestoga wagon was a freight wagon developed in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, in
the early 1700s (Ref. 39) and used extensively in Pennsylvania and the nearby states of Maryland, Ohio, and
Virginia for more than 150 years. It was designed for hauling heavy loads—up to 6 t—and had a distinctive
bed that was curved upward at both ends to prevent the wagon’s contents from shifting or falling out while
traveling over rough roads. A white canvas cover protected the wagon’s contents from inclement weather
and a team of four to six strong horses pulled the wagon some 12 to 14 miles a day (Fig. 19).
    Named after its earlier ancestor, the Conestoga CCT shown in Figure 20 is a space-based, reusable
LTV that uses LANTR propulsion and refuels with LUNOX propellant. Conestoga has its own dedicated
habitat module that supports a crew of four and has a mass of ~10 t. Two crewmembers operate the
vehicle and manage the unloading of the PL. The other two represent rotating crewmembers on
assignment at the lunar base or the LLO propellant depot. Connecting the habitat module to the rest of the
LANTR LTV is a four-sided star truss that has four PL pallets attached to it, each weighing up to ~2.5 t.
To accommodate the wedge-shaped geometry of the cargo pallets, the sides of the star truss are
concave—a feature similar to the upward curving ends on the Conestoga wagon bed, though not for the
same design reason. Attached to the star truss’s forward circular ring is a RMS with twin arms that are
free to move around the ring’s outer perimeter. Using the habitat module’s rear viewing window, the
orbiting LDAV transferring crew and awaiting cargo delivery. Key features and dimensions of the
Conestoga are shown in Figure 21, and major mission activities are shown in Figure 22.




           Figure 19.—Conestoga wagons, the “ships of inland commerce,” were used from 1700s to
             early 1900s to transport settlers, farm produce, and freight across Pennsylvania and
             neighboring states (image ca. 1910). Courtesy of Landis Valley Village & Farm Museum,
             Pennsylvania Historical Museum Commission.




              Figure 20.—Conestoga: Space-based crewed cargo transport, using common NTPS
                and in-line LO2 tank.



NASA/TM—2018-219725                               24
                Figure 21.—Key features and dimensions of Conestoga crewed cargo transport.




          Figure 22.—Conestoga crewed cargo transport mission: LEO, outbound, and LLO operations.


    The Conestoga CCT is a versatile vehicle that can deliver varying amounts of cargo (from 10 to 40 t)
to LLO depending on the transit times out and back. Once loaded with cargo and propellant from the LEO
transportation node and depot (Fig. 22(a)), the Conestoga leaves orbit for the Moon (Fig. 22(b)). After
capturing into LLO (Fig. 22(c)), the Conestoga’s cargo is then unloaded and attached to the LDAV using
the vehicle’s RMS as shown in Figure 22(d). The Conestoga can also be used as a tanker vehicle,
transferring close to 10 t of LH2 from its NTPS to the depot. Outfitted with appropriate refueling
appendages, Conestoga could also supply LH2 propellant directly to the LDAV. Refueling ports and twin
PVAs are located at the forward ends of the NTPS and in-line LO2 tank assembly for refueling in LEO
and LLO, and for powering the NTPS and forward PL element as shown in Figure 21.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                             25
     In this study, the Conestoga’s NTPS is limited to a LEO launch mass of ~70 t, which includes
~39.8 t of LH2 contained in the NTPS’s propellant tank. With this fixed value, the outbound and return O/H
MRs used by the LANTR engines are optimized to achieve the desired mission performance. The
multidisciplinary analysis and mission assessment code (MAMA) with optimization capability (Ref. 40) is
used to determine the customized LO2 tank size and LUNOX refueling requirement for a particular mission
application, or for a fixed LO2 tank size it can be used to determine the maximum delivered PL and LUNOX
refueling needed for a desired trip time. For a fixed LO2 tank size and PL, the shortest trip time and LUNOX
refueling needed can also be determined. A variety of other trades have also been conducted.
     Table IV provides a sampling of different crewed cargo missions, vehicle types, and trip times that
have been examined as well as the associated LUNOX refueling requirements. All the cases shown use
the same common three-engine NTPS described previously in Section 4.0 and shown in Figure 21.
Case 1, the crewed lunar landing mission discussed in Section 5.0 and shown in Figure 16(c), carries
the Orion MPCV and 5 t of cargo. It uses an oversized in-line LO2 tank consisting of two 7.6-m-OD
ellipsoidal domes and requires ~47 t of LUNOX for Earth return.
     Case 2 is a space-based CCT similar to Conestoga. It has its own dedicated habitat module weighing
9.9 t, plus a star truss that has two 2.5-t PL pallets attached to it. The LO2 tank is smaller (~4.6-m OD and
~3.4-m L) and is customized for this particular application, resulting in a lower IMLEO (~131 t) and
LUNOX refueling requirement (~35 t).
     Case 3 shows the impact on CCT sizing of reducing the LEO–LLO transit time from 72 hr down to
36 hr. Cutting the transit time in half increases the total mission V by ~23% and increases the IMLEO by
~46 t. Also, because the LH2 propellant loading in the NTPS is fixed at ~39.8 t for these missions, the
LANTR engines run at higher O/H MRs—increasing the in-line LO2 tank length to ~6.1 m—and the
LUNOX refueling requirement for Case 3 to ~71.6 t—more than double that needed for Case 2.
     Case 4 is the defining mission used to establish the required performance and sizing for the
Conestoga crewed cargo transport. Case 4 not only cuts the one-way transit times to 36 hr, but it also
doubles the amount of cargo delivered to the LLO to 10 t. To meet these demanding mission objectives,
the LANTR engines run “O2 rich” on both the outbound mission leg (O/H MR = 5 and Isp ~ 516 s for TLI;
MR = 4.1 and Isp ~ 550 s for LOC) and return mission leg (MR = 5 and Isp ~ 516 s for both the TEI and
EOC burns). The LO2 tank length increases to 7.95 m, and it holds ~111.2 t of LO2 just prior to mission
start. This tank length is fixed for all subsequent Conestoga-class missions. After dropping off its cargo
and picking up 250 kg of lunar samples, Conestoga refuels with ~74.9 t of LUNOX for the return trip
home. For this mission, Conestoga has an IMLEO of ~214.3 t, consisting of the NTPS (~71 t), the in-line
LO2 tank and conical adaptor (~117.2 t), the star truss assembly with its RMS (~5.3 t) and attached PL
(10 t), the habitat module (9.9 t), consumables (~0.1 t), plus the two crew and two passengers with their
EVA suits (~0.8 t). The total mission V to go from LEO to LLO then back to LEO again is ~9.92 km/s
including g-losses. With the augmented thrust levels provided by the LANTR engines (~56.8 klbf per
engine at MR = 5), the burn times for the individual maneuvers are ~11.5 min (TLI), ~3.8 min (LOC),
~4.4 min (TEI), and ~5.6 min (EOC), totaling ~25.3 min. This total burn time is essentially fixed by the
available amount of LH2 in the NTPS and the ~8.3-kg/s specified LH2 flow rate for each engine. What
varies in the different cases presented in this report is the amount of LO2 supplied in LEO and LLO and
the different O/H MRs used by the LANTR engines to achieve the mission objectives.
     Case 5 illustrates the mission flexibility with the Conestoga CCT and its LANTR engines. With its
fixed-size tanks able to carry ~39.8 t of LH2 and up to ~111.2 t of LO2, Conestoga can operate as both a
cargo delivery and tanker vehicle. By increasing the LEO to LLO transit time back to 72 hr, and operating
the LANTR engines O2 rich both out and back (again at O/H MR = 5 and Isp ~516 s), Conestoga can
deliver 10 t of cargo and transfer ~9.62 t of LH2 propellant from its NTPS to the LLO depot. For the
return trip back to LEO, it refuels with ~54 t of LUNOX. The IMLEO required for this mission is
~194.1 t and the total mission V is ~8.04 km/s. The burn times for the individual maneuvers are 9.9 min
(TLI), ~1.9 min (LOC), ~2.1 min (TEI), and ~5.2 min (EOC) totaling ~19.1 min. By transferring ~9.6 t of
LH2 propellant from the NTPS during this mission, there is less available for the engines to use, so the
total mission burn time decreases and the LANTR engines operate at MR = 5 to compensate.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                              26
TABLE IV.—LANTR CREWED CARGO MISSION OPTIONS, TRAJECTORY AND V BUDGETS, AND LUNOX REFUELING NEEDSa
     Case descriptionb           Objective              Trajectory and orbitsc     In-line LO2              Results
                                                                                       tank
1. Crewed LANTR LTV                                  72-hr one-way transit times  7.6-m OD by   IMLEO ~152.4 t
                         Determine LLO2 refueling
   with MPCV and 12-m                                  LEO  LLO  LEO             ~5.23-m L
                         needed to deliver 5 t cargo                                            ~48.8 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   saddle truss carrying
                         to LLO                           V ~7.984 km/s         (~163.5 t LO2) ~46.9 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
   5 t cargo to LLO
 2. LANTR crewed cargo
    transport (CCT) with     Determine LLO2 refueling     72-hr one-way transit times      4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~131.1 t
    9.9-t habitat module     needed to deliver 5 t cargo
                                                             LEO  LLO  LEO                 ~3.4-m L      ~35.9 t LO2 supplied in LEO
    and 11-m star truss      to LLO using alternative
    carrying 5 t cargo to    LTV configuration                 V  ~7.996 km/s             (~35.9 t LO2)   ~35.1 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    LLO
 3. LANTR CCT with
                             Determine LLO2 refueling     36-hr one-way transit times
    9.9-t habitat module                                                                   4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~177.4 t
                             needed to deliver 5 t cargo
    and 11-m star truss                                      LEO  LLO  LEO                 ~6.1-m L      ~81.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             to LLO while cutting
    carrying 5 t cargo to
                             transit times to 36 hr            V ~9.838 km/s              (~81.2 t LO2)   ~71.6 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    LLO
 4. LANTR CCT with           Determine LLO2 refueling
    9.9-t habitat module     needed to deliver 10 t       36-hr one-way transit times      4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~214.3 t
    and 11-m star truss      cargo to LLO while              LEO  LLO  LEO                ~7.95-m L      ~111.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
    carrying 10 t cargo to   cutting transit times to          V ~9.920 km/s             (~111.2 t LO2) ~74.9 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    LLO                      36 hr
 5. LANTR CCT with           Determine LLO2 refueling
                                                                                                           IMLEO ~194.1 t
    9.9-t habitat module     needed to deliver 10 t       72-hr one-way transit times      4.6-m OD by
                                                                                                           ~90.8 t LO2 supplied in LEO
    and 11-m star truss      cargo and LH2 propellant        LEO  LLO  LEO                ~7.95-m L
                                                                                                           ~9.62 t LH2 to LLO depot
    carrying 10 t cargo to   to LLO with transit times         V ~8.038 km/s             (~111.2 t LO2)
                                                                                                           ~54 t LLO2 refueling
    LLO                      of 72 hr
 6. LANTR CCT with
                             Determine LLO2 refueling     72-hr one-way transit times
    9.9-t habitat module                                                                   4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~189.6 t
                             needed to deliver 20 t
    and two 11-m star                                        LEO  LLO  LEO                ~7.95-m L      ~71.0 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             cargo to LLO with transit
    trusses carrying 20 t
                             times of 72 hr                    V ~8.057 km/s             (~111.2 t LO2) ~52.1 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    cargo to LLO
 7. LANTR CCT with
                             Determine LLO2 refueling ~44.2-hr one-way transit times
    9.9-t habitat module                                                                   4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~230.0 t
                             needed to deliver 20 t
    and two 11-m star                                        LEO  LLO  LEO                ~7.95-m L      ~111.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             cargo to LLO in shortest
    trusses carrying 20 t
                             transit time                      V ~9.017 km/s             (~111.2 t LO2) ~70.9 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    cargo to LLO
 8. LANTR CCT with
                             Determine LLO2 refueling     72-hr one-way transit times
    9.9-t habitat module                                                                   4.6-m OD by     IMLEO ~250.7 t
                             needed to deliver 40 t
    and two 11-m star                                        LEO  LLO  LEO                ~7.95-m L      ~109.8 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             cargo to LLO with transit
    trusses carrying 40 t
                             times of 72 hr                    V  ~8.064 km/s            (~111.2 t LO2) ~60.3 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
    cargo to LLO
a
  Acronyms and symbols are defined within report and in appendix.
b
  Cases use common LH2 NTPS (7.6-m OD by ~15.7-m L). Propellant depots are assumed in LEO and LLO. LANTR engines use optimized O/H
  MRs out and back.
c
  Altitude: 407 km (LEO) and 300 km (LLO, equatorial). Total round-trip mission V values shown include g-losses.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                           27
     For the same one-way transit time of 72 hr, Case 6 shows that a Conestoga-class vehicle can double
the amount of cargo delivered to LLO from 10 to 20 t. Shown in Figure 23, the Conestoga-II is a heavy,
CCT that adds a second 11-m-long star truss and RMS and four more 2.5-t PL pallets to the vehicle
configuration. This addition results in an increase in the vehicle’s overall length from ~57.5 to ~68.5 m.
Departing from LEO, the Conestoga-II’s LANTR engines operate for ~12.3 min at an O/H MR = 3.4 and
Isp of ~573 s. During lunar orbit capture, the engines operate fuel rich for ~4.4 min with a MR = 0.9 and
the Isp at ~737 s. Once in orbit, the crew unloads the forward PL pallets first. This allows an unobstructed
view of the rear PL section from the habitat module’s rear viewing port during the unloading process.
After picking up samples, the Conestoga-II’s LO2 tank is refueled with ~52.1 t of LUNOX. On the return
leg of the mission, the engines operate for ~2.2 min at MR = 4.7 and Isp ~527 s during the TEI maneuver.
For EOC, the engines operate for ~6.4 min at MR = 3.8 and Isp ~558 s. The total mission V is
~8.06 km/s, and the total burn time on the engines is ~25.3 min.
     Even with 20 t of delivered PL, additional performance capability is still possible using the
Conestoga-II vehicle. Since its LO2 tank is only filled to ~64% of maximum capacity in Case 6, faster trip
times are possible by taking advantage of the extra propellant capacity that exists within the vehicle
design. By increasing the LO2 loading to its maximum capacity of 111.2 t before TLI and increasing the
LUNOX refueling to ~70.9 t before TEI, Case 7 shows that faster one-way transit times—on the order of
~44.2 hr—are possible even when carrying 20 t of cargo. For this mission, the LANTR engines operate at
O/H MR ~4.9 and Isp ~519 s for TLI and MR ~3.5 and Isp ~568 s for LOC. On the return leg, the engines
operate at MR = 5 and Isp ~ 516 s for both the TEI and EOC burns. The IMLEO for the Conestoga-II’s
fast 20-t cargo delivery mission is ~230 t, the total mission V is ~9.02 km/s, and the total mission burn
time is again ~25.3 min. The burn times for the individual maneuvers are ~12.2 min (TLI), ~3.6 min
(LOC), ~3.6 min (TEI), and ~5.9 min (EOC).
     Case 8 pushes the Conestoga-II’s cargo delivery capability to its limit for the amount of LH2 and LO2
propellant available in the NTPS and in-line LO2 tank. Assuming 72-hr transit times, this limit is ~40 t
(eight 5-t PL pallets). For this mission, the LO2 loading at LEO departure is ~109.8 t (~98.5% of the
tank’s maximum capacity), and the LANTR engines are operated at O/H MR ~4.4 and Isp ~536 s for
TLI and MR ~3.3 and Isp ~578 s for LOC. On the return leg, the Conestoga-II is refueled with ~60.3 t of
LUNOX, and its engines are operated at MR = 5 and Isp ~536 s for TEI and MR ~4.8 and Isp ~522 s for
EOC. These MR conditions were selected by the optimizer to deliver the specified PL while also
minimizing the total LO2 requirement for the mission. The IMLEO for Case 8 is ~250.7 t, and the total
mission V is ~8.06 km/s. The total mission burn time of ~25.3 min includes the following individual
burn times: ~13.8 min (TLI), ~3.2 min (LOC), ~2.3 min (TEI), and ~6 min (EOC).
     The Conestoga-class CCTs shown departing LEO for the Moon in Figure 24 can provide the basis for
a robust and flexible LTS that offers a wide range of cargo delivery capability and transit times made
possible through the use of LANTR propulsion and supplies of LUNOX provided in LLO. Today, “time
is money” for the long-distance freight haulers traveling our highways, oceans, and skies. In the future,
Conestoga-class vehicles could play the same important role in establishing cislunar trade and commerce
as the Conestoga wagons of the past did for more than a century throughout Pennsylvania and its
neighboring states.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                             28
          Figure 23.—Conestoga-II heavy crewed cargo transport isometric and elevation views.




             Figure 24.—Conestoga-class crewed cargo transports departing LEO for Moon.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                          29
8.0      Commuter Shuttle Mission Feasibility
     In the movie “2001: A Space Odyssey,” released by MGM in 1968 (Ref. 41), Dr. Heywood Floyd
departs from a huge artificial gravity space station orbiting Earth and bound for the Moon. He arrives
there 24 hr later (Ref. 42) aboard a large spherical-shaped LTV called Ares, which touches down on a
landing pad that subsequently descends to a large sprawling lunar settlement located underground. Today,
50 years later, the images portrayed in Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke’s film remain well beyond
our capabilities, and “2100: A Space Odyssey” seems a more appropriate title for the movie. In this
section, we evaluate the feasibility and requirements for commuter flights using LANTR propulsion and
LUNOX propellant to see if the operational capabilities presented in “2001: A Space Odyssey” can be
achieved, albeit on a more “Spartan” scale.
     A 24-hr commuter flight to the Moon is a daunting challenge. This is about the time it now takes to
fly from Washington, DC, to Melbourne, Australia, with a 3-hr layover in San Francisco. As Figure 18
shows, decreasing the LEO-to-LLO transit time from 72 to 24 hr increases the outbound V requirement
from ~4 to 6.4 km/s and the total round-trip V requirement by ~4.8 km/s! Increasing the flight time to
36 hr each way decreases this additional V requirement by 37.5% to ~1.8 km/s. Also, at these higher
velocities, free return trajectories are no longer available, so multiple engines will be required to improve
reliability and increase passenger safety.
     How might a typical commuter flight to the Moon proceed? A possible scenario might start with
passengers boarding a future Earth-to-orbit shuttle for a flight to a future commercial artificial gravity
station (AGS) shown in Figure 25(a). There they would enter a PTM containing its own life support,
power, instrumentation and control, and RCS. The PTM provides the “brains” for the LANTR-powered
shuttle and is home to the 18 passengers and 2 crewmembers operating it while on route to the Moon.
After departing the AGS (Fig. 25(b)), the PTM docks with the fully fueled LANTR shuttle awaiting it a
safe distance away (Fig. 26(a)). At the appropriate moment, the LANTR engines are powered up, and the
shuttle climbs rapidly away from Earth (Fig. 26(b)). For a 36-hr flight to the Moon, the acceleration
experienced by the passengers during Earth departure will range from ~0.4g to ~0.8g near the end of the
TLI burn.




Figure 25.—Future commercial artificial gravity station (AGS) provides transportation hub for PTMs arriving and
  departing from LEO.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                 30
                    Figure 26.—Various phases of LANTR commuter shuttle mission to Moon.

     Following the 36-hr transfer, the LANTR shuttle arrives in LLO where the PTM detaches and docks
with a waiting Sikorsky-style LLV. A commercial propellant depot (Fig. 17(b)) provides a convenient
staging node for LLO operations supplying the LANTR shuttle with LUNOX for Earth return and the
LLV with Earth-supplied LH2 needed to deliver the PTM to the LS. From here the PTM is lowered to a
flatbed surface vehicle (Fig. 26(c)) and electronically engaged providing the PTM with surface mobility.
The PTM then drives itself to the lunar base airlock for docking and passenger unloading (shown in the
lower right corner of Fig. 8). This scenario is reversed on the return trip to Earth (Fig. 26(d)). At the end
of the flight, the passengers will also experience a bit of excitement as peak acceleration levels can reach
~1.4g at the end of the LEO capture burn.
     The commercial commuter shuttle envisioned here utilizes the same NTPS, LANTR engines, and
in-line LO2 tank assembly used on the Conestoga CCT shown in Figure 21. For the commuter shuttle
application, the CCT’s habitat module, star truss, and PL pallets are removed and replaced with a 20-
person PTM (Fig. 27). The fully loaded PTM has an estimated mass of ~15 t, and its OD and length are
~4.6 and ~8 m, respectively.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              31
    Figure 27.—Relative sizes of Conestoga crewed cargo transport and LANTR commuter shuttle using
      same NTPS and in-line LO2 tank assembly.



    Table V provides a sampling of the different LANTR shuttle missions considered in this study. These
missions looked at trip times ranging from 36 to 24 hr as well as the associated LUNOX refueling
requirements needed to achieve these transit times. Cases 1 through 5 use the same NTPS and clustered
LANTR engines used on the Conestoga-class vehicles shown in Figure 24. Case 1 assumes a 36-hr transit
time and uses a customized LO2 tank to determine the minimum IMLEO needed for this mission, which is
~160.6 t. The amount of LO2 supplied in LEO and LUNOX in LLO are approximately the same at ~69.3
and 67.9 t, respectively.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              32
                  TABLE V.—LANTR COMMUTER SHUTTLE MISSION OPTIONS, TRAJECTORY AND V BUDGETS,
                                        AND LUNOX REFUELING NEEDSa
    Case descriptionb            Objective             Trajectory and orbitsc          In-line LO2 tank                Results

                         Determine LLO2
1. LANTR commuter
                         refueling needed to        36-hr one-way transit times                             IMLEO ~160.6 t
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~5.4-m L
                         deliver 15-t PTM to and      LEO  LLO  LEO                                       ~69.3 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~69.3 t LO2)
   back to LEO
                         from LLO with transit            V ~9.835 km/s                                    ~67.9 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                         times of 36 hr

                         Minimize LLO2
2. LANTR commuter
                         refueling needed to        36-hr one-way transit times                             IMLEO ~203.5 t
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
                         deliver 15-t PTM to and      LEO  LLO  LEO                                       ~111.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO
                         from LLO with transit            V ~9.924 km/s                                    ~55.7 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                         times of 36 hr

                         Minimize LEO LO2
3. LANTR commuter
                         fueling needed             36-hr one-way transit times                             IMLEO ~168.2 t
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
                         to deliver 15-t PTM to       LEO  LLO  LEO                                       ~76.1 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO
                         and from LLO with                V ~9.914 km/s                                    ~72.8 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                         transit times of 36 hr

                         Minimize total mission
4. LANTR commuter
                         LO2 needed to deliver      36-hr one-way transit times                             IMLEO ~169.7 t
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
                         15-t PTM to and from         LEO  LLO  LEO                                       ~77.6 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO
                         LLO with transit times           V ~9.913 km/s                                    ~70.2 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                         of 36 hr

                         Determine LLO2
5. LANTR commuter
                         refueling needed           32.8-hr one-way transit times                           IMLEO ~203.3 t
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
                         to deliver PTM to and         LEO  LLO  LEO                                      ~111.1 t LO2 supplied in LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO
                         from LLO with shortest           V ~10.481 km/s                                   ~80.4 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                         transit times possible

                           Determine LLO2 and
6. LANTR commuter                                                                                           IMLEO ~203.7 t
                           ELH2 refueling needed    24-hr one-way transit times
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L   ~111.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                           to deliver the PTM to      LEO  LLO  LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)      ~109.0 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
   back to LEO
                           and from LLO with             V ~13.051 km/s                                    ~17.0 t ELH2 refueling in LLO
                           transit times of 24 hr

                         Determine LLO2 and
7. Super-fast LANTR                                                                                         IMLEO ~203.5 t
                         ELH2 refueling needed      19.2-hr one-way transit times
   shuttle carrying 15-t                                                            4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L   ~111.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                         to deliver the PTM to         LEO  LLO  LEO
   PTM to LLO then                                                                      (~111.2 t LO2)      ~108.8 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
   back to LEO
                         LLO then back to LEO             V ~15.353 km/s                                   ~38.3 t ELH2 refueling in LLO
                         as fast as possible
a
  Acronyms and symbols are defined within report and in appendix.
b
  Cases 1 to 7 use common LH2 NTPS (7.6-m OD by ~15.7-m L). Propellant depots are assumed in LEO and LLO. LANTR engines use
optimized O/H MRs out and back.
c
  Altitudes: 407 km (LEO), 300 km (LLO, equatorial). Total round-trip mission V values shown include g-losses.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                              33
     Cases 2 through 4 also assume 36-hr transit times but use the fixed 7.95-m-long in-line LO2 tank
baselined on Conestoga and shown in Figure 27. For these cases the optimization feature in the MAMA
code is used to minimize the requirements on the following: LUNOX refueling (Case 2), LEO LO2
refueling (Case 3), and total mission LO2 and LUNOX refueling (Case 4). In Case 2, the in-line LO2 tank
is filled to its maximum capacity of ~111.2 t in LEO, and the LANTR engines run O2 rich (O/H MR = 5)
on the outbound mission leg. This minimizes the LH2 consumption so the shuttle’s engines can operate at
lower MRs on the return leg thereby lowering the amount of LUNOX refueling required for the mission
to ~55.7 t. The IMLEO for this shuttle option is the largest, however, at ~203.5 t, and the launch costs to
deliver ~40 t of LH2 and ~112 t of LO2 to the LEO depot could be a discriminator against this option.
     Case 3 minimizes the LEO LO2 resupply to the shuttle to just over 76 t, which lowers the mission
IMLEO to ~168.2 t and includes the NTPS (~71 t), the in-line LO2 tank assembly and conical adaptor
(~82.2 t), and the PTM (15 t). The engines operate at lower O/H MRs on the outbound leg (~3.9 for TLI
and ~1.7 for LOC), requiring more LH2 to be consumed. On the return leg, the shuttle’s engines operate
O2 rich (MR is ~5 for TEI and ~4.9 for EOC), so the LUNOX refueling requirement is increased to
~72.8 t. The total mission V is ~9.914 km/s, and the total engine burn time is ~25.3 min, which includes the
following individual burn times: ~10.5 min (TLI), ~5.0 min (LOC), ~4.3 min (TEI), and ~5.5 min (EOC).
     Case 4 minimizes the total amount of LEO LO2 and LUNOX used in the mission, but the savings is
only ~1.1 t, and the mission IMLEO actually increases by ~1.5 t. Based on these results, Case 3 would be
the preferred 36-hr commuter shuttle option, using the common fixed-length NTPS and LO2 tanks.
     Case 5 focuses on achieving the fastest transit times possible by taking full advantage of the extra
propellant capacity that exists in the vehicle’s in-line LO2 tank. By increasing the commuter shuttle’s LO2
loading to its maximum capacity of ~111.2 t before TLI, refueling with ~80.4 t of LUNOX before TEI,
and operating the LANTR engines O2 rich (O/H MR = 5) out and back, the shuttle can decrease its one-
way transit time from 36 to 32.8 hr. The additional LO2 loading prior to TLI increases the required
IMLEO to ~203.3 t, which includes the NTPS (~71 t), the in-line LO2 tank assembly and adaptor section
(~117.3 t), and the PTM (15 t). The decreased transit time increases the total mission V by ~0.567 km/s
to ~10.5 km/s. The total mission burn time is ~25.3 min, and the individual burn times are ~11 min (TLI),
~3.5 min (LOC), ~5.1 min (TEI), and ~5.7 min (EOC).
     Case 6 is similar to Case 5 except that it also uses some of the ELH2 delivered to the LLO depot by
NTR tankers to “top off” the shuttle’s NTPS before returning to Earth. By resupplying the shuttle with
~111.2 t of LO2 before TLI, refueling it with ~109 t of LLO2 and ~17 t of ELH2 before TEI, and operating
O2-rich on the way back to Earth, the 24-hr trip to the Moon taken by Dr. Floyd in “2001: A Space
Odyssey” becomes possible. The IMLEO for this case is ~203.7 t including the NTPS (~70.9 t), the in-
line LO2 tank assembly (~117.8 t), and the PTM (15 t). The total V required for this 24-hr shuttle
capability is ~13.1 km/s with g-losses. With the additional LH2 supplied to the NTPS, the total engine
burn time also increases to ~36.3 min, which includes burn times of ~12.9 min (TLI), ~7.5 min (LOC),
~8.9 min (TEI), and ~7.0 min (EOC).
     Case 7 is similar to Case 6 with the exception that it uses a larger amount of ELH2 during the return to
Earth, allowing the shuttle’s transit times to be shortened even further, down to ~19.2 hr. For this super-
fast, “medical-emergency-type” case, the shuttle is resupplied with ~111.2 t of LO2 and ~39.8 t of LH2
before TLI, then refueled to near maximum capacity with ~108.8 t of LUNOX and ~38.3 t of ELH2 before
TEI. The engines are also operated O2 rich during the TLI and TEI burns, and H2 rich during the LOC and
EOC burns. The IMLEO is ~203.5 t, which includes the NTPS (~70.8 t), the in-line LO2 tank assembly
and adaptor section (~117.7 t), and the PTM (15 t). The 19.2-hr transit times to the Moon and back
increases the total mission V by an additional ~2.3 km/s to ~15.4 km/s including the g-losses. With the
available LH2 provided during the mission, the total burn time on the LANTR engines increases to
~50.1 min with individual burn durations of ~13.8 min (TLI), ~11.5 min (LOC), ~13.7 min (TEI), and
~11.1 min (EOC).




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              34
9.0     Alternating Priority Cargo Delivery Missions
     In addition to a commercial shuttle service for passengers, it is also likely that similar services will be
developed for delivering high-priority cargo. Today, on their website for international shipping (Ref. 43),
UPS advertises that they “...ship more packages to more places than any other carrier.” They go on to say
that “whether you're shipping packages or pallets, importing or exporting, our extensive transportation
and logistics network can get your shipments where they need to be, when they need to be there.”
Similarly, with a membership in Amazon Prime (Ref. 44), the company promises free 2-day shipping on
your purchases.
     This section examines the performance impact of alternating outbound and return deliveries of a PTM
and priority cargo shipment on the same shuttle flight. The shipping container we envision has a gross
mass of ~7.5 t and carries ~5 t of cargo within its pressurized volume. The container is scaled from the
Cygnus spacecraft, developed by Orbital ATK. Cygnus is an automated cargo vehicle (Ref. 45) designed
to transport supplies to the International Space Station. It has a dry mass of ~5 t and can carry up to 3.5 t
of cargo in its pressurized cargo module. An attached service module provides auxiliary propulsion and
up to 4 kWe of electrical power using two photovoltaic arrays (PVAs) (Ref. 45).
     The priority cargo container (PCC) used in this analysis draws its electrical power from the twin
PVAs located at the front end of the shuttle’s in-line LO2 tank assembly (Fig. 28). It is assumed to have
the same outer mold line as the PTM. An example of this alternating PL delivery scenario is shown in
Figure 29, which depicts a next-day-delivery (NDD) priority cargo flight departing LEO on its way to the
Moon. After it arrives, the PCC detaches and docks with the Sikorsky-style LLV for delivery to the LS in
the same manner as the PTM. The shuttle’s in-line LO2 tank would then be refueled at the LLO depot in
preparation for an arriving PTM from the surface and its return trip to Earth. On the next flight, a PTM
would depart LEO for the Moon, and the PCC would be returned.
     Table VI provides a sampling of two different sets of alternating PTM–PCC mission options considered
in this study. In the first set of PTM–PCC delivery missions (Cases 1 and 2), the three-engine NTPS and
fixed-length in-line LO2 tank are used, and the transit times out and back are 36 hr. In Case 1, the PTM is
delivered on the outbound leg and the PCC is delivered on the return leg. Approximately 66 t of LEO LO2 is
supplied to the shuttle prior to TLI, and it is refueled in LLO with ~55.1 t of LUNOX prior to TEI. The
IMLEO for this mission is ~157.6 t, consisting of the NTPS (~70.8 t), the in-line LO2 assembly and adaptor
section (~71.8 t), and the PTM (15 t). The total mission V is ~9.910 km/s, and the total engine burn time is
again ~25.3 min for the three-engine NTPS and its available LH2 propellant loading.




                     Figure 28.—Priority cargo delivery vehicle using LANTR shuttle system.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                               35
Figure 29.—Alternating priority cargo container and PTM payloads from Earth to Moon and back on same LANTR
  shuttle flight.

             TABLE VI.—ALTERNATING PTM–PCC MISSION OPTIONS, TRIP TIME POSSIBILITIES AND V BUDGETS,
                                        AND LUNOX REFUELING NEEDSa
     Case descriptionb           Objective           Trajectory and orbitsc         In-line LO2 tank                Results

                             Determine LLO2
1. Alternating PTM out to
                             refueling needed
   LLO followed by                               LEO  LLO transit time: 36 hr                           IMLEO ~157.6 t
                             to deliver 15-t                                     4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
   priority cargo delivery                       LLO  LEO transit time: 36 hr                           ~66.0 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             PTM to LLO then                                         (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO using three                            V ~9.910 km/s                                     ~55.1 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                             7.5-t PCC back to
   LANTR engine NTPSs
                             LEO

                             Determine LLO2
2. Alternating priority
                             refueling needed
   cargo delivery to LLO                         LEO  LLO transit time: 36 hr                           IMLEO ~146.5 t
                             to deliver 7.5-t                                    4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
   followed by PTM back                          LLO  LEO transit time: 36 hr                           ~62.2 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             PCC out to LLO                                          (~111.2 t LO2)
   to LEO using three                                 V ~9.909 km/s                                     ~64.8 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                             then 15-t PTM
   LANTR engine NTPSs
                             back to LEO

                             Determine LLO2
3. Alternating PTM out to
                             refueling needed
   LLO followed by                               LEO  LLO transit time: 24 hr                           IMLEO ~191.2 t
                             to deliver 15-t                                     4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
   priority cargo delivery                       LLO  LEO transit time: 48 hr                           ~105.3 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             PTM to LLO then                                         (~111.2 t LO2)
   back to LEO using two                              V ~10.959 km/s                                    ~44.7 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                             7.5-t PCC back to
   LANTR engine NTPSs
                             LEO

                             Determine LLO2
4. Alternating priority
                             refueling needed
   cargo delivery to LLO                         LEO  LLO transit time: 48 hr                           IMLEO ~144.7 t
                             to deliver 7.5-t                                    4.6-m OD by ~7.95-m L
   followed by PTM back                          LLO  LEO transit time: 24 hr                           ~65.9 t LO2 supplied in LEO
                             PCC out to LLO                                          (~111.2 t LO2)
   to LEO using two                                   V ~10.951 km/s                                    ~93.2 t LLO2 refueling in LLO
                             then 15-t PTM
   LANTR engine NTPSs
                             back to LEO
a
  Acronyms and symbols are defined within report and in appendix.
b
  Cases use common LH2 NTPS (7.6-m OD by ~15.7-m L). Propellant depots are assumed in LEO and LLO. LANTR engines use optimized O/H
MRs out and back.
c
  Altitude: 407 km (LEO), 300 km (LLO, equatorial). Total round-trip mission V values shown include g-losses.


     In Case 2, the mission scenario is reversed with the PCC being delivered on the outbound leg and
then the PTM on the return leg. The shuttle is supplied with ~62.2 t of LEO LO2 prior to TLI and is
refueled with ~64.8 t of LUNOX prior to TEI. The IMLEO for this mission is ~146.5 t, consisting of the
NTPS (~70.9 t), the in-line LO2 assembly and adaptor section (~68.1 t) and the PCC (7.5 t). The total
mission V and engine burn time are nearly identical to Case 1 at ~9.909 km/s and ~25.3 min,
respectively. The slightly lower total V for Case 2 is attributed to the PCC’s smaller mass resulting in
lower g-losses during the TLI burn.
     In the second set of PTM–PCC delivery missions (Cases 3 and 4), the same in-line LO2 tank is used,
but the NTPS now uses only two LANTR engines. The transit times are set for PTM delivery at 24 hr and
for the PCC delivery at 48 hr. Like Case 1, Case 3 delivers the PTM on the outbound leg and then the



NASA/TM—2018-219725                                          36
PCC on the return leg. Because of the faster transit time used on the PTM mission leg, ~105.3 t of LO2
must be supplied to the shuttle prior to TLI. Similarly, the LUNOX refueling requirement needed is
reduced to ~44.7 t because of the PCC’s smaller mass and extended transit time for the return to Earth.
The IMLEO for this mission is ~191.2 t, which includes the NTPS (~65.2 t), the in-line LO2 assembly and
adaptor section (~110 t), and the PTM (15 t). The total mission V is ~10.959 km/s, and the total engine
burn time increases to ~37.8 min. The burn times for the individual maneuvers are ~17.9 min (TLI),
~10.8 min (LOC), ~3.2 min (TEI), and ~5.9 min (EOC).
    In Case 4, the mission scenario is again reversed with the PCC being delivered on the outbound leg
and then the PTM on the return leg. The amount of LEO LO2 now supplied to the shuttle is reduced by
~63% to ~65.9 t. Similarly, the LUNOX refueling required to return the heavier PTM back to Earth in
24 hr more than doubles to ~93.2 t. The IMLEO for this mission is ~144.7 t, consisting of the NTPS
(~65.4 t), the in-line LO2 assembly and adaptor section (~71.8 t), and the PCC (7.5 t). Again, the total
mission V and engine burn time are nearly identical to Case 3 at ~10.951 km/s and ~37.9 min. However,
in Case 4, the durations of the outbound and inbound burns are reversed at ~12.5 min (TLI), ~3.7 min
(LOC), ~11.6 min (TEI), and ~10.2 min (EOC).
    In all of the above cases, the MAMA code’s optimizer routine looks for a solution that allows the
mission to be executed with the minimum amount of LO2 (i.e., the total of the initial LEO LO2 and the
refuel LUNOX supplied to the vehicle). It achieves this goal by manipulating the LO2 amounts and the
O/H MR values until it finds the solution with the minimum total LO2. The RCS requirements between
major propulsive maneuvers are also adjusted and determined in the process.

10.0 Mining and Processing Requirements and Estimated LUNOX Reserves
     To get a better idea on what the mining and processing requirements are to support the kinds of
missions discussed in this paper, the three-engine LANTR commuter shuttle mission (Case 5 in Table V)
is examined that runs O2 rich (O/H MR = 5, Isp = 516 s) out to the Moon back and has one-way transit
times of ~32.8 hr. The LUNOX refueling requirement for this mission is ~80.5 t, and the total mission
burn time on each of the LANTR engines is ~25 min. Assuming a 10-hr full-power lifetime on the engine
fuel, a typical LANTR shuttle could perform ~24 missions. Assuming a five-ship fleet and weekly trips to
the Moon, each LANTR shuttle would make around 10 to 11 flights per year, resulting in a service life of
~2.2 years. Near the end of life, the shuttle’s NTPS would be used to inject cargo missions to various
destinations before being disposed of in heliocentric space.
     To support weekly commuter flights to the Moon annual LUNOX production levels of ~12,540 t/yr
will be required (see Table VII). Approximately 4190 t of LUNOX is used by the LANTR shuttle,
~6140 t by four second-generation Sikorsky-style LUNOX tanker LLVs (Fig. 30) flying one resupply
mission to the LLO depot each week over the course of a year, and ~2220 t used by the same Sikorsky-
style LLVs to transport arriving and departing PTMs to and from the LS. Each LLV has a dry mass of
~10.9 t and a maximum LO2/LH2 propellant capacity of ~35 t.

                              TABLE VII.—TOTAL LUNOX REQUIRED FOR WEEKLY COMMUTER FLIGHTSa
                                            [32.8-hr one-way transits (15-t, 20-person PTM).]
    LANTR shuttle
      (80.5 t LUNOX/mission/week)  (52 weeks/year) ......................................................................................................4,186 t/yr
    LLVb
       LLVc (29.5 t LUNOX/flight)  (1 flight/LLV/week)  (4 LLVs)  (52 weeks/year) ..................................................6,136 t/yr
       LLVd (42.7 t LUNOX)/(round trip flights/week)  (52 weeks/year) ...........................................................................2,220 t/yr
    Total LUNOX rate ........................................................................................................................................................12,542 t/yr
a
  Acronyms and symbols are defined within report and in appendix.
b
  O/H MR = 6 and Isp = 465 s. Descent and ascent velocity changes Vdesc = 2000 m/s and Vasc = 1900 m/s assumed.
c
  LLV tanker transports ~25 t of LUNOX to LLO; returns to LS with empty 5-t tank.
d
  Total for LLV delivery of PTM from LLO to LS plus PTM return from LS to LLO.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                                                                 37
                   Figure 30.—Tanker LLV lifts off from commercial facility, delivering LUNOX to depot in LLO.

        TABLE VIII.—COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT LUNAR MINING CONCEPTS SHOWING PLANT MASS,
                                 REQUIRED OPERATING POWER, AND MINING RATESa
 Hydrogen reduction of ilmenite (LUNOX production, 1000 t/yr)
 Plant mass (mining, beneficiation, processing, and power) .................................................................................................... 244 t
 Power requirements (mining, beneficiation, and processing) ...........................................................................................3.0 MWe
 Regolith throughput
   (assumes soil feedstock at 7.5 wt% ilmenite and MMR of 327 t of soil per ton of LUNOX) .................................. 3.3105 t/yr
 Hydrogen reduction of iron-rich volcanic glass (LUNOX production, 1000 t/yr)
 Plant mass (mining, processing, and power) .......................................................................................................................... 105 t
 Power requirements (mining and processing)...................................................................................................................1.5 MWe
 Regolith throughput
   (direct feed and processing of “iron-rich” volcanic glass beads, assuming 4% O2 yield and MMR = 25 to 1)........ 2.5104 t/yr
 Lunar helium-3 extraction: (He3 production, 5 t/yr)
 Mobile miners (150 miners required, each weighing 18 t, and each miner producing He3 at 33 kg/yr) ............................... 2700 t
 Power requirements (200 kW direct solar power/miner) ................................................................................................30.0 MWe
 Regolith throughput
   (processing and capture of solar-wind-implanted volatiles occurs aboard the miner) ............................................. 7.1108 t/yr
aAcronyms are defined within report and in appendix.



    A preliminary assessment of plant mass, power level, feedstock throughput, and required mining area
has been made assuming a LUNOX operation employing 13 modular units, each with a production
capacity of 1000 t/yr. Table VIII compares the characteristics for two LUNOX plants—one based on
hydrogen reduction of ilmenite (Ref. 30), and the other on iron-rich volcanic glass feedstock. The
advantages of using volcanic glass feedstock are apparent, having mass and power requirements that are
43% and 50% lower than that of an ilmenite-reduction plant using a soil feedstock. Included in the
volcanic-glass-reduction plant mass of ~105.3 t is the mining (~9.6 t) and processing equipment (84.6 t),
both of which include a 30% dry weight contingency (DWC), plus the fission reactor power source
(~11.1 t). The plant power requirement of ~1.52 MWe includes ~10.7 kWe for the mining equipment and
~1509 kWe for the processing equipment. Both values again include a 30% margin. The process power
dominates, is a function of the LUNOX production rate, and is primarily associated with the electric
heaters, electrolysis cell, and oxygen liquifiers as discussed in Section 2.0 and pointed out in Figure 5.



NASA/TM—2018-219725                                                           38
     Using the low-end 4% O2 yield obtained from orange and black volcanic glass beads still translates
into more than an order-of-magnitude reduction in the amount of mined material. The mining equipment
used at each 1000 t/yr production plant consists of two front-end loaders and four haulers. To produce
~13,000 t of LUNOX annually will require a glass throughput of ~3.25105 t/yr and a soil mining rate at
each production plant of just under 6 t/hr per loader assuming the same 35% mining duty cycle used in
the ilmenite processing plant results. This duty cycle corresponds to mining operations during ~70% of
the available lunar daylight hours (~3067 hr each year).
     Although this number is large, it is modest compared to terrestrial coal and proposed lunar helium-3
mining activities. For example, with a single 1000-MWe coal-fired power plant consuming about sixty
100-t train cars of coal per day, the annual U.S. production rate for coal exceeds 500 million tons!
Similarly, past proposals for mining helium-3 on the Moon (Ref. 46) to support a future fusion-based
power economy in the United States would require the processing of ~2.8 billion tons of regolith to obtain
the estimated 20 t of helium-3 needed annually (see Table VIII).
     Figure 31 shows the proposed site for a commercial LUNOX facility within the Taurus-Littrow DMD
at the southeastern edge of the Mare Serenitatis (~21° N, ~29.5° E), approximately 30 km west of the
Apollo 17 landing site. This deposit of largely black crystalline beads covers ~3000 km2 and is thought to
be tens of meters thick. Assuming an area of ~2000 km2 (equivalent to a square ~28 mi on a side), a
mining depth of ~5 m, a soil density representative of the Apollo 17 volcanic glass (~1.8 g/cm3), and a
MMR of 25 to 1 (equivalent to a 4% O2 yield), Figure 32 shows that the Taurus-Littrow DMD could
produce ~720 million tons of LUNOX. Figure 32 also shows that the mining areas needed to support
commuter flights to the Moon are not unrealistic at ~0.036 km2 and ~0.18 km2 for one to five flights per
week, respectively. Even at 5 times the higher ~65,000 t/yr rate, there are sufficient LUNOX resources at
this one site to support ~25 commuter flights carrying 450 passengers each week for the next 2215 years,
and more sites containing even larger quantities of iron-rich pyroclastic glass have been identified
(Ref. 24).




            Figure 31.—Apollo 17 landing site and major geographic features of Taurus-Littrow region.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                               39
  Figure 32.—Required mining areas A and LUNOX production rates to support routine commuter flights to Moon.


11.0 A Look Ahead
    Whereas others have discussed more conventional space transportation systems supported by
propellant depots (Ref. 47), the performance capability resulting from combining the two “high-leverage”
technologies, LANTR and LUNOX, is quite extraordinary. For example, to perform the same 36-hr
commuter shuttle mission with the same propellant tank volumes used in Case 3 of Table V, an all-LH2
NTP system would require an effective Isp of ~1575 s, which is equivalent to that postulated for an
advanced gaseous-fuel-core NTR system.
    Besides enabling a robust and versatile LTS, the LANTR concept is expected to dramatically improve
space transportation performance wherever extraterrestrial sources of LO2 and LH2 can be acquired
(Fig. 33), such as the Martian system; main-belt asteroids; and the Jovian moons Europa, Ganymede,
and Callisto.
    In the future, reusable biconic-shaped LANTR-powered ascent and descent vehicles, operating from
specially prepared landing sites on Mars, could be used to transport modular PL elements to the surface
and resupply interplanetary transfer vehicles (ITVs) (Fig. 34) with the propellants needed to reach
refueling depots in the asteroid belt. From there, LANTR-powered ITVs, carrying cargo and passengers,
could continue on to the water-rich moons of the Jovian system, providing a reliable foundation for the
development and eventual human settlement of the solar system.
    In the nearer term, it is also possible that LANTR propulsion could find its way into NASA’s plans
for a human mission to Mars. The year 2018 is the eighth year in a row that NASA has been funding NTP
research and development. Preliminary development plans envision flight testing a NTPS powered by
three 25-klbf-class NTR engines sometime in the late 2020s. For the Mars mission, two additional tanks
of LH2—one an in-line tank and the other a drop tank—are added to supplement the NTPS.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                              40
Because of LH2’s low density, these additional tanks increase the vehicle’s overall size and mass. By
adding the afterburner feature to the NTPS and running the engines at an O/H MR ~1 during the LEO
departure burn, the amount of LH2 used during this maneuver can be cut in half. The thrust output of the
NTPS is also increased by ~60%, from 75 klbf to over 120 klbf, reducing g-losses and eliminating the
need for multiple perigee burns during Earth departure. Afterwards the smaller LO2 drop tank can be
jettisoned and LH2 used for the rest of the mission.




   Figure 33.—Human expansion possibilities using LANTR propulsion and extraterrestrial propellant resources.




    Figure 34.—Conceptual LANTR interplanetary transfer vehicle unloading cargo and loading propellant
      before departing Mars for asteroid belt.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                               41
12.0 Concluding Remarks
     The nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) offers significant benefits for lunar missions and can take
advantage of the mission leverage provided from using lunar-derived propellant (LDP)—specifically,
lunar-derived liquid oxygen (LUNOX)—by transitioning to the liquid-oxygen- (LO2-) augmented NTR
(LANTR). Using this enhanced NTR system has many advantages. It provides a variable thrust and
specific impulse Isp capability, shortens engine burn times, extends engine life, and allows combined
liquid hydrogen and oxygen (LH2 and LO2, respectively) operation. Its use together with adequate
supplies of LUNOX, extracted from abundant reserves of FeO-rich volcanic glass, can lead to a robust
nuclear lunar transportation system (LTS) that evolves over time and has unique mission capabilities. The
examples discussed in this report include short-transit-time crewed cargo transports, commuter shuttles,
and priority cargo delivery systems operating between transportation nodes and/or propellant depots
located in low Earth orbit (LEO) and low lunar orbit (LLO).
     December 2017 marked the 45th anniversary of the Apollo 17 mission to Taurus-Littrow and
unfortunately, the termination of both the Apollo and the Rover/NERVA nuclear rocket programs. In the
not-so-distant future, the technological progeny from these two historic programs—LUNOX and
LANTR—could allow the development of a robust, reusable space transportation system that can be
adapted to a wide variety of potential lunar missions using the basic vehicle building blocks discussed in
this paper.
     The biggest challenge to making this vision a reality, however, will be the production of increasing
amounts of LDP and the development of propellant depots for vehicle refueling in LEO and LLO. An
industry-operated, privately financed venture, with NASA as its initial customer, has frequently been
mentioned as a possible blueprint for how a commercial LUNOX operation and propellant depot might
develop. With industry interested in developing cislunar space and commerce and with competitive forces
at work, the timeline for developing this capability could well be accelerated beyond anything currently
being envisioned. Only time will tell and maybe it will be quicker than any of us can imagine.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                            42
                             Appendix—Nomenclature

AGS         artificial gravity station
AMBR        Advanced Material Bipropellant Rocket
BA          Bigelow Aerospace
CCT         crewed cargo transport
DMD         dark mantle deposit
DWC         dry weight contingency
EEO         elliptical Earth orbit
ELH2        Earth-supplied liquid hydrogen propellant
EOC         Earth orbit capture
EVA         extravehicular activity
FE          fuel element
GC          graphite composite
HLV         heavy lift vehicle
IMLEO       initial mass in low Earth orbit
ITV         interplanetary transfer vehicle
L           length
LANTR       LO2-augmented NTR
LDAV        lunar descent and ascent vehicle
LDP         lunar-derived propellant
LEO         low Earth orbit (= 407 km circular/28.5 inclination)
LLH2        lunar liquid hydrogen
LLO         low lunar orbit (= 300 km circular/equatorial)
LLO2        lunar liquid oxygen
LLV         lunar landing vehicle
LOC         lunar orbit capture
LPI         lunar polar ice
LS          lunar surface
LTS         lunar transportation system
LTV         lunar transfer vehicle
LUNOX       lunar-derived liquid oxygen; another name for LLO2
MAMA        multidisciplinary analysis and mission assessment (code)
MLI         multilayer insulation
MMR         mining mass ratio
MPCV        multipurpose crew vehicle
NAR         nozzle area ratio
NERVA       Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Applications (program)
NLTV        Nuclear-powered lunar transfer vehicle
NTP         nuclear thermal propulsion
NTPS        NTP stage
NTR         nuclear thermal rocket
O/H MR      oxygen-to-hydrogen mixture ratio
OD          outer diameter
PCC         priority cargo container
PL          payload
PTM         passenger transport module
PVA         photovoltaic array
R&D         rendezvous and docking
RCS         reaction control system


NASA/TM—2018-219725                      43
RMS         remote manipulator system
SEC         Shackleton Energy Company
SLS         Space Launch System
SNRE        small nuclear rocket engine
SOFI        spray-on foam insulation
STA         saddle truss assembly
TEI         trans-Earth injection
TLI         translunar injection
TPA         turbopump assembly
TT          tie tube
ULA         United Launch Alliance
ZBO         zero boil-off
V          velocity change increment, km/s
Vasc       ascent velocity change
Vdes       descent velocity change




NASA/TM—2018-219725                       44
                                          References
 1. National Aeronautics and Space Administration: NASA’s Journey to Mars—Pioneering Next Steps
    in Space Exploration. NP–2015–08–2018–HQ, 2015.
 2. Achenbach, Joel: Trump, With NASA, Has a New Rocket and Spaceship. Where’s He Going To
    Go? The Washington Post, Health & Science, March 12, 2017.
 3. David, Leonard: Lunar Leap: Europe Is Reaching for a Moon Base by the 2030s. Space.com, 2015.
    www.space.com/31488-european-moon-base-2030s.html Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
 4. Aliberti, Marco: When China Goes to the Moon. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
    Switzerland, 2015.
 5. Zolfagharifard, Ellie; and Gray, Richard: Russia to Conquer the Moon in 2030: Country Says It's
    Planning a Permanent Manned Base on the Lunar Surface. Daily Mail, 2015.
    www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3344818/Russia Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
 6. Chang, Kenneth: SpaceX Plans to Send 2 Tourists Around the Moon in 2018. The New York Times,
    Science, 2017. www.nytimes.com/2017/02/27/science/spacex-moon-tourists.html Accessed Dec. 15,
    2017.
 7. Malik, Tariq: Private Space Stations Could Orbit the Moon by 2020, Robert Bigelow Says.
    Space.com, 2017. www.space.com/35978-private-moon-refueling-station-by-2020.html Accessed
    Dec. 15, 2017.
 8. Wall, Mike: Mining the Moon’s Water: Q&A With Shackleton Energy’s Bill Stone. Space.com,
    January 13, 2015.
 9. David, Leonard: Inside ULA’s Plan to Have 1,000 People Working in Space by 2045. Space.com,
    2016. www.space.com/33297-satellite-refueling-business-proposal-ula.html Accessed Dec. 15,
    2017.
10. Davenport, Christian: An Exclusive Look at Jeff Bezos’s Plan To Set Up Amazon-Like Delivery for
    ‘Future Human Settlement’ of the Moon. The Washington Post, The Switch, 2017.
    www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch//wp/2017/03/02/an-exclusive Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
11. Sullivan, Thomas A.; and McKay, David S.: Using Space Resources. NASA Johnson Space Center,
    1991, p. 4.
12. Allen, Carlton C.; Morris, Richard V.; and McKay, David S.: Experimental Reduction of Lunar
    Mare Soil and Volcanic Glass. JGR: Planets, vol. 99, no. E11, 1994, pp. 23173–23185.
13. National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Ice on the Moon—A Summary of Clementine and
    Lunar Prospector Results. 2012. http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/ice/ice_moon.html Accessed
    Dec. 15, 2017.
14. Borowski, Stanley K.: The Rationale/Benefits of Nuclear Thermal Rocket Propulsion for NASA’s
    Lunar Space Transportation System. AIAA 91–2052 (NASA TM–106730), 1991.
    http://ntrs.nasa.gov
15. Borowski, Stanley K.; and Alexander, Stephen W.: Fast Track NTR Systems Assessment for
    NASA’s First Lunar Outpost Scenario. AIAA 92–3812 (NASA TM–106748), 1992.
    http://ntrs.nasa.gov
16. Borowski, Stanley K.; McCurdy, David R.; and Burke, Laura M.: The Nuclear Thermal Propulsion
    Stage (NTPS): A Key Space Asset for Human Exploration and Commercial Missions to the Moon.
    AIAA 2013–5465 (NASA/TM—2014-218105), 2013. http://ntrs.nasa.gov
17. Borowski, Stanley K., et al.: Affordable Development and Demonstration of a Small Nuclear
    Thermal Rocket (NTR) Engine and Stage: How Small is Big Enough? AIAA 2015–4524
    (NASA/TM—2016-219402), 2016. http://ntrs.nasa.gov
18. Borowski, Stanley; and Dudzinski, Leonard A.: “2001: A Space Odyssey” Revisited—The
    Feasibility of 24 Hour Commuter Flights to the Moon Using NTR Propulsion With LUNOX
    Afterburners. AIAA 97–2956 (NASA/TM—1998-208830/REV2), 1997. http://ntrs.nasa.gov
19. Joyner, C. Russell, et al.: TRITON: A TRImodal Capable, Thrust Optimized Nuclear Propulsion and
    Power System for Advanced Space Missions. AIAA 2004–3863, 2004.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                         45
20. Bulman, M.J., et al.: LANTR Engine System Integration. AIAA 2004–3864, 2004.
21. Allen, Carlton C.; and McKay, David S.: Lunar Oxygen Production—Ground Truth and Remote
    Sensing. AIAA 95–2792, 1995.
22. Allen, Carlton C.; Morris, Richard V.; and McKay, David S.: Oxygen Extraction From Lunar Soils
    an Pyroclastic Glass. JGR: Planets, vol. 101, no. 11, 1996, pp. 26085–26095.
23. Hawke, B.R.; Coombs, C.R.; and Clark, B.: Ilmenite-Rich Pyroclastic Deposits: An Ideal Lunar
    Resource. Proceedings of the 20th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Houston, TX, 1990, pp.
    249–258.
24. Gaddis, Lisa R., et al.: Compositional Analyses of Lunar Pyroclastic Deposits. Icarus, vol. 161, no.
    2, 2003, pp. 262–280.
25. Spudis, Paul D.; and Lavoie, Anthony R.: Using the Resources of the Moon To Create a Permanent,
    Cislunar Space Faring System. AIAA 2011–7185, 2011.
26. Haruyama, Junichi, et al.: Lack of Exposed Ice Inside Lunar South Pole Shackleton Crater. Science,
    vol. 322, no. 5903, 2008, pp. 938–939.
27. Davis, Hubert P.: Lunar Oxygen Impact Upon STS Effectiveness. Eagle Engineering Report No.
    8363, 1983.
28. Frisbee, R.H.; and Jones, R.M.: An Analysis of Propulsion Options for Transport of Lunar Materials
    to Earth Orbit. AIAA 83–1344, 1983.
29. Taylor, Lawrence A.; and Carrier III, W. David: Oxygen Production on the Moon: An Overview and
    Evaluation. Resources of Near Earth Space, John S. Lewis, Mildred Shapely Matthews, and Mary L.
    Guerrieri, eds., University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 1993, pp. 69–108.
30. Christiansen, E.L., et al., Conceptual Design of a Lunar Oxygen Pilot Plant. EEI Report 88–182
    (NASA CR–172082), 1988. http://ntrs.nasa.gov
31. Gibson, Michael A.; and Knudsen, Christian W.: Lunar Oxygen Production From Ilmenite. Lunar
    Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century, W.W. Mendell, ed., Lunar and Planetary Institute,
    Houston, TX, 1985, pp. 543–550.
32. Allen, Carlton C.; Weitz, Catherine M.; and McKay, David S.: Prospecting for Lunar Oxygen With
    Gamma-Ray Spectrometry and Multispectral Imaging. Workshop on New Views of the Moon:
    Integrated Remotely Sensed, Geophysical, and Sample Datasets, B.L. Jolliff and G. Ryder, eds., LPI
    Contribution No. 958, Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX, 1998, pp. 19–20.
33. Feldman, W.C., et al.: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer. Lunar Planet, Sci. XXVII,
    1996, pp. 355–356.
34. Lucey, Paul G.; Taylor, G. Jeffrey; and Malaret, Erick: Abundance and Distribution of Iron on the
    Moon. Science, vol. 268, no. 5214, 1995, pp. 1150–1153.
35. Koeing, Daniel R.: Experience Gained From the Space Nuclear Rocket Program (Rover/NERVA).
    Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA–10062–H, 1986.
36. Bulman, M.J.; and Neill, T.M.: Simulated LOX-Augmented Nuclear Thermal Rocket (LANTR)
    Testing. AIAA 2000–3897, 2000.
37. RL10. Wikipedia, 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RL10 Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
38. Hodge, J., et al.: Space Transfer Vehicle—Lunar Transportation Ground Based LEO Rendezvous
    and Docking Study. NAS8–37856, Martin Marietta, Denver, CO, 1991.
39. Conestoga Wagon. A&E Televisions Networks, LLC, 2012.
    http://www.history.com/topics/conestoga-wagon Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
40. Ryan, Stephen W.; and Borowski, Stephen K.: Integrated System Modeling for Nuclear Thermal
    Propulsion (NTP). AIAA 2014–3624, 2014.
41. Kubrick, S.; and Clarke, A.C.: 2001: A Space Odyssey. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), 1968.
42. Clarke, A.C.: 2001: A Space Odyssey. Based on a screenplay by S. Kubrick an A.C. Clarke, Signet
    Book, The New American Library, Inc., New York, NY, 1968, p. 61.
43. UPS Ships More Packages to More Places Than Any Other Carrier. https://global.ups.com Accessed
    Dec. 18, 2017.
44. Amazon Prime. https://www.amazon.com/gp/prime Accessed Jan. 8, 2018.


NASA/TM—2018-219725                            46
45. Cygnus (spacecraft). 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cygnus_(spacecraft) Accessed Dec. 18, 2017.
46. Sviatoslavsky, I.N.: Processing and Energy Costs for Mining Lunar Helium-3. Proceedings of a
    Workshop on Lunar Helium-3 and Fusion Power, NASA CP−10018, 1988, pp. 129−146.
47. Smitherman, David; and Woodcock, Gordon: Space Transportation Infrastructure Supported By
    Propellant Depots. AIAA 2011−7160, 2011.




NASA/TM—2018-219725                            47

