---
title: Mission Design Considerations for a Low-Thrust Spacecraft
collection: 05-academic-papers/ntrs-white-papers
source: NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) — accession 20260005760
source_url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20260005760
rights: Public-use permitted by the US government for its records; no third-party material (NTRS copyright determination GOV_PUBLIC_USE_PERMITTED)
distribution: PUBLIC
sti_type: CONFERENCE_PAPER
center: Glenn Research Center
publication_date: 2026-07-26
retrieved: 2026-09-22
sha256: 5260c89bd79df9cfe73b0548e51142f0a452cc33227f78a55653d238f70a7d68
pages: 20
words: 7977
cv_look_pages: 3
---

                                                                                     AAS 26-657



     MISSION DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR A LOW-THRUST
                       SPACECRAFT

                                             Scott N. Karn*

             Developing an executable low-thrust trajectory for use in a spaceflight mission
             requires the design and optimization of a deterministic trajectory as well as the
             validation that the selected architecture is robust to some set of uncertainties, ex-
             ecution errors, and potential contingencies. Uncertainty in the ability of the space-
             craft and its launch vehicle to execute a trajectory as well as potential devia-
             tions such as in-flight anomalies combine with design-to constraints and require-
             ments to complicate the optimization problem. The approach by which robust
             mission design was accomplished for the initial capability of NASA’s Gateway is
             presented as well as associated results.

BACKGROUND

    Over the past 30 years, solar electric propulsion (SEP) has grown from an experimental tech-
nology serving in handful of relatively niche applications to a workhorse widely adopted across the
industry1. Since the early 2000s SEP thruster and spacecraft power generation technologies have
matured substantially, allowing SEP to move out of the realm of bespoke, cutting-edge spacecraft
such as Deep Space 1 and Dawn and into use on proliferated Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellations,
geostationary (GEO) communications satellites, and exploration platforms. In particular, the mat-
uration of hall effect thrusters (HETs) in the last three decades2 has led to their first use in deep
space3 as well as the development of high-power systems for use in human exploration4. This rise
in the use of SEP-equipped spacecraft has also resulted in increased interest in the formulation and
development of new missions as well as significant advances in the field of low-thrust trajectory
design and optimization.
    Despite increasing interest and research, low-thrust trajectory design remains an underdevel-
oped field when compared to its high-thrust counterpart. This is particularly true in the area of
robust mission design, where a wide gap exists between methods which can be used to design
trajectories that are mathematically valid and those that are executable by a physical, operational
spacecraft. While the design and optimization of deterministic low-thrust trajectories is often com-
putationally difficult and resource intensive, robust trajectory design increases this difficulty sig-
nificantly as mission performance must be assessed and validated against expected execution er-
rors, performance uncertainties, and risks. Beyond-Earth missions are particularly sensitive to these
sources of error as they transit often-chaotic multibody dynamical environments, but the rarity and



*
Mission Design Engineer, Mission Architecture and Analysis Branch, NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark
Road, Cleveland, OH, 44135




                                                        1
bespoke nature of these missions means that the tools used to develop robust, flight-ready trajecto-
ries are often built from scratch or involve significant overhauls of heritage methods.




                               Figure 1: Lunar Transit mission diagram
   The initial capability of NASA’s Gateway lunar space station was envisioned to be one such
mission, wherein a 50kW SEP-equipped Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) would transfer a
large, human-exploration spacecraft from a Geostationary Transfer Orbit (GTO) to a 9:2 Earth-
Moon Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit (NRHO)4. The maturation of this low-thrust Lunar Transit tra-
jectory (Figure 1) from early, feasibility-focused, design reference missions (DRMs) towards full-
fidelity, executable flight trajectories necessitated the development of novel methods and tools for
robust mission design. Many of these methods leveraged heritage approaches to low-thrust mission
design authored by the Deep Space 1 and Dawn mission teams5. The assessment of navigation and
cycle-to-cycle statistical uncertainties evolved from these methods and has been described previ-
ously6. This publication will focus on how uncertainty in the performance of the integrated space-
craft, including launch vehicle insertion errors, SEP thruster and power system performance, as
well as contingency scenarios and off-nominal events such as missed thrust events (MTEs) were
assessed.




                                                   2
INTRODUCTION

   In a conceptual or low-fidelity space, the objective of trajectory design is often simply to find a
solution which successfully transits between two locations of interest (the Earth and the Moon, for
example). For flight missions, this already challenging optimization problem becomes significantly
more complex due to the presence of physical systems which must execute a mission as well as the
programmatic context in which a mission exists. Mission objectives, requirements, constraints, and
“desirements” or “nice-to-haves” must all be balanced against one another. A solution space which
before may only have been bounded by physics and a handful of critical choices (spacecraft mass,
propulsion system performance, etc) now becomes heavily laden with myriad inputs and constraints
(many of which are often competing or contradictory). In this way, an already-challenging optimi-
zation problem becomes significantly more daunting as a mission develops and matures.
    Adding every possible argument directly into the optimization of a trajectory would rapidly
result in a model that is too dense and too complex to be useful (or to even converge in the first
place). Many details are thus considered a-priori or a-posteriori in order to simplify computation;
lower-fidelity methods can be used to filter out some set of initial conditions prior to simulation,
trajectory results may be post-processed to determine compliance with a known set of requirements,
and statistical methods such as Monte Carlo analyses can be used to assess trajectory performance
under known uncertainties and risks. This, however, requires an extensive set of tools and methods
to accomplish. And while varied and complex, these analyses must be reliable and scalable in order
to support the cadence associated with mission development.
   This a-posteriori approach to uncertainty analysis proved to be a substantial undertaking for the
PPE and the Lunar Transit mission. Leveraging previous work to develop a robust framework by
which deterministic nominal reference trajectories could be developed7 and a similarly standardized
methodology for the assessment of MTEs8, an expanded analysis suite was developed to enable
large scale assessments of integrated performance uncertainties in critical mission parameters. This
package, named Aberrant and built around the existing Copernicus trajectory design software9,
enabled large scale Monte Carlo analysis of launch vehicle insertion errors, uncertainties in SEP
thruster and spacecraft power system performance, and off-nominal events such as thruster failures
as well as including the existing MTE framework. Results from large-scale runs could be quickly
assessed for compliance with existing mission requirements and constraints including operating
limits of critical limits and data provided critical insight into the necessary propellant margins and
reserves to ensure successful execution of the Lunar Transit mission.

MISSION GROUND RULES AND ASSUMPTIONS

    The mission design process, as with any modeling effort, starts with some known set of initial
conditions with which to develop a trajectory. This set may be referred to as ground rules and
assumptions (GR&As) and it contains formal mission requirements, operating and design-to con-
straints, performance assumptions for major subsystems, programmatic objectives and desires, and
details of the computational environment in which a trajectory will be modeled. In the context of
the Lunar Transit mission these GR&As can include, among others (Figure 2 presents a larger, but
not exhaustive list):
       1.   Minimum mass delivery to the NRHO (requirement/constraint)
       2.   Qualified operating lifetime of SEP thrusters (requirement/constraint)
       3.   Maximum eclipse duration (requirement constraint)
       4.   Maximum total ionizing dose (requirement/constraint)




                                                   3
       5.     Launch vehicle performance (system performance estimate)
       6.     Thruster and power system performance (system performance estimate)
       7.     Launch date (programmatic direction)
       8.     Available computing resources (computational consideration)
       9.     Trajectory design software capabilities (computational considerations)




            Figure 2: Dependencies of the Lunar Transit integrated trajectory design problem
    The complete list of GR&As form the context within which a deterministic trajectory is de-
signed. Some GR&As, such as the choice of trajectory simulation software and available compu-
tational resources, may be selected according to specific mission needs or supplemented at cost.
Others, such as concept of operations (CONOPS) events and timelines, may be determined through
engineering assessments of mission needs and can be adjusted within a defined risk posture to ease
the burden on trajectory design. Many GR&As, often taking the form of requirements and con-
straints, are dictated to engineering teams or are natural consequences of decisions such as the
selection of a specific launch vehicle, thruster type, and solar array design.
   The specific hardware that is selected for a spacecraft, and the manner in which it is tested,
forms an inherent limitation on the operation of the vehicle. Hardware is typically qualified to some
defined test criteria, whether it be a safe envelope of operating temperatures, operating lifetime
before a component may fail, or limits on operating environment before reliability is reduced. These
qualification limits are themselves constraints, governing the manner in which a system can be
assumed to be safe to operate. In practice, this means that a mission which accounts for a physical
spacecraft finds itself far more limited than a theoretical one. Life limits, maximum rate of change
of vehicle attitude10, minimum fly-by altitudes governed by thermal limits of components, or max-
imum eclipse durations due to temperature and energy storage capabilities all form bounds which
are often more constraining than formal mission requirements or objectives. Requirements may be




                                                    4
waived if the situation demands it, while hardware failures that lead to loss of mission cannot be
ignored or written off.
    These limits and criteria rigidly bound a trajectory and must either be directly included in the
optimization problem or assessed a-posteriori for compliance. Additionally, system performance
assumptions may contain interdependencies which complicate modeling. The parking orbit a tra-
jectory may begin from is dependent on the performance of the selected launch vehicle as well as
the mass and separation condition requirements of the spacecraft and the power available to the
SEP system is a function of the performance of the vehicle power system, including the solar array
capabilities and the ability of the energy storage system to recover from periods of eclipse. These
system interactions may be modeled and determined a-priori (such as park orbit energy) or they
may need to be modeled within the trajectory optimization problem (such as SEP system perfor-
mance over time), further complicating the process of developing a deterministic trajectory.

MISSION UNCERTAINTIES

    In addition to the complexities of developing a single, nominal, deterministic trajectory a flight
mission must consider a host of uncertainties and unknowns to determine whether a mission design
is executable. To carry a sufficiently high confidence that a mission can be successfully flown a
mission designer needs to incorporate some set of performance parameters and events which may
be realized during flight but cannot be accurately predicted beforehand. Beginning with launch, the
spacecraft will be inserted into an initial orbit with some previously unknown (but quantified) error,
vehicle systems will perform differently than predicted pre-flight (these differences may be within
quantified uncertainties or they may be significant if an anomaly has occurred), and so the as-flown
trajectory will depart from the pre-flight reference (Figure 3). The magnitude of these uncertainties
and unknowns which the mission designer must protect for is defined through the mission’s risk
management process.




    Figure 3: Simplification of differences between deterministic (black) vs realized (colored) launch
       vehicle injection orbits, spacecraft performances, and trajectories to reach the NRHO
General Mission Uncertainties
   All space missions, regardless of size, objective, or design, must deal with the epistemic and
aleatoric uncertainties inherent to remotely operating a complex system in an environment that




                                                    5
cannot be fully recreated or simulated in a test facility. Pre-flight designs rely on the quality of test
data, system-level simulations, and environmental models. This pre-flight knowledge can vary de-
pending on the capabilities of the facilities used for testing, the precision of the instruments and
methods used to collect data, and the fidelity of the models used to generate performance predic-
tions. The uncertainty present in test measurements and integrated models can often be quantified,
meaning that it is a “known unknown”. Some statistical understanding of the uncertainty provides
engineers with a probability distribution of the degree to which uncertainty may be realized during
mission execution, allowing its impact to be characterized through Monte Carlo methods.
    The manner in which a spacecraft is flown also dictates how uncertainties may impact opera-
tions. No physical system can perfectly execute commands and so there will always be some delta
between what the ground wants a spacecraft to do and what it actually does (this is typically referred
to as an execution error). Determining what a spacecraft has executed, and at what time, is not
necessarily a straightforward task. Unlike ground-based systems, it is not possible to physically
inspect an on-orbit spacecraft and the knowledge that operators have of the vehicle in real-time is
only as extensive as the onboard sensors and downlinked telemetry allow. Telemetry is also not
always available depending on the frequency with which ground stations are available or scheduled,
meaning that available knowledge can quickly become obsolete. This gap between the state of the
spacecraft and the ground’s understanding of it must be considered pre-flight and included in un-
certainty analysis to validate a trajectory architecture.
Uncertainties Inherent to Electric Propulsion
    While HETs are a mature technology, there remains a significant lack of fundamental
knowledge regarding the in-space performance of these systems. While HETs are some of the most
numerous forms of propulsion on-orbit today, it remains difficult to characterize the output of these
thrusters on the ground, there is no standard or agreed upon method by which to extrapolate ground
test data (in a facility which imperfectly simulates vacuum) to on-orbit performance, and it is not
often possible to recreate precise estimates of on-orbit performance from spacecraft telemetry.
   The AEPS thruster, of which three were planned to be used on PPE, produces a maximum of
586 mN of thrust at a discharge power of 12 kW11. The thruster has a mass of <47 kg12, meaning
that AEPS has a thrust to weight ratio of roughly 0.001 at standard gravity. Measuring such a small
force acting upon a much more significant mass is inherently challenging. For PPE, the AEPS
thruster performed qualification and acceptance testing at NASA Glenn Research Center’s electric
propulsion test facility. Measurement uncertainty at this facility has previously been characterized
as +/- 6.9 mN at a 95% confidence interval for a thruster as powerful as AEPS13. While small, this
uncertainty still represents 1.2% of the full thrust magnitude, an error that must be accounted for
across roughly 300 days of thrusting in the Lunar Transit mission.
    In addition to accurately measuring the performance of a thruster on the ground, this perfor-
mance must be extrapolated to an on-orbit environment. Previous work has shown that HETs, in-
cluding the magnetically shielded AEPS, are sensitive to facility backpressure when tested on the
ground14. Generally, a HET will display higher specific impulse (efficiency) at higher backpres-
sures associated with ground-based vacuum test chambers. As space forms a more perfect vacuum
than any test chamber, the on-orbit background pressure is very close to zero and the realized effi-
ciency and thrust magnitude of a HET is often lower than that observed in pre-flight testing. Un-
fortunately, due to the general lack of in-space data available for HET performance, no standard
method exists by which to characterize this difference and account for it in pre-flight analysis.




                                                     6
    Just as ground-test data carries a high-degree of uncertainty for HETs, in-flight estimates can
be difficult to obtain and imprecise. Performance estimates of thrusters in space are often obtained
by reconstructing thrust magnitude over some period of time from orbit determination (OD) solu-
tions, meaning that these estimates are dependent on the quality of the OD being performed. Vehi-
cle telemetry pertaining to the state of valves within the propellant management system can addi-
tionally provide insight into the mass flow rate of the system over time, allowing specific impulse
and mass evolution to be reconstructed as well. These methods also carry their own uncertainties
and missed communications passes may lead to onboard data being permanently lost due to data
storage limits, meaning that an accurate accounting of the spacecraft’s mass over time may not be
available. Without an accurate mass estimate thrust estimation is further complicated, even when
onboard accelerometers are available.
    While precise characterization of how a thruster will perform on or-orbit when commanded is
currently not available to mission designers, the Psyche mission has shown that even systems with
considerable flight heritage may exhibit unexpected behaviors. The SPT-140, flown on the Psyche
spacecraft, has a strong flight heritage with Intuitive Machines (formerly Maxar) having operated
at least 4 SPT-140-equipped spacecraft prior to Psyche’s launch15. Despite this extensive history of
on-orbit use and characterization, the mode-hopping behavior3 observed during Psyche’s electric
propulsion checkout activities had never been documented previously. This performance instabil-
ity, in a thruster with a significant amount of previous operation, further exemplifies the uncertain-
ties inherent in the use of high-powered electric propulsion in space missions.
Mission Specific Uncertainties
   Gateway and the PPE were envisioned to be a first-of-its-kind application of SEP to a large,
high mass, human-rated exploration vehicle. Gateway was to incorporate a number of never-before-
flown technologies, including the largest roll-out solar arrays (ROSAs) and the highest power SEP
system developed to date. This system included two newly developed thruster types (AEPS and the
BHT-6000) neither of which has operated in-space. The result was a mission that inherently carried
uncertainties in the performance of critical systems that have never previously operated on-orbit
(such as power and propulsion). Further uncertainty is added by the novel nature of this mission to
NASA human space flight (HSF), which has previously only operated high-thrust spacecraft and
has largely been confined to low-Earth Orbit (LEO).
    While all space missions account for some uncertainty in system performance about a
mean/nominal specification, the number of new technologies onboard PPE/Gateway led to a statis-
tically significant degree of variation in the mean value itself. Where heritage low-thrust verifica-
tion methods utilizing Veil and the newly developed Stampede6 have assessed cycle-to-cycle vari-
ation of performance about a mean value, the Lunar Transit required significant focus to be put on
analysis of variations in mean performance values for SEP thrust magnitude and power availability.
Further complicating this analysis was the need to perform this analysis across a wide range of
potential launch dates due to system sensitivity to seasonal variations in solar array performance
and Earth-Moon system alignment.
Missed Thrust and Contingency Scenarios
    In addition to the uncertainties discussed above, the Lunar Transit mission design needed to
consider a number of potential disruptive events that could occur during execution. These include
MTEs (a catch-all term used to describe any time that a vehicle safe-mode or unplanned coast
period disrupts the execution of a low-thrust maneuver) as well as contingency scenarios such as
failed SEP thruster. MTEs are a persistent threat to any low-thrust mission, and the Lunar Transit




                                                   7
was no different. With more than 300 days of planned thruster operation, missed thrust proved to
be a significant driver of sensitivity analysis. Additionally, due to the high thruster throughput re-
quired to reach the NRHO (more than 3,000 m/s ∆v), the loss of a SEP thruster and particularly the
loss of one of the three AEPS would make successful execution of the remainder of the trajectory
challenging.
    Application of the methods described by Imken, et al16, to the Lunar Transit reflected a high
likelihood of multiple vehicle safe mode events over the duration of the mission. These empirical
forecasts, developed against historical safe-mode event occurrences and durations in deep space
missions, indicated that operators could expect to experience between 2 and 7 individual MTEs
with a total outage duration between 3 and 10 days (Figure 4). In addition to MTEs caused by safe
mode events, operational considerations such as orbital object conjunctions were accounted for
under the missed thrust umbrella. Previous publications17 have detailed the strategy PPE MD de-
veloped for collision avoidance maneuvers (CAMs) during the Lunar Transit by which an addi-
tional, unplanned, coast period would be used to generate separation between the Gateway space-
craft and a potential conjuncting object. Due to the highly eccentric nature of the Lunar Transit
during the early phases of flight, a coast on the order of an hour placed at apogee passage was
shown to be effective at producing miss distances on the order of tens to hundreds of kilometers.
Due to the low initial perigee altitude of the Lunar Transit (200 km) and the dense object environ-
ment at low Earth altitudes below 2,000 km, multiple CAMs were anticipated to be necessary dur-
ing flight. As CAM implementation was based in the addition of unplanned coasting, this was, by
definition, intentional missed thrust and was included in the broader MTE context.




             Figure 4: Empirical MTE forecasting using methods outlined by Imken, et al16
    Failures within the primary propulsion system can have catastrophic consequences for space-
craft and lead to loss of mission. PPE’s SEP system inherently carried redundancy through the
integration of 7 separate thrusters, 3x AEPS and 4x BHT-6000 thrusters. During transit, however,
the AEPS strings would have produced roughly 80% of the total impulse required (a natural con-
sequence of the AEPS units being roughly twice as powerful as the BHT-6000). Thruster string
failures were thus analyzed through the bounding case of the loss of a single AEPS unit on the first




                                                   8
day of the mission, at mission elapsed time (MET) +0 days. Analysis focused on the ability of the
spacecraft to reach the NRHO within existing mission constraints while utilizing the remaining 6
healthy strings in order to show fault tolerance within the propulsion system.

RISK MITIGATION

    Uncertainties and contingency scenarios represent risks to the ability of the combined spacecraft
and operator teams to successfully execute the mission within established constraints and require-
ments. To ensure that sufficient capability exists to protect against a set of accepted risks, margins
and reserves were applied to critical mission and spacecraft parameters. If, when, and to what mag-
nitude a risk would be realized during flight would prompt the consumption of part of these margins
and reserves to offset the impact.
   Within the context of mission design, margins and reserves were primarily applied to propellant
(particularly xenon mass) and time, including thruster duty cycles included for maneuver expansion
periods, explicit coast periods reserved for things like missed thrust recovery, and padding placed
on required coasting events such as eclipse passage to protect against navigation state uncertainty.
Broader vehicle margins such as mass growth allowance are beyond the scope of mission design
and thus not discussed in this publication.
    For the Lunar Transit mission margin and reserves were defined as separate quantities and ap-
plied to specific forms of uncertainty. Reserves were aimed at protecting against “known un-
knowns”, uncertainties that were likely or guaranteed to be realized but the magnitude of the real-
ization would not be known pre-flight. This includes epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties such as
thruster performance dispersions and launch vehicle injection error. Missed thrust was also in-
cluded under reserves due to the high likelihood of realization indicated by empirical forecasting.
Margins, on the other hand, targeted “unknown unknowns”, events or uncertainties that may or may
not occur during flight. This category broadly included anything where both the occurrence and the
magnitude of realization was not certain, such as contingency scenarios and significant dispersions
beyond the magnitude protected for with reserves (typically 3 standard deviations). Also included
in margins were any risks, uncertainties, or events that were not being tracked at all in preflight
analysis due to incomplete or insufficient knowledge of their potential existence. While some mar-
gins, such as contingencies, could be directly quantified through analysis these “surprises” lurking
beyond the limits of the engineering team’s knowledge would be covered with whatever propellant
or time was naturally “left over” in the development of the deterministic mission. For example,
should a surplus of xenon exist between the onboard storage capacity and the nominal mission and
reserve and margin needs, then this extra propellant would flow to margins. Table 1 summarizes
these definitions.
Table 1: Reserves and margins overview
 Reserves                                           Margins
 Known Unknowns                                     Unknown Unknowns
     §   Thruster performance uncertainty               §   Thruster failures
     §   Orbit insertion dispersions                    §   Prolonged loss of comms
     §   Power availability uncertainty                 §   Beyond 3σ dispersions
     §   Navigation uncertainty                         §   Risks not being tracked preflight
     §   Execution errors                               §   Vehicle contingencies
     §   Missed thrust events




                                                    9
RESULTS

    Monte Carlo analyses and targeted assessments of specific contingency cases became a focus
of PPE MD as the Lunar Transit mission advanced from conceptual design towards execution.
Validating the robustness of trajectories to expected uncertainties became a critical and necessary
step towards certification of flight readiness. While many analyses covering a large array of uncer-
tainties, execution errors, and operational implementations were undertaken, results presented here
will focus on launch vehicle injection error, thruster performance uncertainty, MTEs, and thruster
failures. Reserves and margins are presented in terms of the percent of the deterministic xenon cost
required to account for each realization. A brief discussion of time margins as it pertains to a max-
imum experienced eclipse requirement of 90-minutes is also included.
Launch Vehicle Injection Error
    The Lunar Transit trajectory begins with a target interface point (TIP), which serves as a patch
point between the ascent trajectory modeled by the launch vehicle team and the in-space trajectory
modeled by PPE MD. The spacecraft will not perfectly be delivered to the identified TIP state by
the launch vehicle and so the parking orbit from which the Lunar Transit begins will initialize with
some insertion error. The first week of the Lunar Transit was envisioned to consist of system check-
outs and a multi-day SEP system commissioning, meaning that insertion errors would propagate
freely during this time without the ability to perform correction maneuvers. Due to the low perigee
altitude of this parking orbit (200 km), perturbations due to drag, Earth spherical oblateness, and
solar gravity would magnify dispersions in initial state.
   Lunar Transit operations planning assumed that the pre-flight reference trajectory would be re-
designed during the initial 7-day checkout to incorporate real-time knowledge in park orbit state
and vehicle system performance. Dispersions in TIP insertion would thus be incorporated into a
newly designed reference trajectory which would mitigate their impact relative to requiring short-
term retargeting of the original, pre-flight reference. Analysis completed using the Aberrant pack-
age simulated this process by sampling from a known distribution of perturbations to park orbit
parameters including:
       1.   Apogee altitude
       2.   Perigee altitude
       3.   Inclination
       4.   Argument of perigee (AOP)
       5.   Right Ascension of the Ascending Node (RAAN) (determined by launch epoch)
    The resulting trajectory was then reoptimized to reach the NRHO. Of note is that due to the
manner in which TIP states were defined (in an Earth body-fixed frame), RAAN was solely a func-
tion of the time of day in which a launch occurred (assuming that ascent guidance and duration did
not change from one minute to the next). Monte Carlo analysis sampled across distributions in each
parameter simultaneously and covered a potential launch window of 20 minutes centered about the
optimal epoch determined in reference trajectory development (+/- 10 minutes). Representative
analysis covers a single, notional, month of potential launches (presented here as March of 2027)
and contains roughly 20,000 samples.




                                                  10
      Figure 5: Sobol sensitivity indices of propellant consumption to varied TIP state parameters
    As multiple parameters are being varied simultaneously (apogee, perigee, inclination, RAAN,
AOP, and launch date), a Sobol sensitivity analysis18 is conducted to determine trajectory propellant
usage sensitivity to variations in each value. From Figure 5 it can be seen that variations in apogee
altitude (and thus orbital energy) dominate the data set. This is to be expected, as increases in orbital
energy decrease the ∆v required from the spacecraft to transit from GTO to NRHO (and the con-
verse is true as well). The second most sensitive component is launch date, represented by park
orbit injection epoch, which is also to be expected due to the daily evolution of the Earth-Moon
system geometry and the fixed launch inclination of 28.5˚. Finally, variations in TIP RAAN form
the final significant contribution to changes in xenon use, which will be discussed below.
    As indicated by the Sobol results, xenon propellant required to correct for dispersions in apogee
altitude forms a clearly identifiable trend, where higher apogee altitudes (positive dispersions) re-
quire less propellant than the nominal trajectory (lower xenon reserve). Figure 6 shows that 3σ
dispersions in apogee altitude result in between +/- 3% impact to available xenon reserves with hot
insertions potentially saving xenon relative to the mean. The results also show two clear solution
families separated by TIP RAAN, with one family forming around 45˚ and one forming near -15˚.
This trend is known to PPE MD, where solutions fall into one of two RAAN orientations depending
on launch date. This is a result of the orientation of a launch trajectory with a 28.5˚ inclination and
the Moon’s orbital plane about the Earth, where the -15˚ and 45˚ solution families produce a space-
craft trajectory that arrive in a plane conducive to a lunar intercept at the end of the Earth-centered
spiral portion of the Lunar Transit. Solutions within these two families can exhibit different xenon
costs and eclipse trends from one another and this behavior has been noted across three separate
iterations of reference trajectory design covering launch dates spanning three years (2026, 2027,
and 2028). The RAAN sensitivity seen in the Sobol results are thus a product of this solution family
behavior, and not the +/- 10-minute launch window perturbation applied to the Monte Carlo anal-
ysis (and in fact no significant sensitivity between launch window and trajectory performance have
been noted by PPE MD).




                                                    11
               Figure 6: Xenon reserve sensitivity to apogee altitude dispersions
Thruster Performance Uncertainty
    As discussed previously, PPE carried inherent uncertainty in the on-orbit performance of the
SEP thrusters due to ground measurement uncertainty and performance differences in varying
back-pressure environments. As with TIP insertion accuracy, a statistical distribution of thruster
performance (thrust magnitude and specific impulse) as well as power system performance (in
power available to the SEP system) was developed and applied to Lunar Transit reference trajec-
tories in a Monte Carlo fashion.
    Once again, a Sobol sensitivity analysis is employed to determine the sensitivity of xenon usage
to variations in thrust magnitude, specific impulse, power to SEP, and launch date (this analysis is
performed over the same March 2027 period as above). Sobol results (Figure 7) show a dominant
sensitivity to variations in thruster efficiency with a secondary impact from thrust magnitude, a
small contribution from power to SEP (which serves as an additional adjustment to thrust and spe-
cific impulse via thruster throttle level), and very little impact from launch date. This result is in-
dicative of the comparatively larger uncertainty in SEP thruster performance than power system
performance, which is better characterized due to the mature implementation of ROSAs in space-
flight missions. The second order impact of thrust magnitude to xenon usage has been determined
to be a result of lower-thrust trajectories experiencing a greater number of eclipses than nominals
(to be discussed below). This greater time spent in shadow increases the time required to spiral out
of Earth’s gravity well, resulting in worsening geometric alignment of the trajectory with the
Moon’s orbital plane when the spacecraft reaches lunar intercept. This alignment is corrected pro-
pulsively, resulting in increased propellant consumption at lower thrust magnitudes.




                                                   12
        Figure 7: Sobol sensitivity of xenon usage to changes in SEP performance parameters
    Results (Figure 8) show a strong correlation between specific impulse and xenon use, as expected
via the rocket equation. This trend is nearly 1:1, with a 1σ reduction in specific impulse requiring,
on average, 1% more xenon to recovery from. This nearly linear relationship between propellant
use and specific impulse is a happy coincidence of the magnitude of performance dispersion, which,
for the purposes of analysis, was assumed to be roughly 0.8% 1σ. A ~1% variation in specific
impulse resulting in a ~1% variation in propellant use not surprising to mission designers, but this
linearity is an example of not only the law of small numbers but also how the high baseline SEP
specific impulse of over 2,600 s helps to flatten the curve of the rocket equation. These results
additionally show that just above 4% xenon reserve is required to protect against 3σ dispersions in
thruster specific impulse.
    Unlike propellant consumption, which is primarily a function of specific impulse, eclipse pro-
files are primarily a function of thrust magnitude. Higher thrust magnitudes mean that when the
spacecraft reaches the beginning of an eclipse season, the size of the vehicle’s orbit will have grown
at a faster rate than the nominal. Meaning that each revolution within the eclipse season will be
larger and thus orbital velocity across that revolution will, on average, be lower. This means the
spacecraft will transit the Earth’s umbra more slowly, leading to increased eclipse durations with
higher thrust magnitudes. The spacecraft will, however, exit an eclipse season entirely more quickly
due to the higher rate of change of semi-major axis. This behavior is seen in Figure 9, which shows
increasing eclipse durations and decreasing Earth eclipse counts with higher thrust dispersions
across the entirety of March of 2027. Across 3σ dispersions in thrust, the duration of the longest
experienced eclipse increases by ~3 minutes over baseline, while the number of eclipses decreases
by roughly 10. Figure 9 also shows trajectories which violate the 90-minute requirement at higher
thrust dispersions, meaning that while the baseline trajectory may have been requirement compli-
ant, a mission design which accounts for uncertainty in performance is not. This trend reflects the
need for margin to be applied to path constraints such as a maximum eclipse duration in order to
account for real world uncertainty in execution.




                                                   13
                 Figure 8: Xenon reserves required vs specific impulse dispersions




    Figure 9: Eclipse duration (left) and number of total Earth eclipses (right) vs thrust magnitude
                                 dispersion, colored by launch date
Missed Thrust
   Previous work10 as well as the empirical results in Figure 4 have highlighted the probability of
missed thrust across the end-to-end Lunar Transit. While the empirical results indicated a 3σ




                                                  14
probability of encountering just under 10-days of total thrust outage during the Lunar Transit, the
combined PPE engineering and operations team conducted a separate, vehicle specific, assessment
to determine a required missed thrust tolerance for the Lunar Transit. Flight controllers from
NASA’s Mission Control Center Houston (MCC-H) along with mission design concluded that a
resilience to 21-days of total thrust outage occurring at any time during transit would provide a
reasonable not-to-exceed time for anomaly resolution and spacecraft recovery during operations.
This maximum outage duration of 21-days became a “known unknown”, with the xenon required
to protect against an outage of this duration coming in the form of reserve.
   Using the framework contained in Aberrant, 21-day MTEs were analyzed using the Rolling
Outage approach10, beginning at MET +0 and continuing through the end of the Spiral Phase (near
MET +275). Further analysis assessed MTEs in the Alignment and Insertion Phases but have not
been included here for conciseness. In each case, the remaining spacecraft trajectory was reopti-
mized post-MTE to target the NRHO. To limit the propellant impact of an outage, 21-day MTEs
prompted an arrival delay of 4 NRHO revolutions, roughly corresponding to one lunar month, or
29 days. This delay prevented the need for excessive thrusting during later phases of the mission
and preserved optimal coasting in the Alignment Phase while maintaining a favorable geometry by
which the Gateway would execute a lunar intercept.




     Figure 10: Xenon reserve as a function of the MET occurrence of a 21-day missed thrust event
    Missed thrust results for 21-day outages show that a xenon reserve of roughly 2% is sufficient
to recover from MTEs at any point in the Spiral Phase, provided the spacecraft can arrive at the
NRHO 29 days later than planned (Figure 10). Sensitivity is not constant over the duration of the
Spiral Phase, however, with xenon costs decreasing as the MET at which an outage occurs in-
creases. This is due to the increasing perigee altitude of the trajectory over time, meaning that




                                                 15
atmospheric drag and Earth spherical oblateness induce fewer perturbations to trajectories with
outages later in the mission. The results also show a launch date sensitivity, with certain launch
dates exhibiting lower costs than others (the May 7th solution is noticeably more robust to MTEs
than solutions on May 1st through the 6th).
Thruster Failures
    Given the strategic value of the Gateway to the Artemis architecture as envisioned in the begin-
ning of 2026, it was desirable to maintain fault tolerance and anomaly resilience where possible.
This included resilience to thruster failures, with the MET +0 loss of a single AEPS thruster deter-
mined to be the most stressing case for the Lunar Transit. To assess this contingency, the same set
of trajectories analyzed in the missed thrust assessment were modified to represent the loss of a
single AEPS. While the PPE carried 3x AEPS, it also would have carried 4x BHT-6000s, and so
following the loss of a 12 kW string the Lunar Transit would be completed on 2x AEPS and 4x
BHTs. Complicating this analysis is the need to complete a recovery within the qualified lifetime
of the BHT-6000 strings which, due to their lack of magnetic shielding, are expected to degrade
over their life and eventually fail due to this wear mechanism.




                     Figure 11: Single AEPS out recovery results for May 2027
    Figure 11 shows the xenon margin (not reserve, as contingencies are defined as unknown-un-
knowns) required to recover from an MET +0 AEPS failure across launch dates in May of 2027.
These recovery costs are significantly higher than those for the three types of stochastic uncertain-
ties described above, with a maximum value of ~10%. Due to the significant shift in impulse han-
dling away from the AEPS and towards the remaining BHT-6000s, total system efficiency drops
in these recovery cases and propellant consumption increases. While the AEPS thrusters produce
nearly 80% of the total required mission impulse in nominal scenarios, that share drops to just 60%




                                                  16
in a failure case. Margin, like reserves, is not made of just one value but is meant to cover multiple
potentialities. One individual scenario requiring 10% margin represents a significant driver of pro-
pellant needs and posed program leadership with a challenging risk posture to incorporate into
mission-level accounting.




                               Figure 12: BHT-6000 lifetime utilization
   Nominal Lunar Transit trajectories required roughly 50% of the available lifetime of each BHT-
6000 thruster to complete (a more comprehensive discussion of thruster utilization has been pre-
sented previously19). As Figure 12 reflects, AEPS failure recoveries nearly double that usage to
between 93% and 95%. In practice, mission designers were forced to throttle the BHT thrusters
back in these recovery scenarios in order to prevent lifetime exceedances, further reducing the
overall system efficiency and increasing propellant consumption further. This qualification limit
became a difficult design constraint to comply with and one that drove thruster implementation
decisions during contingency recoveries.
Impact to Margins and Reserves
    These four analyses each are the result of the application of some set of accepted GR&As to
reference trajectories representing deterministic missions. The results reflect a potential distribution
of risk postures, with mean values for stochastic uncertainty sensitivity near zero for all three re-
serve-based analyses up to 4.6% 3σ in the case of thruster performance errors. Likewise, AEPS out
cases represent a choice to protect against single fault tolerance in the SEP system, driving a high
propellant margin of nearly 10%. When added together, these analyses represent 9% (3σ) of xenon
reserve and 9.9% of xenon margin (Table 2). It is, of course, possible to reduce these margins and
reserves by choosing to accept a higher degree of risk on mission execution. Mission managers can
choose to account for 2σ uncertainties in values such as thruster performance or reliability




                                                    17
assessments may indicate that an AEPS failure is not likely enough to warrant carrying an explicit
margin. These decisions are themselves part of the GR&As that guide analysis and the risk posture
that has been accepted at a project or program level drive not only trajectory design and analysis
decisions but also hardware decisions on the spacecraft (such as propellant tank size to accommo-
date additional xenon).
Table 2: Reserves and Margins Impacts
                                   Mean + 3σ Xenon Reserve            Xenon Margin
 TIP Injection Error                                          1.7%                                 0%
 SEP Uncertainty                                              4.6%                                 0%
 Missed Thrust (21-days)                                      2.7%                                 0%
 AEPS Failure                                                   0%                               9.9%
 Total                                                          9%                              9.9%


CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

   Hardware, as a mission designer may come to learn, is a synonym for constraint. Real, physical
systems inherently are imperfect as are the humans that operate them. Ground based facilities pro-
vide imperfect or incomplete recreations of the space environment, models imperfectly simulate
the operations of systems, and spacecraft and the supporting ground-based apparatuses imperfectly
execute missions within the context of incomplete knowledge.
    When hardware is qualified for use on a mission, the parameters of those tests set the limits to
which systems are accepted to safely operate. On-orbit, systems may safely operate well beyond
those bounds but they do so at risk without existing data. In the case of the BHT-6000 thruster (as
an example), this takes the form of a qualified lifetime. This number is not a true limit after which
the thruster catastrophically fails, it is a limit in knowledge that becomes a design-to constraint in
pre-flight analysis. During flight, mission managers may choose to exceed this limit particularly in
the event of an anomaly or contingency. Such a capability cannot, however, be depended upon to
ensure mission robustness in development. These limits in knowledge become the limits to which
engineers can design and analyze, and the final design of a mission will reflect the known capabil-
ities of a spacecraft, not the true maximums.
    Any low-thrust spacecraft may face the same uncertainties and contingencies presented in this
work. Launch vehicle injection errors apply to all space missions, the thruster performance uncer-
tainties described here are inherent to all electric propulsion technologies, missed thrust is a persis-
tent risk to low-thrust missions, and thruster failures may strike any spacecraft. Likewise, the mag-
nitude of margins and reserves necessary to protect against not just these, but all forms of errors,
uncertainties, and risks that face a spacecraft must be accounted for in the development of any flight
mission.
    To offset just four unknowns in the Lunar Transit required 18.9% of the deterministic xenon
utilization (9% for reserves and 9.9% for thruster failures). This is a valuable lesson about the nature
of maturing a mission from formulation to flight. Early in mission development (typically following
the preliminary design review), the overall architecture and structure of a spacecraft trajectory is
likely to be frozen. At this stage, if one were to assume that the spacecraft mass was 10,000 kg, and




                                                    18
transit required consuming 1,000 kg of xenon, systems engineers may allocate the remaining 9,000
kg to the remainder of the vehicle. Avionics, power systems, structure, and all other manner of
hardware will then be developed, fabricated, and integrated onto a physical spacecraft such that it
weighs in at allocation (or often slightly above allocation) prior to launch. If this work is completed
without considering margins required to ensure robust mission design, then systems engineers may
be shocked to learn during later phases of development that the analysts are not just asking for
1,000 kg of xenon, they are asking for 20%, or 200 kg more! If the now 10,200 kg spacecraft cannot
complete the mission, managers must undertake the painful process of either accepting increased
risk to burn down margins and reserves or maintain their risk posture and offload mass from the
spacecraft. Should this happen after systems are integrated, this may mean directing a technician
to physically cut hardware off a nearly complete spacecraft.
    Propellant is not the only margin or reserve that must be accounted for, as seen in the case of
the 90-minute maximum eclipse requirement on the Lunar Transit. Dispersions in thruster perfor-
mance indicated that eclipse durations may vary by up to +/- 5 minutes due to uncertainties in
mission execution. This indicates to the mission designer that the design-to constraint for determin-
istic trajectories is not a maximum of 90 minutes but instead is some lower value such as 85 minutes
to incorporate sufficient robustness to unknowns.
    This same philosophy can be extended to myriad other unknowns; some conservatism must be
added to the deterministic trajectory in order to ensure that the mission can be executed under real
world realizations. A flyable trajectory is therefore less performant than a conceptual optimal so-
lution designed under less stringent assumptions. Engineers may then choose to incorporate this
conservatism early into the formulation process to ensure that a mission is not designed so close to
the theoretical maximum performance as to become brittle or impossible to execute when uncer-
tainties are later realized. Likewise, in the development of testing and qualification campaigns it
may be valuable to consider the situations in which a system may be used and not just the case of
a nominal mission. Whether or not a mission may successfully advance from formulation to de-
tailed design to execution is a function of not only available funding and resources, but also to how
well the limits of knowledge were considered during development.




                                                   19
REFERENCES
1
  J.R. Brophy, “Perspectives on the Success of Electric Propulsion”, Journal of Electric Propulsion, 2022
2
  M. J. Patterson and J. S. Sovey, “History of Electric Propulsion at NASA Glenn Research Center: 1956 to Present”,
American Society of Civil Engineers, 2013
3
  S. Snyder, “Initial Checkout of the Psyche Electric Propulsion System”, Journal of Electric Propulsion, 2025
4
  M. McGuire, S. McCarty, D. Grebow, T. Pavlak, S. Karn, K. Ponnapalli, D. Davis, K. Hack, “Overview of the Lunar
Transfer Trajectory of the Co-Manifested First Elements of NASA’s Gateway”, AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist
Conference, Aug 2021
5
   D. Han, “Orbit Transfers for Dawn’s Vesta Operations: Navigation and Mission Design Experience”, International
Symposium on Space Flight Dynamics, 2012
6
  C. Venigalla and S. McCarty, “Monte Carlo Analysis of Low-Thrust Many-Revolution Spiral Out Trajectories with
Statistical Errors for NASA’s Gateway”, AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting, 2025
7
  S. McCarty, “Mission Scan Approach for the Gateway Low Thrust Spiral to a Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit”, AAS/AIAA
Spaceflight Mechanics Meeting, Jan 2025.
8
  S. Karn and M. Wentzel-Long, “A Missed Thrust Framework for Low-Thrust Spiral Trajectories to the NRHO”, Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2026
9
  Copernicus Trajectory Design and Optimization System, Software Package, Ver. 5.4.0, NASA Johnson Space Center,
Houston, TX, 2025
10
   M. Martini and B. Humphreys, “The Effects of Solar Beta Angle on Low Thrust Spirals for Solar Electric Propulsion
Vehicles”, AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meetings, Jan 2025
11
   R. Shastry, H. Kamhawi, and J. Frieman, “12-kW Advanced Electric Propulsion System Hall Thruster Current Quali-
fication and Production Status”, International Electric Propulsion Conference, 2024.
12
   “Advanced Electric Propulsion System (AEPS)” L3 Harris Technologies, 2024
13
   J. Mackey, et al, “Uncertainty in Inverted Pendulum Thrust Measurements”, 54th AIAA/SAE/AIAA Joint Propulsion
Conference, Jul 2018
14
   H. Kamhawi, et al, “Performance, Facility Pressure Effects, and Stability Characterization Tests of NASA’s Hall Effect
Rocket with Magnetic Shielding Thruster”, 52nd AIAA/SAE/AIAA Joint Propulsion Conference, Jul 2016
15
   T. Kerl, et al “Maxar Electric Propulsion Development for Deep Space”, AIAA Propulsion and Energy Forum, 2020
16
   T. Imken, R. Randolph, M. DiNicola, and A. Nicholas, “Modeling Spacecraft Safe Mode Events”, IEEE Aerospace
Conference, 2018
17
   S. Karn, et al, “Ballistic Leverage for Collision Avoidance During the Lunar Transit Trajectory of NASA’s Co-Mani-
fested Vehicle”, AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, 2023
18
   I. Sobol, “On sensitivity estimation for nonlinear mathematical models”, Matematicheskoe Modelirovanie, 1990
19
   M. McGuire, S. McCarty, K. Hack, S. Karn, “Application of Solar Electric Propulsion to the Low Thrust Lunar Transit
of the Gateway Power and Propulsion Element”, 38th International Electric Propulsion Conference, 2024




                                                            20

