---
title: Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey
collection: 21-anti-colonial
region: Jamaica / United States
counter: colonialism and white supremacy
note: the Pan-Africanist’s own speeches and writings (1923)
source: Internet Archive
source_url: https://archive.org/details/philosophyopinio01garv
language: English
license: public domain
---
Sere 
aes 


mesa teen: 
ees irae ses argtniems Sra ee 
ea ee = Sree eee : : 
SSS Sieier ere essere oeneeenes 
eae we Serene eo ene 
< pesos werackgeseacates = 


eS SSS 


ee ee ree 


eriieestten 
eee noes 


anetrreD 
ae 


ae 
Se 





LIBRARY 
Brigham Young University 


PERSONAL LIBRARY OF 
SENATOR REED SMOOT 


DONATED BY THE 
HARLOW E. SMOOT FAMILY 




















AN APPEAL TO THE 
SOUL OF WHITE 
AMERICA 


THE SOLUTION TO THE 
PROBLEM OF COMPETITION 
BETWEEN TWO OPPOSITE 
RACES. 


NEGRO LEADER APPEALS 
TO THE CONSCIENCE OF 
WHITE RACE TO SAVE 
HIS OWN. 


eee 


Baw 
MARCUS GARVEY 
PRESIDENT GENERAL of the 
UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION. 


REPRINT FROM MAGAZINE ARTICLE 1923. 





THE LIBRARY 
- BRIGHAM Younc U-IVERSITY 
PROVO, UTAH 





Au Appeal to the Soul nt 


White Amvrira. 








AN APPEAL TO THE SOUL OF W,HITE AMERICA 


Surely the soul of liberal, philanthropic, liberty-loving, white 
America is not dead. 


It is true that the glamour of materialism, has to a great de- 
gree, destroyed the innocence and purity of the national conscience, 


but, still, beyond our politics, beyond our soulless industrialism, 
there is a deep feeling of human sympathy that touches the 


soul of white America upon which the unfortunate and sorrowful 
can always depend for sympathy, help, and action. 


It is to that feeling that I appeal at this time for four hundred 
million Negroes of the world, and fifteen million of America in 
particular. : 


There is no real white man in America, who does not desire a 
solution of the Negro problem. Each thoughtful citizen has pro- 


bably his own idea of how the vexed question of races should be 
settled. To some the Negro could be gotten rid of by whole sale 
butchery, by lynching, by economic starvation, by a return to slav- 
ery 4nd legalized oppression; while others would have the problem 
solved by seeing the rece all herded together and kept some where 
among themselves, but a few—those in whom they have an interest 
should be allowed to live around as the wards of a mistaken phil- 
anthropy; yet, none so generous as to desire to see the Negro 
elevated to a standard of real progress, and prosperity-welded 
into a homogeneous whole, creating of themselves a mighty nation 
with proper systems of government, civilization, and ¢ulture, to 
mark them admissable to the fraternities of nations and races 
without any disadvantage 


AN APPEAL TO THE SOUL OF WHITE AMERICA. 


I do not desire to offend the finer feelings and_ sensibilities 
of those white friends of the race who really believe that they are 
kind and considrate to us as a people; but I feel it my duty to 
make a real appeal to conspience and not belief. | Conscience 1s 
solid, convicting and permanently demonstrative; belief, is only a 
matter of opinion, changeable by superior reasoning. Once the 
belief was that it was fit and proper to hold the Negro as a slave 
and in this the Bishop, Priest and layman agreed. Later on 
they changed their belief or opinion, but at all times the conscience 
of certain people dirtated to them that it was wrong and inhuman 
to hold human beings as slaves. It is to such a conspience in 
white America that I am addressing myself. 

Negroes are human beings— the peculiar and strange opinions 
of writers, ethnologists, philosophers, scientists and anthropolo- 
gists notwithstanding— they have feelings: souls, passions, am" 
bitions desires, just as other men, hence they must be considered. 


Has white America really considered the Negro in the light of 
permanent human progress? The answer is NO. 


Men and women of the white race, do you know what is going 
to happen if you do not think and act now? One of two things. 
You are either going to deceive and keep the Negro in your 
midst until you have perfectly completed your wonderful Ameri 
can s:ivilization with its progress of art, science, industry, and 
politics, and then, jealous of your own success and achievements 
in those directions, and with the greater jealousy of seeing your 
race pure and unmixed, cast him off to die in the whirlpool of 
economic starvation, thus, getting rid of another race that was not 
intelligent enough to live, or, you simply mean by the largeness 
of your hearts to assimmilate fifteen million Negroes into the 
social fraternity of an American race that will neither be white 
nor black. Don’t be alarmed! We must prevent both consequen- 
ces. No real race loving white man wants to destroy the purity 
of his race, and no real Negro conscious of himself, wants to dies 
hence there is room for an understanding» and an adjustment, 
and that is just what we seek. 


Let white and black stop deceiving themselves. Let the white 
race stop thinking that all black men are dogs and not to be con- 
sidered as human beings. Let foolish Negro agitators and so-cal- 


BNW AP EAL TOE SOUR OP WHITE AMERICA 


led reformers, encouraged by deceptive and unthinking white as 
sociates, stop preaching and advocating the doctrine of “social 


equality,’ meaning thereby the social intermingling of both races, 
intermarriages, and general scyial co-relatioship. The two ex- 
tremes will get us nowhere, other than breeding hate 4nd en- 
couraging discord, which will eventually end disastrously to the 
weaker race. 


Some Negroes in the quest of position, and honor, have been 
admitted to the full enjoyment of their constitutional rights, 
thus we have some of our men filling high and responsible Gov- 
ernment positions, others on their own account, have established 
themselves in the professions, commerce and industry. This the 
casual onlooker, and even the men themselves, will say carries a 
guarantee and hope of social equality, and perm@nent rezpial 
progress: But this is the mistake. There is no progress of 
he Negro in America that is permanent, so long as we h@ve 
with us the monster evil-prejudice. 


Prejudice, we shall always have between black and white, so 
long as the latter believes that the former is intruding upon their 
rights. So long as white laborers believe that black laborers are 
taking and holding their jobs, so long as white artisans believe 
that black artisans are performing the work that they should do; 
so long as white men and women Pelieve that black men and wo- 
men are filling the positions that they covet; so long as white pol- 
it‘yal leaders and statesmen believe that black politicians and 
statesmen are seeking the same positions in the Nation’s Govern- 
ment; so long as white men believe that black men want to 4s- 
scyiate with and marry white women, then we will have prejudice 
and not only prejudice, but riots, lynchings, burnings, and God 
to tell what next and to follow! 


It is this danger that drives me mad. It must be prevented. 
We c4nnot allow white and black to drift along unthinkingly to- 
ward this great gulf and danger, that is nationally ahead of us. 
It is because of this, that I speak, and now call upon the soul of 
great. white America to help. 

It 1s no use putting off, the work must be done, and it must be 
started now. 


AN APPEAL TO THE SOUL OF WHITE AMERICA. 


Some peoplé have misunderstood me. Some don’t want to 
understand me But I must explain myself for the good of 
America, and for the good of the world and humanity. 


Those of the Negro reze who preach social equality, and who 
are working for an American race that will in complexion be 
neither white nor black, have tried to misinterpret me to the white 
public, and create prejudice against my work. The white public, 
not stopping to analyze and question the motive behind criticisms 
and attacks, aimed against new leaders and their movements, 
condemn without even giving a charre to the criticised to be heard. 
Those who oppose me in my own race, because I refuse to endorse 
their program of social arrogance and social equality, gloat over 
the fact that by their misrepresentation and underhand methods, 
they were able to have me convicted and imprisoned for crime 
which they ealculate will so discredit me as to destroy the move- 
ment that I represent, in opposition to their program of a new 
American race; but we will not now consider the opposition to a 
program or a movement, but state the facts as they are, and let 
deep souled white America pass its own judgement. 


In another one hundred years white Americ will have doubled 
its population, in another one hundred years it will have trebled 
itself. 'The keen student must realize that the centuries ahead 
will bring us an overcrowded and over populated country; op- 
portunities, as the population grows larger will be fewer; the com- — 
petition for bread between the people of their own class will 
become keener, and so much more so will there be no room for 
two competitive races, the one strong and the other weak., To 
imagine Negroes as District Attorneys, Judges, Senators, Con- 
gressmen, Assemblymen, Aldermen, Government Clerks, and Of- 
fici@ls, Artisans and laborers at work while millions of white men 
starve, is to have before you the bloody picture of wholesale mob 
violence, that I fear, and against which I am working. 


No preaching, no praying, no presidenti@l ed-rt, will control the 
passion of hungry unreasoning men of prejudice when the hour 
comes. It will not come I pray in our generation, but it is of 
the future that I think 4nd for which I work. 


A generation of ambitious Negro men and women, out from the 
best Colleges, Universities, Institutions, capable of filling the 





PING REPEAL TOME SOUL OF WHITH; AMERICA 


highest and best positions in the nation, in industry, commerce, 
society and polities! Can you keep them back? If you do so 
they. will agitate and throw your constitution in your faces. 
Can you stand before civilization 8nd deny the truth of your con- 
_stitution? What are you going to do then? You who are jusz 
will open up the door of opportunity and say to all and sundry 
“Enter in.” But ladies and gentlemen, what about the mob, that 
starving crowd of your own race? Will they stand by, suffer 
and starve, and allow an opposite competitive race to prosper in 
the midst of their distress? If you can conjure these things 
up in your mind, then you have the vision of the race problem 
of the future in America, 


There is but one solution, and that is to provide an outlet for 
Negro energy, ambition, and passion, away from the 4ttraction 
of white opportunity and surround the race with opportunities 
of its own If this is not done, and if the foundation for same 
is not laid now, then the consequences will be sorrowful for the 
weaker race, and be disgraceful to our ideals of justice, and shcrk- 
ing to our civilizaton. : 


The Negro must have a country, and a n@&tion of his own. 
If you laugh at the idea, then you are selfish and wicked, for you 
and your children do not intend that the Negro shall discdthode 
you in yours. If you do not want him to have a country and 
a nation of his own; if you do not intend to give him equal op- 
portunities in yours; then it is plain to see that you me@n that he 
must die, even as the Indian to make room for your generations. * 


Why should the Negro die? Has he not served America and 
the world. Has he not borne the burden of civilization in this 
Western world for three hunded ye@rs? Has he not contributed 
of his best to America? Surely all this stands to his credit, 
but there will not be enough room and the one @nswer is “find a 
place.’ We have found a place, it is Africa and as black men for 
three centuries have helped white men build Anffica, surely 
generous and grateful white men will help black men build Africa. 


And why shouldn’t Africa and America travel down the ages 
as protectors of human rights 4nd guardians of democracy? 
Why shouldn’t black men help white men secure and establish 
universal peace? We can only have peace when we are just to 
all mankind; and for that peace, and for the reign of universal love 


AN APPEAL TO THE SOUL OF WHITE AMERICA 


[now appeal to the soul of white America. Let the Negroes 
have a Government of their own: Don’t encourage them to be- 
lieve that they will become social equals 4nd leaders of the whites 
in America, without first on his own acrount proving to the world 
that they are capable of evolving a civilization of their own. 
The white race can best help the Negro by telling him the truth, © 
and not by flattering him into believing that he is as good as 
any white man without first proving the racial, national con- 
structive metal of which he is made. %& 


Stop flattering the Negro about scyial equality, and tell him to 
go to work and build for himself. Help him in the direction 
of doing for himself, and let him know that self progress brings 
its own reward. — 


I appeal to the considerate and thoughtful conscience of white 
America not to condemn the cry of the Universal Negro Im: 
provement Association for a nation in Africa for Negroes, but 
to ‘give us a charice to explain ourselves to the world. White 
America is too big and when infémed and touched, too liberal, 
to turn down the cry of the awakened Negro for “a place in the 
Sut: 


*e 














om 
rae 


ny ea 7 








Regie > Fe myth 1 eri at smirk are eg ments P| S48 9 Donen py ott vp ee ALIS, 34g ommend eh hPa iba eee hitin ved) pe 08 Met ing mae ie ee Me 


a a Sob Bianca a 






“) 


b ’ le 4 
ee ALARMS Biesewers: ot nthe 


‘ a ie 








MARCUS GARVEY 


Philosophy and Opinions 


OF 


MARCUS GARVEY 


Edited by 
AMY JACQUES-GARVEY 


cers ee rene 


Freedom’s battle, once begun, 
Bequeathed by bleeding sire to son, 


Tho’ baffled oft, is ever won. 
Byron. 


serge EER EES 


First EpITIOoN 
rn pn es 


Published by 
THE UNIVERSAL PUBLISHING HOUSE. 
56 West 135th Street, 
NEW. YOREKICITY.N:¥.,..U. S.A. 
LO23; 








THE LIBRARY 
BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY 
PROVO, UTAH 


Dedicated To 
THE TRUE AND LOYAL MEMBERS OF 
THE UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT, 
ASSOCIATION 
In The Cause Of 
AFRICAN REDEMPTION 


Ve 


A REQUEST 


Not to be rzad with the eye 
nor feeling of prejudice, but 
with the view of helping to 
solve a vital human problem 
that confronts the nation. 


- 


PREFACE 


This Volume is compiled from the speeches and articles de- 
livered and written by Marcus Garvey from time to time. 


My purpose for compiling same primarily, was not for publica- 
tion, but rather to keep as a personal record of the opinions and 
sayings of my husband during his career as the Leader of that 
portion of the human family known as the Negro Race. However, 
on second thought, I decided to publish this volume in order to 
give to the public an opportunity of studying and forming an 
opinion of him; not from inflated and misleading newspaper and 
magazine articles, but from expressions of thoughts enunciated 
by him in defence of his oppressed and struggling race; so that 
by his own words he may be judged, and Negroes the world over 
may be informed and inspired, for truth, brought to light, forces 
conviction, and a state of conviction inspires action. 


The history of contact between the white and black races 
for the last three hundred years or more, records only a series of 
pillages, wholesale murders, atrocious brutalities, industrial ex- 
ploitation, disfranchisement of the one on the other; the strong 
against the weak; but the sun of evolution is gradually rising, 
shedding its light between the clouds of misery and oppression, 
and quickening and animating to racial consciousness and even- 
tual national independence black men and women the world over. 


It is human, therefore, that few of us within the Negro race _ 
can comprehend this transcendent period. We all suffer in a 
more or less degree; we all feel this awakened spirit of true man- 
hood and womanhood; but it is given to few the vision of leader- 


Vil, 


ship—it is an inspiration—it is a quality born in man. Therefore 


in the course of leadership it is natural that one should meet op- 
position because of ignorance, lack of knowledge and sympathy 


of the opposition in understanding fully the spirit of leadership. 


With the dawn of this new era, which precedes the Day of, 
National Independence for Negroes, it is well for all members of 
the race to understand their leadership; know what its essentials, 
its principles are, and help it to attain its goal and liberate a race 
in the truest sense of the word. 


In Chapter 1 of this volume. I have endeavored to place before 
my readers gems of expression convincing in their truths. 


Chapter 2 deals with definitions and expositions of various 
interesting themes. 


Chapters 3 and 4 contain a collection of brief essays on sub- 
jects affecting world conditions generally and Negroes in particu- 
lar. 


In Chapter 5 I have reproduced what I consider two of the 
best speeches of my husband. 


It is my sincere hope and desire that this small volume will 
help to disseminate among the members of my race everywhere 
the true knowledge of their past history, the struggles and striv- 
ings of the present leadership, and the glorious future of national 
independence in a free and redeemed Africa, acheived through 
organized purpose and organized action. 


AMY JACQUES-GARVEY 
New York City, 
February, 23rd., 1923. 


Vili, 


le 
A 
3 
j 





CONTENTS 





CHAPTER I 


Epigrams 

CHAPTER JJ 
Propaganda 
Slavery 
Force 
Education 
Miscegenation ~ 
Prejudice 
Radicalism 
Government 
Evolution & the Result 
_ Poverty 
Power 
Universal Suspicion 
Dissertation on Man 
Race Assimilation 
Christianity 
The Function of Man 
Traitors 


CHAPTER If 


Present Day Civilization 

Divine Apportionment of Earth 
Universal Unrest in 1922 

World Disarmament 

Cause of Wars 

World Readjustment 

The Fall of Governments 

Great Ideals know no Nationality 


1X, 


Pages 
1—14 


15 
15—16 
16 

17 
17—18 
18 
18—19 
19 
19—21 
spe 
2192 


24—25 
26 
27 


29—30 


31 
32 
32 
oo 
oo 
34 
34—35 
36—37 


Purpose of Creation 
Purity of Race 
Man know Thyself 
A Solution for World Peace in 1922 
God as a War Lord 
The Image of God 
CHAPTER IV 


The Slave Trade 

Negroes’ Status Under Alien Governments 
The Negro as an Industrial Makeshift 
Lack of Co-operation in the Negro Race 


Pages — 
37 

a 
38—39 
40—42) 
43-44 


45—46) 
47 

48 
49 


White man’s Solution for the Negro Problem in America ee 
2-53) 


The True Solution of the Negro Problem 
White Propaganda about Africa 
The three stages of the Negro in Contact 
with the whiteman 
Booker T. Washington’s Program 
Belief that Race problem will adjust itself a Fallacy 
Examples of white Christian Control of Africa 
The Thought behind their deeds 
Similarity of Persecution 
Shall the Negro be exterminated? 
Africa for the Africans 
The Future as I see it 
CHAPTER V 
Emancipation Speech 
Christmas Message 
Kaster Sermon 
Convention Speech 
Statement on arrest 


D 
o4 


55 
56 3 
57—58! 
59 

60 . 
60—62, 
63—67) 
68—72 
A ETS. 


79—82 
83—86 
87—92 
93—97 
98—100 














x, ‘ "i E ; . : 
E ee i : 
: 2 ; ‘ * 5 . : 

i‘ ‘ # ~ . , 4 2 

‘ > 7 : y t ay ‘ 2 
ae = c d ~ + 
* aie: ' 
= 5 cs = = 5 ~ ; aM < 
enim ey ee Pree gee anemt e pine ke ee aeyn wate ala pee i, eis PE A Mk iA hc el lage el Aah hss SP 3p one pes hone ieee 
Sal ae SD wee og v , ee ee Mere Vinal. i ‘i “ » . . 











Perr 
en 


eral 


¥ 


S 





AMY JACQUES-GARVEY 


Philosophy and Opinions 


MARCUS GARVEY 


CHAPTER 1 


HISTORY ie the land-mark by which we are directed into 
the true course of life. 


The history of a movement, the history of a nation, the 
history of a race is the guide-post of that movement’s destiny, 
that nation’s destiny, that race’s destiny. 


What you do to-day that is worthwhile, inspires others to 
act at some future time. 





O 

CHANCE has never yet satisfied the hope of a suffering 
people. 

Action, self-reliance, the vision of self and the future have 
been the only means by which the oppressed have seen and realized 
the light of their own freedom. 

———0 

LIFE is that existence that is given to man to live for a pur- 

pose, to live to his own satisfaction and pleasure, providing he 








2 PHILOSOPHY: AND. OPINIONS 


forgets not the God who created him and who expects a spiritual 
obedience and observation of the moral laws that He has inspired. 








O 


There is nothing in the world common to man, that man can- 
not do. 





O 





The ends you serve that are selfish will take you no further 
than yourself; but the ends you serve that are for all, in common, 


will take you even into eternity. 
———0 





It is only the belief and the confidence we have in a God why 
man is able to understand his own social institutions, and move 
and live like a rational human being. 

Take away the highest ideal—FAITH and CONFIDENCE 
IN A GOD—and mankind at large is reduced to savagery and 
the race destroyed. 








O 


A race without authority and pwoer, is a race without respect. 








O 


CRITICISM is an opinion for good or ill, generally indulged 
in by the fellow who knows more than any one else, yet the big- 
gest fool. There is no criticism that calls not forth yet another. 
The last critic is the biggest fool of all, for the world starts and 
ends with him. He is the source of all knowledge, yet knows 
nothing, for there is not a word one finds to use that there is 
not another that hath the same meaning, then wherefore do we 
criticize? 





PHIFOSORHYCAN DVOPINTIONS 3 


FEAR is a state of nervousness fit for children and not men. 
When man fears a creature like himself he offends God, in whose 
image and likeness he is created. Man being created equal fears 
not man but God. To fear is to lose control of one’s nerves, one’s 
will—to flutter, like a dying fowl, losing consciousness, yet, alive. 








O 


AMBITION is the desire to go forward and improve one’s 
condition. It is a burning flame that lights up the life of the 
individual and makes him see himself in another state. To be 
ambitious is to be great in mind and soul. To want that which 
is worth while and strive for it. To go on without looking back, 
reaching to that which gives satisfaction. To be humanly ambi- 
tious is to take in the world which is the province of man; to be 
divinely ambitious is to offend God by rivalling him in His 
infinite Majesty. 





0 





ADMIRATION is a form of appreciation that is sametimes 
mistaken for something else. There may be something about 
you that suggests good fellowship when kept at a distance, but in 
closer contact would not be tolerated, otherwise it would be love. 


erence ( jee 


RELIGION is one’s opinion and belief in some ethical truth: 
To be a Christian is to have the religion of Christ, and so to be a 
believer of Mohammed is to be a Mohammedan but there are so 
many religions that every man seems to be a religion unto himself. 


No two persons think alike, even if they outwardly profess the 
same faith, so we have as many religions in Christianity as we 
have believers. | 


4 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


DEATH is the end of all life in the individual or the thing; 
if physical, the crumbling of the body into dust from whence it 
came. He who lives not uprightly, dies completely in the crumb- 
ling of the physical body, but he who lives well, transforms him- 
self from that which is mortal, to immortal. 





———0 


FAITHFULNESS is actuated by a state of heart and mind 
in the individual that changes not. No one is wholely faithful 
to a cause or an object, except his heart and mind remain firm 
without change or doubt. If one’s attitude or conduct changes 
toward an object, then one has lost in one’s faithfulness. It is 
a wholeness of belief overshadowing all suspicion, all doubt, ad- 
mitting of no question; to serve without regret or disgust, to ob- 
ligate one’s self to that which is promised or expected, to keep to 
our word and do our duty well. There are but few faithful 
people now-a-days. 


0 








PROHIBITION—is to abstain from intoxicating liquor, as 

it makes us morbid and sometimes drunk. But we get drunk 

.every day, nevertheless, not so much by the strength of what we sip 
from the cup, but that which we eat, the water we drink, and the 

air we inhale, which at fermentation conspire at eventide to make 

us so drunk and tired that we lose control of ourselves and fall 

asleep. Everybody is a drunkard, and if we were to enforce real 

prohibition we should all be dead. 








0 


There is no strength but that which is destructive, because. 
man has lost his virtues, and only respects force, which he 
himself cannot counteract. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 5 


This is the day of racial activity, when each and every group 
of this great human family must exercise its own initiative and 
influence in its own protection, therefore, Negroes should be more 
determined to-day than they have ever been, because the mighty 
forces of the world are operating against non-organized groups 
of peoples, who are not ambitious enough to protect their own 
interests. 

ee 


Wake up Ethiopia! Wake up Africa! Let us work towards 
the one glorious end of a free, redeemed and mighty nation. Let 
Africa be a bright star among the constellation of nations. 

etc aetna 


A man’s bread and butter is only insured when he works for 
it. 








O 


The world has now reached the stage when humanity is really 
at the parting of the ways. It is a question of “MAN MIND 
HY SELLE.” 


we 





The political readjustment of the world means that those 
who are not sufficiently able, not sufficiently prepared, will be at 
the mercy of the organized classes for another one or two 
hundred years. 





0 


The only protection against INJUSTICE in man is POWER 
—Physical, financial and scientific. 








O 

The masses make the nation and the race. If the masses 
are illiterate, that is the judgment passed on the race by those who 
are critical of its existencce. 





6 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
The function of the Press is public service without prejudice 


or partiality, to convey the truth as it is seen and understood with- 
out favoritism or bias. 


0 
EDUCATION is the medium by which a people are prepared 


for the creation of their own particular civilization, and the ad- 
vancement and glory of their own race. 











O 


NATIONHOOD is the only means by which modern civiliza- 
tion can completely protect itself. 





Independence of nationality, independence of government, is 
the means of protecting not only the individual, but the group. 


Nationhood is the highest ideal of all peoples. 





0 





The evolutionary scale that weighs nations and races, balances 
alike for all peoples ; hence we feel sure that some day the balance 
will register a change for the Negro. 





0 





If we are to believe the Divine injunction, we must realize 
that the time is coming when every man and every race must re- 
turn to its own ‘‘vine and fig tree.’’ 


aerceeenieen )omesreeeeaenes 
Let Africa be our guiding Star—OUR STAR OF DESTINY. 
—— 





So many of us find excuses to get out of the Negro Race, 
because we are led to believe that the race is unworthy—that it 
has not accomplished anything. Cowards that we are! It is we 
who are unworthy, because we are not contributing to the uplift 
and up-building of this noble race. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 7 


How dare any one tell us that Africa cannot be redeemed, 
when we have 400,000,000 men and women with warm blood 
coursing through their veins? 


The power that holds Africa is not Divine. The power that 
holds Africa is human, and it is recognized that whatsoever man 
has done, man can do. 





0 





We of the Negro Race are moving from one state of organiza- 
tion to another, and we shall so continue until we have thoroughly 
lifted ourselves into the organization of GOVERNMENT. 








O 


Be as proud of your race today as our fathers were in the days 
of yore. We have a beautiful history, and we shall create an- 
other in the future that will astonish the world. 








O 


WOMAN 


What the night is to the day, is woman to man. The period 
of change that brings us light out of darkness, darkness out of 
light, and semi-light out of darkness are like the changes we 
find in woman day by day. 


She makes one happy, then miserable. You are to her kind, 
then unkind. Constant yet inconstant. Thus we have WOMAN. 
No real man can do without her. 








0 


LOVE 


A happy but miserable state in which man finds himself from 
time to time; sometimes he believes he is happy by loving, then 
_ suddenly he finds how miserable he is. It is all joy, it sweetens 


8 PHILOSOPHY. AND OPINION >. 


life, but it does not last. It comes and goes, but when it is active, i 
there is no greater virtue, because it makes one supremely happy. — 


We cannot hold our love, but there is one love that never . 


changeth or is mistaken, and that is God’s. The longer we hold 
our love, the nearer we approach like unto our Creator. 


The whole world is run on bluff. No race, no nation, no man 


has any divine right to take advantage of others. Why allow 
the other fellow to bluff you? 


Every student of Political Science, every student of Economics | 


knows, that the race can only be saved through a solid industrial 


foundation. That the race can only be saved through political — 


independence. Take away industry from a race; take away 
political freedom from a race, and you have a greup of slaves. 


Peoples everywhere are travelling toward industrial oppor- ' | 
tunities and greater political freedom. As a race oppressed, it is 7 
for us to prepare ourselves that at any time the great change in © 
industrial freedom and political liberty comes about, we may be q 
able to enter into the new era as partakers of the joys to be in- 7 


herited. 


Lagging behind in the van of civilization will not prove our — 
higher abilities. Being subservient to the will and caprice of pro- — 
gressive races will not prove anything superior in us. Being satis- 
fied to drink of the dregs from the cup of human progress will not — 
demonstrate our fitness as a people to exist alongside of others, — 
but when of our own intiative we strike out to build industries, © 
governments, and ultimately empires, then and only then will we 7 











PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 9 


as a race prove to our Creator and to man in general that we are 
fit to survive and capable of shaping our own destiny. 





0 





The world ought to know that it could not keep 400,000,000 
Negroes down forever. 


There is always a turning point in the destiny of every race, 
every nation, of all peoples, and we have come now to the turning 
point of the Negro, where we have changed from the old cringing 
weakling, and transformed into full-grown men, demanding our 
portion as MEN. 





0 





I am not one of those Christians who believe that the Bible 
can solve all the problems of humanity. 

The Bible is good in its place, but we are men. We are the 
creatures of God. We have sinned against Him, therefore it 
ae more than the Bible to keep us in our places. 

Man is becoming so vile that'to-day we cannot afford to con- 
vert him with moral, ethical, physical truths alone, but with that 
which is more effective—implements of destruction, { 


0 
LEADERSHIP means everything—PAIN, BLOOD, DEATH. 











0 





To be proseprous in whatever we do is the sign of TRUE 
WEALTH. We may be wealthy in not only having money, but 
in spirit and health. It is the most helpful agency toward a self— 
satisfying life. One lives, in an age like this, nearer perfection by 
being wealthy than by being poor. To the contended soul, wealth 
is the stepping stone to prefection; to the miser it is the nearest 
avenue to hell. I would prefer to be honestly wealthy, than 
miserably poor. 


10 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


To be free from temptation of other people’s property is 1 
to reflect the HONESTY of our own souls. There are but few 
really honest people, in that between the thought and the deed we 





make ourselves dishonest. The fellow who steals, acts dishonestly, a 


We can steal in thought as well as in deed, therefore to be honest 


is a virtue that but few indulge. To be honest is to be satisfied, 


having all, wanting nothing. If you find yourself in such a state — 
then you are honest, if not the temptation of your soul is bound — 
to make you dishonest. This applies to the king and the peasant 
alike. 





0 








All peoples are struggInig to blast a way through the in- 7 


dustrial monopoly of races and nations, but the Negro as a whole 
has failed to grasp its true significance and seems to delight in 
filling only that place created for him by the white man. 





O 





[The N egro who lives on the patronage of philanthropists is 
the most dangerous member of our society, because he is willing 
to turn back the clock of progress when his benefactors ask him 
so to do.| 





0 





No race in the world is so just as to give others, for the ask- 
ing, a square deal in things economic, political and social. 





O 





Men who are in earnest are not afraid of conseqeunces, 








0 


No one knows when the hour of Africa’s Redemption cometh. 
It is in the wind. It is coming. One day, like a storm, it will 
be here. When that day comes all Africa will stand together. 

















PHILOSOTMYIANT. OPINIONS 11 


Any sane man, race or nation that desires freedom must first 
of all think in terms of blood. Why, even the Heavenly Father 
tells us that “without the shedding of blood there can be no re- 
mission of sins?” Then how in the name of God, with history 
before us, do we expect to redeem Africa without preparing our- 
selves—some of us to die. 





O 





I pray God that we shall never use our physical prowess to 
oppress the human race, but we will use our strength, physically, 
morally and otherwise to preserve humanity and civilization. 





ne) 


For over three hundred years the white man has been our 
oppressor, and he naturally is not going to liberate us to the 
higher freedom—the truer liberty—the truer Democracy. We 
have to liberate ourselves. 


terre peer en 


Every man has a right to his own opinion. Every race has 
a right to its own action; therefore let no man persuade you 
against your will, let no other race influence you against your own. 





0 





The greatest weapon used against the Negro is DISORGANI- 
ZATION. 





0 





If you have no confidence in self you are twice defeated in 
the race of life. With confidence you have won even before you 
have started. 





O 





At no time within the last five hundred years can one point 
to a single instance of the Negro as a race of haters. 


42 PHILOSOPHY: AND OPINIONS 


The Negro has loved even under severest punishment. In 
slavery the Negro loved his master, he safe-guarded his home 
even when he further planned to enslave him. We are not a 
race of Haters, but Lovers of humanity’s Cause. 





O 





Mob violence and injustice have never helped a race or a 
nation, and because of this knowledge as gathered from the events 
of ages, we as a people in this new age desire to love all mankind, 
not in the social sense, but in keeping with the Divine Injunction 
“MAN LOVE THY BROTHER.” 








O 


PREPAREDNESS is the watch-word of this age. For us 
as a race to remain, as we have been in the past—divided among 
ourselves, parochializing, insularizing and nationalizing our acti- 
vities as subjects and citizens of the many alien races and govern- 
ments under which we live—is but to hold ourselves in readiness 
for that great catastrophe that is bound to come—that of racial 
extermination, at the hands of the stronger race—the race that 
will be fit to survive. 








O 


Humanity takes revenging crime from one age to the next, 
according to the growth and development of the race so afflicted. 


But the perpetuation of crime through revenge and retalia- 
tion will not save the human race. 


el 





Europe is bankrupt today, and every nation within her bounds 
is endeavoring to find new openings, new fields for exploitation— 
that exploitation that will bring to them the resources, the revenue 
and the power necessary for their rehabilitation and well-being. 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 13 


We are living in a strenuous, active age, when men see, not 
through the spectacles of sympathy, but demand that each and 
every one measures up in proportion to the world’s demand for 
service. 

enn 





The attitude of the white race is to subjugate, to exploit, and 
if necessary exterminate the weaker peoples with whom they come 
in contact. 


They subjugate first, if the weaker peoples will stand for it; 
then exploit, and if they will not stand for SUBJUGATION nor 
EXPLOITATION, the other recourse is EXTERMINATION. 


O 








If the Negro is not careful he will drink in all the poison of 
modern civilization and die from the effects of it. 





O 





There can be no peace among men and nations, so long as 
the strong continues to oppress the weak, so long as injustice is 
done to other peoples, just so long will we have cause for war, 
and make a lasting peace an impossibility. 





O 





Hungry men have no respect for law, authority or human life. 








O 
I am not opposed to the white race as charged by my enemies. 

I have no time to hate any one, All my time is devoted to the 

up-building and developement of the Negro Race. _ 





O 





When nations outgrow their national limits, they make war 
and conquer other people’s territory so as to have an outlet for 
their surplus populations. 








The world does not count races and nations that have nothing. 


14 PHILOSOPHY: AND: OFINIONS 


Point me to a weak nation and I will show you a people op- 
pressed, abused, taken advantage of by others. 


Show me a weak race and I will show you a people reduced . 


to serfdom, peonage and slavery. 
Show me a well organized nation, and I will show you a 
people and a nation respected by the world. 
O 
The battles of the future, whether they be physical or mental, 
will be fought on scientific lines, and the race that is able to pro- 
duce the highest scientific development, is the race that will 
ultimately rule. 














O 

Let us prepare TODAY. For the TOMORROWS in the lives 
of the nations will be so eventful that Negroes everywhere will 
be called upon to play their part in the survival of the fittest 
human group. 





O 
Let us in shaping our own Destiny set before us the qualities 
of human JUSTICE, LOVE, CHARITY, MERCY AND EQUITY. 
Upon such foundation let us build a race, and I feel that the 
God who is Divine, the Almighty Creator of the world, shall for- 
ever bless this race of ours, and who to tell that we shall not 
teach men the way to life, liberty and true human happiness? 
O 
Day “by. day ‘we héar the cry ofr AURICA = shOR = Tie 
AFRICANS.” This cry has become a positive, determined one. 
It is a cry that is raised simultaneously the world over, because 
of the universal oppression that affects the Negro. 














O 





All of us may not live to see the higher accomplishment of 


an African Empire—so strong and powerful, as to compel the © 


respect of mankind, but we in our life-time can so work and act 
as to make the dream a possibility within another generation. 





Te 
“ye 


CHAPTER II 


PROPAGANDA 


We are living in a civilization that is highly developed. We 
are living in a world that is scientifically arranged in which 
everything done by those who control is done through system; 
proper arrangement, proper organization, and among some of the 
organized methods used to control the world is the thing known 
and called “PROPAGANDA.” 


Propaganda has done more to defeat the good intentions of 
races and nations than even open warfare. 

Propaganda is a method or medium used by organized peoples 
to convert others against their will. 


We of the Negro race are suffering more than any other 
race in the world from propaganda—Propaganda to destroy 
our hopes, our ambitions and our confidence in self. 





O 





SLAVERY 


Slavery is a condition imposed upon individuals or races not 
sufficiently able to protect or defend themselves, and so long as a 
race or people expose themselves to the danger of being weak, 
no one can tell when they will be reduced to slavery. 

When a man is a slave he has no liberty of action; no freedom 
of will, he is bound and controlled by the will and act of others; 
as of the individual, so of the race. 


15 


16 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


Slavery is not a condition confined to any one age or race 
of people. Slavery has been since man in the different distribu- 
tion of himself, scattered here, there and everywhere, has grown 
and developed, wherein one race will become strong and the 
other race remains weak. The strong race has always reduced 
the weak to slavery. It has been so in ages past, it is so now in 
certain parts of the world, and will be so until the end of time. 


The great British nation was once a race of slaves. In their 
own country they were not respected bacause the Romans went 
there, brutalized and captured them, took them over to Rome 
and kept them in slavery. They were not respected in Rome be- 
cause they were regarded as a slave race. But the Briton did 
not always remain a slave. As a freed man he went back to his 
country (Britain) and built up a civilization of his own, and by 
his self-reliance and initiative he forced the respect of mankind 
and maintains it until today. 


a Oe 
FORCE 


The powers opposed to Negro progress will not be influenced 
in the slighest by mere verbal protests on our part. They realize 
only too well that protests of this kind contain nothing but the 
breath expended in making them. 

They also realize that their success in enslaving and dominat- 
ing the darker portion of humanity was due solely to the element 
of FORCE employed (in the majority of cases this was accom- 
plished by force of arms.) 


Pressure of course may assert itself in other forms, but in 
the last analysis whatever influence is brought to bear against 
the powers opposed to Negro progress must contain the element 
of FORCE in order to accomplish its purpose, since it is apparent 
that this is the only element they recognize. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 17 
EDUCATION 


To be learned in all that is worth while knowing. Not to be 
crammed with the subject matter of the book or the philosophy 
of the class room, but to store away in your head such facts as 
you need for the daily application of life, so that you may the 
better in all things understand your fellowmen, and interpret 
your relationship to your Creator. 3 


- You can be educated in soul, vision and feeling, as well as 
in mind. To see your.enemy and know him is a part of the com- 
plete education of man; to spiritually regulate one’s*self is an- 
other form of the higher education that fits man for a nobler 
place in life, and still, to approach your brother by the feeling 
of your own humanity, is an education that softens the ills of the 
world and makes us kind indeed. 


Many a man was educated outside the school room. It is 
something you let out, not gompletely take in. You are part of it, 
for it is natural; it is dormant simply because you will not develop 
it, but God creates every man with it knowingly or unknowingly 
to him who possesses it—that’s the difference. Develop yours 
and you become as great and full of knowledge as the other 
fellow without even entering the class room. 


(ee 
MISCEGENATION 


Some of the men of the Negro race aggravate the race ques- 
tion because they force the white man to conclude that to educate 
a black man, to give him opportunities, is but to fit him to bea 
competitor for the hand of his woman; hence the eternal race 
- question. 

But not all black men are willing to commit race suicide 
and to abhor their race for the companionship of another. There 


18 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


are hundreds of millions of us black men who are proud of our 
skins and to us the African Empire will not be a Utopia, neither 
will it be dangerous nor fail to serve our best interests, because 
we realize that like the leopard we cannot change our skins. 
The men of the highest morals, highest character and noblest 
pride are to be found among the masses of the Negro race who 
love their women with as much devotion as white men love theirs. 


ene en pees 
PREJUDICE 


Prejudice of the white race against the black race is not so 
much because of color as of condition; because as a race, to them, 
we have accomplished nothing; we have built no nation, no 
government; because we are dependent for our economic and 
political existence, 

You can never curb the prejudice of the one race or nation 
against the other by law. It must be regulated by one’s own 
feeling, one’s own will, and if one’s feeling and will rebel against 
you no law in the world can curb it. 


Prejudice can be actuated by different reasons. Sometimes 
the reason is economic, and sometimes political. You can only 
obstruct it by progress and force. 

en 


RADICALISM 


**Radical’’ is a label that is always applied to people who 
are endeavoring to get freedom. 

Jesus Christ was the greatest radical the world ever saw. 
He came and saw a world of sit and his program was to 
inspire it with spiritual feeling. He was therefore a radical. 

George Washington was dubbed a radical when he took up 
his sword to fight his way to liberty in America one hundred 
and forty years ago. 





PHIBOSOL AY AND OPINIONS tg 


All men who call themselves reformers are perforce radicals. 
They cannot be anything else, because they are revolting against 
the conditions that exist. 


Conditions as they exist reveal a conservative state, and if 
you desire to change these conditions you must be a radical. 


I am, therefore, satisfied to be the same kind of radical, if 
through radicalism I can free Africa.. 


eS - 


GOVERNMENT 


Government is not infallible. Government is only an ex-~ 
ecutive control, a centralized authority for the purpose of ex- 
pressing the will of the people. 


Before you have a government you must have the people. 
Without the people there can be no government. The government 
must be, therefore, an expression of the will of the people. 


—— 


EVOLUTION AND THE RESULT 


Evolution brings us changes that sometimes make us fail 
to recognize ourselves even after a lapse of centuries. 


When the great white race of today had no civilization of 
its own, when white men lived in caves and were counted as 
savages, this race of ours boasted of a wonderful civilization on 
the Banks of the Nile. 


It may sound good for some Negroes to say that they were 
born here or there, and they do not intend to go anywhere else 
but where they saw the light of day. But let me say to you 
men, the world is small and humanity in the many and various 
race groups, is growing larger every day. i 


20 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


A race that was ten millions fifty years ago is today sixty 
millions. A race that was thirty millions fifty years ago is to- 
day ninety millions; how many will they be tomorrow and 
the world is not growing larger? 


What will happen through the multiplication of all these 
various race groups, of those who are in power, of those who 
are strong, those who have at their command the forces of 
nature, through which they can exploit the weak and ultimately 
exterminate them? What will happen to you, the weak and un- 
prepared, when the strong becomes more numerous even though 
the world remains at its present size? 


Ah, if you will but think down the future and compare the 
possibilities of that future with the happenings of the past you 
will come to the conclusion that there is no other salvation for 
the Negro but through a free and independent Africa. 


Whilst geographically speaking the world has ever been in its 
natural divisions as we know it, and see it, yet, politically speaking, 
the world has changed, and is still changing. Yesterday we had 
the Roman Empire, we had the Grecian Empire, we had even 
before the Carthaginian, the Assyrian and the Babylonian empires. 
What has become of them? They have gone into the oblivion 
of the past, because of human progress, because of the develop- 
ment of certain races as aginst the stagnation of others; but even 
yesterday we also had the great German Empire; we had the 
Russian Empire; we had the Empire of Austria and Hungary. 
Where are they now? They too, are travelling toward the 
oblivion of the past. Today we have the great French Empire, 
the British Empire and other great commonwealths. Will they 
stand? 


Ah, methinks not, because evolution and human progress 
bring changes, and in the changes no man can tell what will 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 21 


happen tomorrow as against what exists today. Therefore, I 
say to the four hundred million Negroes of the world, prepare 
yourselves for the higher life, the life of liberty, industrially, 
educationally, socially and politically. 





O-------- 
POVERTY 


A hellish state to be in. It is no virtue. It is a crime. 

To be poor, is to be hungry without possible hope of food; 
to be sick without hope of medicine; to be tired and sleepy with- 
out a place to lay one’s head; to be naked without the hope of 
clothing; to be despised and comfortless. To be poor is to be 
a fit subject for crime and hell. | 

The hungry man steals bread and thereby breaks the eighth 
commandment; by his state he breaks all the laws of God and 
man and becomes an outcast. In thought and deed he covets his 
neighbor’s goods; comfortless as he is he seeks his neighbor’s 
wife; to him there is no other course but sin and death. That 
is the way of poverty. No one wants to be poor. 





O 
POWER 


Power is the only argument that satisfies man. 

Except the individual, the race or the nation has POWER 
that is exclusive, it mean's that that individual, race or nation will 
be bound by the will of the other who possesses this great 
qualification. 

It is the physical and pugilistic power of Harry Wills that 
makes white men afraid to fight him. 





It was the industrial and scientific power of the Teutonic 
race that kept it for years as dictator of the economic and 
scientific policies of Europe. 


22 PHILOSOPHY IAND OPINION S 


It is the naval and political power of Great Britain that keeps 
her mistress of the seas. 


It is the commercial and financial power of the United States 
of America that makes her the greatest banker in the world. 
Hence it is advisable for the Negro to get power of every kind. 
POWER in education, science, industry, politics and higher 
government. That kind of power that will stand out signally, 
so that other races and nations ¢an see, and if they will not see, 
then FEEL. 


Man is not satisfied or moved by prayers or petitions, but 
every man is moved by that power of authority which forces 
him to do even against his will. 











PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 23 


UNIVERSAL SUSPICION 


Humanity everywhere is struggling toward political freedom 
and economic opportunity. In this struggle we are confronted 
with the rivalry of the keenest minds of the age; each race and 
nation seeking to present its best to the world. 

So much is expected of each by the different rivals, that it 
becomes impossible to reach an amicable settlement and to 
establish universal confidence. 

It can be plainly seen that no one race or nation trusts the 
other. There is a UNIVERSAL SUSPICION that hovers over 
the conduct of every great leader representative of his race or 
nation. It is this suspicion that limited the Washington Four 
pact Treaty; it is this suspicon that caused the failure of the 
Genoa Conference; it is this suspicion that is going to wreck 
ultimately many of the nations and empires of today, thereby 
throwing into obscurity many of the races that now dominate 
the affairs of men. We asa race, are called upon to play our part, 
and we must do it well. 

In the spread of this universal suspicion that causes nation 
to distrust nation, and race to distrust race, we also have our dis- 
trust which makes it impossible for us to believe in anyone else 


but ourselves. 


24 PHILOSOPHY ‘AND OPINIONS 
DISSERTATION ON MAN 


Man is the individual who is able to shape his own character, 
master his own will, direct his own life and shape his own ends. 


When God breathed into the nostrils of man the breath of 
life, made him a living soul, and bestowed upon him the authority 
of “Lord of Creation,” He never intended that that individual 
should descend to the level of a peon, a serf, or a slave, but that 
he should be always man in the fullest possession of his senses, 
and with the truest knowledge of himself. 


But how changed has man become since creation?’’ We find 
him today divided into different classes—the helpless imbecile, 
the dependent slave, the servant and the master. These different 
classes God never created. He created MAN. But this individ- 
ual has so retrograded, as to make it impossible to find him—a 
real man. 


As far as the Negro race is concerned, we ean find but few 
real men to measure up to the higher purpose of the creation, and 
because of this lack of manhood in the race, we have stagnated © 
for centuries and now find ourselves at the foot of the great human 
ladder. 


After the creation, and after man was given possession of the 
world, the Creator relinquished all authority to his lord, except 
that which was spiritual. All that authority which meant the 
regulation of human affairs, human society, and human happiness 
was given to man by the Creator, and man, therefore, became 
master of his own destiny, and architect of his own fate. 


In process of time we find that only a certain type of man 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 25 


has been able to make good in God’s creation. We find them 
building nations, governments and empires, as also great monu- 
ments of commerce, industry and education (these men realizing 
the power given them exerted every bit of it to their own good 
and to their posterity’s) while, on the other hand, 400,000,000 
Negroes who claim the common Fatherhood of God and the 
Brotherhood of Man, have fallen back so completely, as to make 
us today the serfs and slaves of those who fully know themselves 
and have taken control of the world, which was given to all in 
common by the Creator. 


I desire to impress upon the 400,000,000 members of my race 
that our failings in the past, present and of the future will be 
through our failures to know ourselves and to realize the true 
functions of man on this mundane sphere. 


26 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
RACE ASSIMILATION 


Some Negro leaders have advanced the belief that in another 
féw years the white people will make up their minds to assimi- 
late their black populations; thereby sinking all racial prejudice 
in the welcoming of the black race into the social companionship 
of the white. Such leaders further believe that by the amalgama- 
tion of black and white, a new type will spring up, and that type 
will become the American and West Indian of the future. 


This belief is preposterous. I believe that white men should 
be white, yellow men should be yellow, and black men should be 
black in the great panorama of races, until each and every race 
by its own initiative lifts itself up to the common standard of 
humanity, as to compel the respect and appreciation of all, and 
so make it possible for each one to stretch out the hand of wel- 
come without being able to be prejudiced against the other be- 
cause of any inferior and unfortunate condition. 


The white man of America will not, to any organized extent, 
assimilate the Negro, because in so doing, he feels that he will be 
committing racial suicide. This he is not prepared to do. It is 
true he illegitimately carries on a system of assimilation; but 
such assimilation, as practised, is one that he is not prepared to 
support because he becomes prejudiced against his own offspring, 
if that offspring is the product of black and white; hence, to the 
white man the question of racial differences is eternal. So long 
as Negroes occupy an inferior position among the races and 
nations of the world, just so long will others be prejudiced 
against them, because it will be profitable for them to keep up 
their system of superiority. But when the Negro by his own 
initiative lifts himself from his low state to the highest human 
standard he will be in a position to stop begging and praying, 


and demand a place that no individual, race or nation will be able 
to deny him. . 


PHILOSOPHY AND-OPINIONS Zh 
CHRISTIANITY 


A form of religion practised by the millions, but as mis- 
understood, and unreal to the majority as gravitation is to the 
untutored savage. We profess to live in the atmosphere of 
Christianity, yet our acts are as barbarous as if we never knew 
Christ. He taught us to love, yet we hate; to forgive, yet we 


revenge; to be merciful, yet we condemn and punish, and still 
we are Christians. 


If hell is what we are taught it is, then there will be more 
Christians there than days in all creation. To be a true Chris- 
tian one must be like Christ and practice Christianity, not as 
the Bishop does, but as he says, for if our lives were to be pat- 
terned after the other fellow’s all of us, Bishop, Priest and 
Layman would ultimately meet around the furnace of hell, 
and none of us, because of our sins, would see salvation. 


28 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
THE FUNCTION OF MAN 


God placed man on earth as the lord of Creation. The ele- 
ments—all nature are at his command—it is for him to harness 
them subdue them and use them. 


Edison harnessed electricity. Today the world reflects the 
brilliancy of his grand illumination. 


Stephenson, through experiments, has given us the use of the 
steam engine, and today the railroad train flies across the country 
at a speed of sixty miles an hour. 


Marconi conquered the currents of the air and today we have 
wireless telegraphy that flashes news across the continents with 
a rapidity never yet known to man. 


All this reveals to us that man is the supreme lord of crea- 
tion, that in man lies the power of mastery, a mastery of self, 
a mastery of all things created, bowing only to the Almighty 


Architect in those things that are spiritual, in those things that 
are divine, 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS a 
TRAITORS 


In the fight to reach the top the oppressed have always been 
encumbered by the traitors of their own race, made up of those of 
little faith and those who are generally susceptible to bribery for 
the selling out of the rights of their own people. 


As Negroes, we are not entirely free of such an encumbrance. 
To be outspoken, I believe we are more encumbered in this way 
than any other race in the world, because of the lack of training 
and preparation for fitting us for our place in the world among 
nations and races. 


The traitor of other races is generally confined to the med- 
iocre or irresponsible individual, but, unfortunately; the traitors 
among the Negro race are generally to be found among the men 
highest placed in education and society, the fellows who call them- 
selves leaders. 


(For us to examine ourselves thoroughly as a people we will 
find that we have more traitors than leaders, because nearly 
everyone who essays to lead the race at this time does so by first 
establishing himself as the pet of some philanthropist of another 
race, to whom he will go and debase his race in the worst form, 
humiliate his own manhood, and thereby win the sympathy of the 
“great benefactor’, who will dictate to him what he should do in 
the leadership of the Negro racej It is generally “You must go 
out and teach your people to be meek and humble; tell them to 
be good servants, loyal and obedient to their masters. If you 
will teach them such a doctrine you can always depend on me to 
give you $1,000 a year or $5,000 a year for the support of your- 
self, the newspaper or the institution you represent. I will always 
recommend you to my friends as a good fellow who is all right,” 
With this advice and prospect of patronage the average Negro 
leader goes out to lead the unfortunate mass. These leaders tell 


30 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


us how good Mr. So and So is, how many good friends we have 
in the opposite race, and that if we leave everything to them all 
will work out well. 


This is the kind of leadership we have been having for the 
last fifty years. It is nothing else but treachery and treason of the 
worst kind. | The man who will compromise the attitude of his 
country is a traitor, and even so the man who will compromise 
the rights of his race can be classified in no other way than that 
of a traitor also. 


Not until we settle down as four hundred million people and 
let the men who have placed themselves in the lead of us realize 
that we are disgusted and dissatisfied, and that we shall have a 
leadership of our own and stick by it when we get it, will we be 
‘able to lift ourselves from this mire of degradation to the heights 


of prosperity, human liberty and human appreciation. 


yi 4 
ae 
pe 





ia et Si aati ar hn Sm sie eM 


CHAPTER 111 


PRESENT DAY CIVILIZATION 


We are circumvented today by environments more dangerous 
than those which circumvented other peoples in any other age. We 
are face to face with environments in a civilization that is highly 
developed; a civilization that is competing with itself for its own 
destruction; a civilization that cannot last, because it has no 


spiritual foundation; a civilization that is vicious, crafty, dis- 
honest, immoral, irreligious and corrupt. 


We see a small percentage of the world’s populace feeling 
happy and contented with this civilization that man has evolved, 
and we see the masses of the human race on the other hand dis- 
satisfied and discontented with the civilization of today—the ar- 
rangement of human society. Those masses are determined to 
destroy the systems that hold up such a society and prop such a 
civilization. 


As by indication, the fall will come. A fall that will cause 
the universal wreck of the civilization that we now see, and in 
this civilization the Negro is called upon to play his part. He is 
called upon to evolve a national ideal, based upon freedom, hu- 
man liberty and true democracy. 


32 PHIEOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


DIVINE APPORTIONMENT OF EARTH 


God Almighty created all men equal, whether they be white, 
yellow or black, and for any race to admit that it cannot do what 
others have done, is to hurl an insult at the Almighty who created 
all races equal, in the beginning. 


The white man has no right of way to this green earth, neither 
the yellow man. All of us were created lords of the creation, and 
whether we be white, yellow, brown or black Nature intended a 
place for each and every one. 


If Europe is for the white man, if Asia is for brown and 
yellow men, then surely Africa is for the black man. The great 
white man has fought for the preservation of Europe, the great 
yellow and brown races are fighting for the preservation of Asia, 
and four hundred million Negroes shall shed, if needs be, the 
last drop of their blood for the redemption of Africa and the eman- 
cipation of the race everywhere. 





O 


UNIVERSAL UNREST IN 1922 


The human race is universally disturbed because of the many 
injustices inflicted upon the masses by the dominant powers. The 
privileged classes have for centuries dominated the will of the 
masses, and as it would appear, have ground out of the toiling mil- 
lions the last drop of sweat. These millions are now in rebellion. 
They are striking everywhere—in England, France, Germany, 
America and other parts of the world. Those who are not on 
strike are shaking their fists in bloody revolution as a protest 
against the industrial and political systems of the day. 





In this big noise for world readjustment in the affairs of the 
human race, four hundred million Negroes cry out for better 
consideration and for justice. 











PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 33 
WORLD DISARMAMENT 


Present day statesmen are making the biggest blunder of the 
age if they believe that there can be any peace without equity 
and justice to all mankind. 


Any attempt at disarmament when half the world oppresses 
the other half is but a farce, because the oppressed will make 
their oppressors get armed sooner or later. 





oO 





CAUSE OF WARS 


The world is not yet perfect. It is in chaos; yes, in confu- 
sion and out of this confusion will come many more upheavals that 
will shake its very foundation. Fool not yourselves that the con- 
ferences that have been held, and will be held in the future, are 
sufficient to settle the disgruntled state of the world, the dissatis- 
fied condition of humanity. They have not gone down to the root 
of all evils that give cause to the great discontent, they will never 
be able to establish a permanent peace and present to us a settled 
world. 


The history of the past teaches us that we have had many 
wars, each more deadly, each more catastrophic, and even as the 
war of 1914-18 was the most deadly we have experienced for ages, 
so in the very near future we shall see the most bloody conflict 
ever waged by man. Whether it is to be a war of the races or of 
the nations, no one can tell, but so long as this injustice continues ; 
so long as the strong continues to oppress the weak; so long as 
the powerful nations arrange among themselves to oppress the 
weaker ones, and to keep the more unfortunate of humanity in 
serfdom, and to rob and exploit them, so long will the cause of 
war be fed with the fuel of revenge, of hatred, and of discontent. 


34 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
WORLD READJUSTMENT 


The political re-adjustment of the world means this-that 
every race must find a home; hence the great cry of Palestine for 
the Jews—Ireland for the Irish,—India for the Indians and sim- 
ultaneously Negroes are raising the cry of “AFRICA FOR THE 
AFRICANS”, those at home and those abroad. 


It is a cry for political re-adjustment along natural lines, and 
this re-adjustment has come out of the war of 1914-18, because, 
we, as Negroes, realize that if (with our knowledge and experience 
of western civilization) we allow the world to adjust itself politi- 
cally without taking thought for ourselves, we would be lost to 
the world in another few decades. 


THE FALL OF GOVERNMENTS 


The fall of nations and empires has always come about 
first by the disorganized spirit,—the disorganized sentiment of 
those who make up the nation or the empire. 


The one class opposing, fighting against the other, the other 
class seeking to deprive them of the essentials of life which are 
necessary for the good and well-being of all. 


The class that ruled in the past and the class that rules now 
in government, are the people who have always provoked the 
spirit of those who are ruled. Hence you have social revolutions, 
civil strifes, which ultimately result in the downfall of the empire 
or the nation. What has happened in the past will happen again. 
I sr not attempting to prophesy the destruction of any of the now 
existing empires or nations, but the empires and nations them- 
selves are going to their own ruin. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 35 


In Europe we hear of great industrial unrests. Laborers 
uniting themselves and marching to the representatives of gov- 
ernments asking for better conditions to alleviate their suffering. 
Instead of the representatives seeking to pacify and satisfy those 
who are in need, the representatives of such governments adopt 
a strongarmed policy to prosecute and persecute those who suffer 
and appeal for aid from the nation or the empire. What happens? 
The dissatisfied who are driven away by the majesty of the law, 
go back to those who suffer with them and scatter throughout 
the nation or the empire the spirit of dissatisfaction that ultimately 
breaks out in civil strife, social disorder, which in turn brings 
the downfall of the nation or the empire. 


People who rule (being selected by the masses of their own) 
forget when they come into power that they have an obligation 
~ to those who placed them in authority and through selfishness ar- 
rogate to themselves all that is good within the nation to the ex- 
clusion of those who suffer and to the exclusion of those who 
placed them in their positions of trust. HENCE MONOPOLY— 
industrial, commercial and economic—which places power in the 
hands of the select few, and through the selfishness of administra- 
tion by the few they cause the majority of the masses to exist al- 
ways in want. Through this want, a spirit of disssatisfaction 
springs up among the people, and they, in their passion, seeking 
to correct the evil, tear down governments. 


36 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
GREAT IDEALS KNOW NO NATIONALITY 


My enemies in America have done much to hold me up to 
public contempt and ridicule, but have failed. They believe that 
the only resort is to stir up national prejudice against me, in that 
I was not born within the borders of the United States of 
America. 

I am not in the least concerned about such a propaganda, be- 
cause I have travelled the length and breath of America and I 
have discovered that among the fifteen million of my race, only 
those who have exploited and lived off the ignorance of the masses _ 
are concerned with where I was born. The masses of the people 
are looking for leadership, they desire sincere, honest guidance 
in racial affairs. As proof of this I may mention, that the largest 
number of members in the Universal Negro Improvement As- 
sociation (of which I am President-General) are to be found in 
America, and are native born Americans. I know these people 
so well and I love them so well, that I would not for one minute 
think that they would fall for such an insiduous propaganda. 

All intelligent people know that one’s nationality has nothing 
to do with great ideals and great principles. If because I am a 
Jamaican the Negro should not accept the principle of race rights 
and liberty, or the ideal of a free and independent race; then 
you may well say that because Jesus was a Nazarene the outside 
world should not accept His Doctrine of Christianity, because 
He was an “alien.” 

Because Martin Luther was born in Germany, the world 
should not accept the doctrine of Protestantism. 

Because Alexander Hamilton and Lafayette were not born 
in America, Americans should not accept and appreciate the 
benefits they bestowed upon the nation. 

Because Marconi was an Italian, we of the new world 
should not make use of wireless telegraphy. Again I say, great 
principles, great ideals know no nationality. 



































EEILOS OPAV VANDA OPINIONS 37 


I know no national boundary where the Negro is concerned. 
The whole world is my province until Africa is free. 





O 


PURPOSE OF CREATION 


The man or woman who has no confidence in self is an un- 
fortunate being, and is really a misfit in creation. 





God Almighty created each and every one of us for a place 
in the world, and for the least of us to think that we were created 
only to be what we are and not what we can make ourselves, is 
to impute an improper motive to the Creator for creating us. 


God Almighty created us all to be free. That the Negro 
race became a race of slaves was not the fault of God Almighty, 
the Divine Master, it was the fault of the race. 


Sloth, neglect, indifference caused us to be slaves. 


Confidence, conviction, action will cause us to be free men 
to-day. 





O 


PURITY OF RACE 


I believe in a pure black race just as how all self-respecting 
whites believe in a pure white race, as far as that can be. 





I am conscious of the fact that slavery brought upon us the 
curse of many colors within the Negro race, but that is no rea- 
son why we of ourselves should perpetuate the evil; hence in- 
stead of encouraging a wholesale bastardy in the race, we feel 
that we should now set out to create a race type and standard of 
our own which could not, in the future, be stigmatized by bas- 
tardy, but could be recognized and respected as the true race 
type anteceding even our own time. 


38 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
MAN KNOW THYSELF: 


For man to know himself is for him to feel that for him 
there is no human master. For him Nature is his servant, and 
whatsoever he wills in Nature, that shall be his reward. If he 
wills to be a pigmy, a serf or a slave, that shall he be. If he wills 
to be a real man in possession of the things common to man, 
then he shall be his own sovereign. 


When man fails to grasp his authority he sinks to the level 
of the lower animals, and whatsoever the real man bids him do, © 
even as if it were of the lower animals, that much shall he do. 
If he says “go.” He goes. If he says ‘“‘come,” he comes. By this 
command he performs the functions of life even as by a similar 
command the mule, the horse, the cow perform the will of their 
masters. 


For the last four hundred years the Negro has been in the 
position of being commanded even as the lower animals 
are controlled. Our race has been without a will; without 
a purpose of its own, for all this length of time. Because 
of that we have developed few men who are able to understand 
the strenuousness of the age in which we live. 


Where can we find in this race of ours real men. Men of 
character, men of purpose, men of confidence, men of faith, men 
who really know themselves? J have come across so many weak- 
lings who profess to be leaders, and in the test I have found 
them but the slaves of a nobler class. They perform the will of 
their masters without question. 


To me, a man has no master but God. Man in his authority 
is a sovereign lord. As for the individual man, so of the indivi- 
dual race. This feeling makes man so courageous, so bold, as to 
make it impossible for his brother to intrude upon his rights. So 
few of us can understand what it takes to make a man—the man 
who will never say die; the man who will never give up; the man 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 39 


who will never depend upon others to do for him what he ought to 
do for himself; the man who will not blame God, who will not 
blame Nature, who will not blame Fate for his condition; but the 
man who will go out and make conditions to suit himself. Oh, 
how disgusting life becomes when on every hand you hear peo- 
ple (who bear your image, who bear your resemblance) telling 
you that they cannot make it, that Fate is against them, that they 
cannot get a chance. If 400,000,000 Negroes can only get to know 
thesmelves, to know that in them is a sovereign power, is an 
authority that is absolute, then in the next twenty-four hours we 
would have a new race, we would have a nation, an empire,— 
resurrected, not from the will of others to see us rise,—but from 
our own determination to rise, irrespective of what the world 
thinks. 


40 PHILOSOPHY AND OTP is 
A SOLUTION FOR WORLD PEACE—1922. 


We hear a great deal of talk about world peace today. Wil- 
son of America, Lloyd George of England, Clemenceau of France 
a few years ago prophesied at Versailles a reign of peace. Up to 
the present many of the leading statesmen of the world have 
pledged themselves to a program of world peace. Many confer- 
ences have been held (political as well as industrial) for the pur- 
pose of settling the question of peace; but up to now none of them 
has laid the foundation for a real peace, for a lasting peace. 


The peace of the world cannot be settled by political con- 
ferences, or by industrial conferences only. If we are to have a 
world peace it will only come when a great inter-racial conferenc 
is called. When Jew will meet Gentile; when Anglo-Saxon will 
meet Teuton; when the great Caucasian family will meet the 
Mongolian, and when all will meet the Negro, and then and there 
straighten out the differences that have kept us apart for hund- 
reds of years, and will continue to keep us apart until Doom’s 
Day, if something is not done to create better racial understand- 
ing. 

If white men continue to exploit yellow men, if white men 
continue to exploit black and brown men, if yellow men continue 
to exploit brown and black men, then all we can _ look for- 
ward to is a reign of wars and rumors of wars. So long 
as Anglo-Saxons oppress Indians; so long as the French exploit 
the black race; so long as the Russian murders the Jew, so long 
will the cause for war be found, and so long will man continue 


to fight and kill his brother. 


If England wants peace, if France wants peace, I suggest to 
them to pack up their bag and baggage and clear out of Africa, 
because Africa in the future will be to them what Europe has 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 41 


been for the last three hundred years—a hot bed of wars, pol- 
itical intrigues and upheavals,—and Europe has changed many a 
time politically. Once the great Napolean ruled, the Czars ruled 
and but recently the German Eagle was the symbol of fear. To- 
day England stands out as the most brilliant star in the Europ- 
ean political constellation. But what of tomorrow? Africa with 
her threatened upheaval will produce the same conditions in an- 
other century as Europe has done in the past. Can we not see 
that we are marching headlong into the abyss of eternal de- 
struction? Can we not realize that we are not laying the founda- 
tion of peace? Can we not realize that we are but provoking the 
sleeping passions of the races? How long do you believe that 
four-hundred million Negroes will allow themselves to be ex- 
ploited by alien races, robbed and murdered? Just so long until 
the truth is brought home to them, and then when the sleeping 
giant awakens, even like Samson, he may bring down the piilars 
of the temple. 


The war of 1914-18 has created a new sentiment throughout 
the world. Once upon a time weaker peoples were afraid of 
expressing themselves, of giving vent to their feelings, but today 
no oppressd race or nation is afraid of speaking out in the cause 
of liberty. Egypt has spoken, Ireland has spoken, Poland has 
spoken and Poland is free, Egypt is free, Ireland is also free. 
Africa is now speaking, and if for seven-hundred and fifty years 
Irishmen found perseverance enough to have carried the cause 
of freedom on and on until they won, then four hundred million 
Negroes are prepared to carry on the fight for African liberty 
even if it takes us to the seat of the Most High, yes if it takes us 
until judgment day, we shall fight the cause on and on without 
relenting. The world may scoff at us, the world may deride us, 
but there have been many surprises for the world before, and 
there will be many more. Englishmen scoffed at the Colonists 
when they agitated for independence in America, but their scoffs 


42 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


and derisions did not prevent George Washington from giving 
us the glorious Stars and Stripes. Men laughed at the propaganda 
of Tolstoi. The Czar himself impugned the idea of a more liberal 
Russia, but today Lenine and Trotszky rule. Yes, the Louis’s 
laughed at the propaganda of the Liberals of France, but the 
French Monarchy is no more. Today Frenchmen take pride in 
the new democracy of France; so that others may laugh at us 
today because we are agitating the question of a free and inde- 
pendent Africa, but tomorrow, who knows, Africa will loom up 
as the greatest Republic in the world. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 43 
GOD AS A WAR LORD 


God is a bold Sovereign—A Warrior Lord. The God we 
worship and adore is a God of War as well as a God of Peace. He 
does not allow anything to interfere with His power and author- 
ity. 


The greatest battle ever fought was not between the Kaiser 
of Germany on the one hand and the Allied Powers on the other, 
it was between Almighty God on the one hand and Lucifer the 
Archangel on the other. 


When Lucifer challenged God’s power in Heaven and mar- 
shalled his forces on the plains of Paradise, the God we worship 
and adore also marshalled His forces, His Archangels, His Cheru- 
bims and His Seraphims, and in battle array He placed Himself 
before them with the royal standard of Heaven. He faced the op- 
possing general Lucifer with his hordes on the battle plains of 
Heaven and there the great war began. The whole universe shook 
as the battle raged between the two opposing forces, and as God 
the Creator gained the upper hand of Lucifer, what did He do? 
Did He hoist the white flag of peace? No, God Almighty, God 
the Omnipotent took hold of Lucifer and flung him from the 
heights of Heaven to the depths of hell, thereby proving that He 
is a God of war as well as a God of peace, And when anyone trans- 
gresses His power He goes to war in defence of His rights. 


Man is only a little lower than the angels; the angels are 
only a little lower than the creator, but the Creator, 
has bequeathed to angels and to men the same principles, the 
same policies that govern Him as God. And even as he goes to 


war in defense of His rights, so man goes to war in defense of 
his rights. 


44 PHITOSOPEY "AND ORI NION,S. 


I believe with Napoleon. When some one asked him ‘‘On 
what side is God?’’ he replied. ‘‘God is on the side of the strong- 
est battalion.’? Napolean was right. He had a true concept of 
God. God is really on the side of the strongest peoples because God 
made all men equal and He never gave superior power to any one 
class or group of people over another, and any one who can get 
the advantage over another is pleasing God, because that is the 
servant who has taken care of God’s command in exercising 
authority over the world. 





O 





THE IMAGE OF GOD 


If the white man has the idea of a white God, let him worship 
his God as he desires. If the yellow man’s God is of his race let 
him worship his God as he sees fit. We, as Negroes, have found a 
new ideal. Whilst our God has no color, yet it is human to see 
everything through one’s own spectacles, and since the white 
people have seen their God through white spectacles, we have 
only now started out (late though it be) to see our God through 
our own spectacles. The God of Isaac and the God of Jacob let 
Him exist for the race that believes in the God of Isaac and the 
God of Jacob. We Negroes believe in the God of Ethiopia, the 
everlasting God—God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy 
Ghost, the One God of all ages. That is the God in whom we 
believe, but we shall worship Him through the spectacles of 
Ethiopia. 


i a i a la a i ee a a ae el ee 


i Si A a a i i an aa i be a i i ee ee 


= ee a ee ee 


ew eee 


ee 





CHAPTER IV 
THE SLAVE TRADE 


Three hundred years ago no Negroes were to be found in 
this Western Hemisphere, we were to be found exclusively in 
Africa. Just about that time a large number of white people 
(called Colonists) settled in America. They desired laborers to 
help them in the country’s development. They turned to Asia 
and were unable to use the yellow man. At that time a man 
named John Hawkins (afterwards knighted) asked permission of 
Queen Elizabeth of England to take the blacks from Africa into 
her colonies of America and the West Indies and use them in their 
development. The Queen asked, ‘‘what consideration will you 
give them?’’ Hawkins said ‘‘They will be civilized and Christian- 
ized in the Colonies, for in their own country they are savages and 
barbarians.”’ 


Under these pretenses the British Queen signed a charter 
empowering John Hawkins and others to remove from Africa 
millions of our fore-parents—men, women and children—who were 
sold in the slave markets of the Southern States of America and 
the West Indies. Parents were separated from children, husbands. 
from wives: All scattered in this Western Hemisphere to work 
in the cottonfields of the Southern States of America and the 
sugar plantations of the West Indies. 


The Negroes who were sold in the West Indies remained as 
slaves for two hundred and thirty years and those sold in America 
for two hundred and fifty years. The West Indian Negroes were 
emancipated eighty five years ago by Queen Victoria of England, 


46 PHILOSOPHY - AND OPINIONS 


and the American Negroes fifty eight years ago by Abraham 
Lincoln. 

We-the Negroes in this Western Hemisphere are descendants 
of those Africans who were enslaved and transported to these 
shores, where they suffered, bled and died to make us what we 
are today—Civilized, Christian free men. Shouldwe not, therefore, 
turn our eyes towards Africa, our ancestral home and free it | 
from the thraldom of alien oppression and exploitation? 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 47 


NEGROES’ STATUS UNDER ALIEN GOVERNMENTS 


Within modern times the Negro race has not had any real 
statesmen, and the masses of our people have always accepted the 
intentions and actions of the statesmen and leaders of other races 
as being directed in our interest as a group in conjunction with 
the interests of others. Such a feeling on our part caused us to 
believe that the Constitution of the United States was written 
for Negroes, as well as the Constitutions of England, France, 
Italy, Germany and other countries where Negroes happen to have 
their present domicile, either as citizens or as subjects. 


That we suffer so much today under whatsoever flag we live 
is proof positive that constitutions and laws, when framed by 
the early advocates of human liberty, never included and were 
never intended for us as a people. It is only a question of sheer 
accident that we happen to be fellow citizens today with the de- 
cendants of those who, through their advocacy, laid the founda- 
tion for human rights. | 


So this brings us to the point where, as a people, we can 
expect very little from the efforts of present day statesmen of 
other races, in that their plans, (as far as advantages to be de- 
rived therefrom are concerned) are laid only in the interests of 
their own people and not in the interest of Negroes; hence it is 
imperative that Negroes as a people evolve just at this time a 
statesmanship sufficiently able to cope with the designs and 
movements that are being made that will (except we prevent it) 
ultimately mean our doom and destruction. 


48 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


THE NEGRO AS AN INDUSTRIAL MAKE-SHIFT 


The Negro’s prosperity today, limited as it is, is based upon 
the foundation laid by an alien race that is not disposed to go 
out of its way to prepare for the economic existence of anyone else 
but itself; therefore our present prosperity as far as employment 
goes, is purely accidental. It is as accidental to-day as it was dur- 
ing the war of 1914-18 when colored men were employed in differ- 
ent occupations, not because they were wanted, but because they 
were filling the places of men of other races who were not avail- 
able at that time. Negroes are still filling places, and as time goes 
on and the age grows older our occupations will be gone from us, 
because those for whom we filled the places will soon appear, and 
as they do we shall gradually find our places among the millions 
of permanent unemployed. The thing for the Negro to do there- 
fore, is to adjust his own economic present, in readiness for the 
future. 


A race that is solely dependent upon another for its economic 
existence sooner or later dies. As we have in the past been liv- 
ing upon the mercies shown us by others, and by the chances ob- 
tainable, and have suffered therefrom, so will we in the future 
suffer if an effort is not made now to adjust our own affairs. 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 49 


LACK OF CO-OPERATION IN THE NEGRO RACE 


It is so hard, so difficult to find men who will stick to a pur- 
pose ,who will maintain a principle for the worth of that prin- 
ciple, for the good of that purpose, and if there is a race that 
needs such men in the world today, God Sey knows it is 
the race of which I am a member. 


The race needs men of vision and ability. Men of character 
and above all men of honesty, and that is so hard to find. 


The greatest stumbling block in the way of progress in the 
race has invariably come from within the race itself. The monkey 
wrench of destruction as thrown into the cog of Negro Progress, 
is not thrown so much by the outsider as by the very fellow 
who :s in our fold, and who should be the first to grease the wheel 
of progress rather than seeking to impede it. 


But notwithstanding the lack of sympathetic co-operation, I 
have one consolation—That I cannot get away from the race, and 
so long as I am in the race and since I have sense and judgment 
enough to know what affects the race affects me, it is my duty 
to help the race to clear itself of those things that affect us in 
common. 


30 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


WHITE MAN’S SOLUTION FOR THE NEGRO PROBLEM 
IN AMERICA 


Immediately after the signing of the Emancipation Proclama- 
tion in America, the white man started to think how he could 
solve the new problem of the Negro. 


He saw that the Negro could not be slaughtered by whole- 
sale killing in that it would be a blot on American civilization, 
- he therefore had to resort to some means of solving the problem, 
which meant the extinction of the Negro in America. 


The plan he decided on was as follows: 


‘‘Now that America is undeveloped and we have but 
34,000,000 in population (30,000,000 being white and 
4,000,000 black) a number not large enough to develop 
the country as we want it, we will use the 4,000,000 blacks 
until we have built up the country, sufficiently and when 
we no longer need their labor, we will throw them off and 
let them starve economically and die of themselves, or 
emigrate elsewhere, we care not where. Then no one can 
accuse us of being inhuman to the Negro as we shall not 
have massacred him.”’ 


A hearty welcome is extended to white people from all parts 
of the world to come to and settle in America. They come in by 
the thousands every month. Why? The idea is to build up a vast 
white population in America, so as to make the white people in- 
dependent of Negro labor; thereby depriving them of the means 
of livelihood, the wherewithal to buy bread, which means that in 
a short while they will die of starvation. 


Those of us who study industrial conditions among the race 
must have noticed that Negroes in America have been thrown out 
of jobs that they occupied formerly, and their positions taken by 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS Sh 


Kuropean Immigrants. Now if the white people have not reached 
the apex of their intention industrially, as far as the development 
of the country is concerned, and they have exhibited such a degree 
of prejudice since they started their plan; how much more pre- 
judiced will they not become in the next one hundred years when 
their population will be doubled by emigration and birthrate? 
This is the problem the Negro has to face in America, 


52 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
THE TRUE SOLUTION OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM—1922 


As far as Negroes are concerned, in America we have the 
problem of lynching,peonage and dis-franchisement. 


In the West Indies, South and Central America we have the 
problem of peonage, serfdom, industrial and political govern- 
mental inequality. 


In Africa we have, not only peonage and serfdom, but out- 
right slavery, racial exploitation and alien political monopoly. 


We cannot allow a continuation of these crimes against our 
race. As four hundred million men, women and children, worthy 
of the existence given us by the Divine Creator, we are de- 
termined to solve our own problem, by redeeming our Motherland 
Africa from the hands of alien exploiters and found there a gov- 
ernment, a nation of our own, strong enough to lend protection to 
the members of our race scattered all over the world, and to com- 
pel the respect of the nations and races of the earth. 


Do they lynch Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germans or Japan- 
ese? No. And Why? Because these people are represented by 
great governments, mighty nations and empires, strongly organ- 
ized. Yes, and ever ready to shed the last drop of blood and 
spend the last penny in the national treasury to protect the honor 
and integrity of a citizen outraged anywhere. 


Until the Negro reaches this point of national independ- 
ence, all he does as a race will count for naught, because the pre- 
judice that will stand out against him even with his ballot in his 
hand, with his industrial progress to show, will be of such an 
overwhelmning nature as to perpetuate mob violence and mob 
rule, from which he will suffer, and which he will not be able to 
stop with his industrial wealth and with his ballot. 


You may argue that he can use his industrial wealth and his 
ballot to force the government to recognize him, but he must 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS oo 


understand that the government is the people. That the majority 
of the people dictate the policy of governments, and if the major- 
ity are against a measure, a thing, or a race, then the govern- 
ment is impotent to protect that measure, thing or race. 


If the Negro were to live in this Western Hemisphere for an- 
other five hundred years he would still be outnumbered by other 
races who are prejudiced against him. He cannot resort 
to the government for protection for government will be in the 
hands of the majority of the people who are prejudiced against 
him, hence for the Negro to depend on the ballot and his industrial 
progress alone, will be hopeless as it does not help him when he 
is lynched, burned, jim-crowed and segregated. The future of the 
Negro therefore, outside of Africa, spells ruin and disaster, 


54 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


WHITE PROPAGANDA ABOUT AFRICA 

This propaganda of dis-associating Western Negroes from 
Africa is not a new one. For many years white propagandists 
have been printing tons of literature to impress scattered 
Ethiopia, especially that portion within their civilization, with the 
idea that Africa is a despised place, inhabited by savages, and 
cannibals, where no civilized human being should go, especially 
black civilized human beings. This propaganda is promulgated 
for the cause that is being realized today. That cause is COLON- 
IAL EXPANSION for the white nations of the world. 


At the present time the world is not producing enough 
food to feed all its inhabitants. The strong are fed and the 
weak starve. That is why there are famines in certain countries, 
even though those countries produce certain things for human 
consumption. The strong go there and take the food and send 
it home just as how Great Britain and France go into Africa, take 
out the products and ship them away to feed Europeans and 
leave Africans to starve. The strong will always live at the ex- 
pense of the weak. 


This rush for territory, this encroachment on lands, is only 
a desire of the strong races, especially the white race, to get hold 
of those portions and bits of land necessary for their economic 
existence, knowing well, that, in another two hundred years, 
there will not be enough supplies in the world for all of its inhabi- 
tants. The weaker peoples must die . At present Negroes are 
the weakest people and if we do not get powerand strength now 
we shall be doomed to extermination. 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 55 


THE THREE STAGES OF THE NEGRO IN CONTACT WITH 
THE WHITE MAN 


I believe, as far as the Negro is concerned politically, that 
there are three stages relating to our contact with the white man: 


The First Stage in the life of the Negro in this Western 
Hemisphere was the stage when the white man shackled us in 
Africa and brought us here and kept us for two hundred and fifty 
years. During this period we worked and received no recompense, 
no pay for our labor, and we were satisfied because of the white 
man’s Christian teaching ‘‘ Learn to labor and to wait.’’ 


The Second Stage was the thing called Emancipation, which 
we have enjoyed for fifty-eight years. This stage came when they 
gave us partial freedom, and a petty existence by way of wages, 
and we were satisfied during that stage to do just what they told 
us todo. We worked for small wages and voted Republican Dem- 
Ocratic and so forth, until after fifty-eight years we discovered 
that a change was necessary. 

Now we have entered into the Third Stage of our existence, 
wherein we say to the white man ‘‘ After two hundred and fifty 
years of slavery and fifty eight years of partial freedom under 
your leadership we are going to try but fifty years under our own 
direction. 


This new stage calls for all the manhood within the race and 
means that we must throw off all the conditions that affected us 
in the first and second stages, and go out and do—acquit our- 
selves like men in the economic, industrial and political arena. 


56 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


BOOKER T. WASHINGTON’S PROGRAM 


The world held up the great Sage of Tuskegee—Booker T. 
Washington—as the only leader for the race. They looked for- 
ward to him and his teachings as the leadership for all times, not 
calculating that the industrially educated Negro would himself 
evolve a new ideal, after having been trained by the Sage of 
Tuskegee. 


The world satisfied itself to believe that succeeding Negro 
leaders would follow absolutely the teachings of Washington, Un- 
fortunately the world is having a rude alwakening, in that we are 
evolving a new ideal. The new ideal includes the program of 
Booker T. Washington and has gone much further. ! 


Things have changed wonderfully since Washington came 
on the scene. His vision was industrial opportunity for the 
Negro, but the Sage of Tuskegee has passed off the stage of life 
and left behind a new problem—a problem that must be solved, 
not by the industrial leader only, but by the political and military 
leaders as well. 


If Washington had lived he would have had to change his 
program. No leader can successfully lead this race of ours with- 
out giving an interpretation of the awakened spirit of the New 
Negro, who does not seek industrial opportunity alone, but a 
political voice. The world is amazed at the desire of the New 
Negro, for with his strong voice he is demanling a place in the 
affairs of men, 





PHILOSOLHY AND OPINIONS 57 


BELIEF THAT RACE PROBLEM WILL ADJUST ITSELF A 
FALLACY 


Some of our leaders in the Negro race flatter themselves into 
believing that the problem of black and white in America will 
work itself out, and that all the Negro has to do is to be humble, 
submissive and obedient, and everything will work out well in the 
‘<Sweet bye and bye’. But the keen student will observe this,— 
that a terrible mistake was made between forty and fifty years 
ago when black men were elected to legislative assemblies all over 
the country, especially in the southern states and even at the 
National Capitol when representatives of this race occupied seats 
in Congress. The mistake was made as far as the white people 
were concerned. There was a state of dis-organization in the Na- 
tion, and in that state certain things happened by mere chance. In 
the chance, dozens of black men became Senators and Congress- 
men. This opened up to the eyes of the white nation the possi- 
bility of the black man governing the white man in these United 
States of America—the possibility of the black man making laws 
to govern the white man? This possibility drove them almost to 
madness, in suddenly rejecting the spirit of the constitution and 
the Declaration of Lincoln that “all men are created equal”, hence 
a determination was arrived at, that never again would it be possi- 
ble for the race of slaves to govern the race of masters within 
these United States of America. 


Some of us believe that this slave race of ours will live 
in the United States of America and in the future again become 
law makers for the white race (our slave masters of sixty years 
ago). Nothing of the kind has happened in all human history. 
There is not one instance where a slave race living in the same 
country (within the same bounds as the race of masters that en- 
slaved them and being in numbers less than the race of masters) 
has ever yet ruled and governed the masters. It has never been so 
in history, and it will never be so in the future. The hidden spirit 


58 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


of America is determined that it shall never be, caring not what 
hopes and promises we get. 


But history has recorded where a race of slaves through evo- 
lution, through progress, has risen to the heights where they 
ruled and dominated those who once enslaved them, but that 
race of slaves has always had to betake itself to other habi- 
tats (usually their own native land) and there, apart from those 
who once enslaved them, developed a power of their own, a 
strength of their own, and in the higher development of that 
strength, and of that power, they, like others, have made conquests, 
and the conquests sometimes have enabled them to enslave those 
who once enslaved them. So for us to encourage the idea that one 
day Negroes will rise to the highest in the administration of this 
white government, is only encouraging a vain hope. 


The only wise thing for us as ambitious Negroes to do, is 
to organize the world over, and build up for the race a mighty 
nation of our own in Africa, And this race of ours that can 
not get recognition and respect in the country where we were 
slaves, by using our own ability, power and genius, would 
develop for ourselves in another country in our habitat a nation 
of our own, and be able to send back from that country,—from 
that native habitat—to the country where we were once en- 
slaved, representatives of our race, that would get as much 
respect as any other ambassadors from any other race or nation. 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 59 
EXAMPLES OF WHITE CHRISTIAN CONTROL OF AFRICA 


The world has seen many fair examples of white Christian 
control of Africa: 


The outrages of Leopold of Belgium, when he butchered thou- 
sands of our defenceless brothers and sisters in the Belgian 
Congo, and robbed them of their rubber. 


The natives of Kenya South East Africa armed with sticks 
and stones rebelled against the injustices and brutality of the 
English, and were hewn down by machine guns, because they 
did not supply the demands of the invaders. 


The Hottentots of South West Africa in rebellion against 
similar brutality and exploitation, using spears and leather shields 
to protect themselves, were bombed from aeroplanes by the Chris- 
tian? whites. 

The above are but few examples of the many atrocities 
committed on our defenceless brothers and sisters in Africa by 
white exploiters and invaders. Surely the introduction of chemi- 
eal gas among the natives of Africa would place them in a better 
position to handle ‘‘the alien disturbers of African peace.’’ 


It strikes me that with all the civilization this Western Hemis 
phere affords, Negroes ought to take better advantage of the 
cause of higher education. We could make of ourselves better 
mechanics and scientists, and in cases where we can help our 
brothers in Africa by making use of the knowledge we possess, 
it would be but our duty. If Africa is to be redeemed the Western 
Negro will have to make a valuable contribution along technical 
and scientific lines, 


60 PHIDOSOPAHYCAND OPINIONS 


THE THOUGHT BEHIND THEIR DEEDS 
Behind the murder of millions of Negroes annuaily in Africa 
is the well organized system of exploitation by the alien intruders 
who desire to rob Africa of every bit of its wealth for the satis- 
faction of their race and the upkeep of their bankrupt European 
countries. 


If we of the Western World take no interest in the higher 
development of the African natives, it will mean that in another 
hundred years historians and writers will tell us that the black 
man once inhabited Africa, just as the North American Indian 
once inhabited America. But those of us who lead are well versed 
in Western civilization and are determined that the black man 
shall not be a creature of the past, but a full-fledged man of the 
‘present and a power to be reckoned with in the future. 





eu ghia 
SIMILARITY OF PERSECUTION 


Christ came into the world centuries ago to redeem lost man- 
kind. From the age of twelve to His Crucifixion He taught the 
doctrine of salvation without fear of the great and mighty ones 
of His day. But His fellow Jews became jealous of His success 
and sought means to get rid of Him. They argued among them- 
selves saying, ‘‘How can we doit. We have no power, no judges, 
and if we lay hands upon Him, He will have us apprehended by the 
Roman authorities. The best thing we can do is to frame him up’’. 
So they made certain statements to the Roman Government which 
had Jesus incarcerated, while His brother Jews shouted with joy 
as they had accomplished their desire. 


When Jesus was brought to trial Pontius Pilate, the Gover- 
nor, did not care to send Him to prison as He had not interfered 
with the honor and reputation of any Roman citizen, and the 
/ Romans were not jealous of the work of this Jew. But the Jews 


Be ge ky capone Baas 


a 
= 
& j 
x 





RI Ne rN mip 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 61 


who were jealous of Christ said, ‘‘This man is preaching against 
Caesar and the State; He is preaching the doctrine of rebellion 
among the peaceful Jews and citizens of the State; if you do not 
convict this man, you are not a friend of Caesar’. Pilate being 
thus forced against his will, was compelled to decide against 
Jesus, even though he knew that Jesus had done no wrong. 


After He was condemned Pilate still hoped to get his con- 
science clear by letting Jesus go, in that. he Pilate was empowered 
to release one criminal on Feast Day. When the time came for 
the condemned men to be crucified Pilate asked them to choose 
between Barrabas, the robber and Jesus whom they called the 
King of the Jews, and they cried, “Crucify Jesus and let Barrabas 
go’’. Pilate said, ‘‘What evil hath he done’’, but they cried the 
more “Crucify him’, 


So we have a relative position at this time. Selfish, jealous 
Negroes know they can do nothing to impede the progress of 
the Universal Negro Improvement Association, and if left alone 
we will go on organizing Negroes throughout the world, so they 
say: “We cannot handle Garvey and his Organization, as we 
have no power, let us go to the State and Federal authorities, and 
frame him up, let us say he is an anarchist, a seditionist and is 
speaking against the povernment”. Like the Jews of old, they 
ery ‘‘Crucify him,’’ or rather, ‘‘Send him to prison, deport him.’’ 


During Christ’s sojourn on earth He taught many lessons, 
among them: ‘‘Blessed are they which are persecuted for right- 
eousness ’’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’’ This dec- 
laration has inspired men through all ages to make their sacrifice 
in the cause of human liberty. 


When we recount the many noble deeds of the heroes and 
martyrs of the various nations and races of the world, who have 
sacrificed their lives in the cause of freedom, we will readily rea- 
lize that this declaration of Christ has proved itself true. Through 


62 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


the sacrifice of Jesus and the yielding up of His life on Calvary’s 
Cross, the world today has caught an inspiration that will live 
forever. In the time when He taught His doctrine few men be- 
lieved in and followed Him, but after the lapse of centuries we find 
that Christianity has become the greatest moral force in the 
world. As with Christianity, so with every great human Move- 
ment taught under similar circumstances. 


May we not say to ourselves that the doctrine Jesus taught— 
that of redeeming mankind—is the doctrine we ourselves must 
teach in the redemption of our struggling. race? Let us there- 
fore cling fast to the great ideal we have before us. This time it 
is not the ideal of redeeming the world, such as was the ideal of 
Jesus, but it is the ideal of redeeming and saving 400,000,000 
souls who have suffered for centuries from the persecution of 
alien races. As Christ by His teachings, His sufferings and His 


death, triumphed over His foes, through the resurrection, so do - 


we hope that out of our sufferings and persecutions of today we 
will triumph in the resurrection of our newborn race. 


© (EUS a a le Se oa a il la a a a TON 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 63 
SHALL THE NEGRO BE EXTERMINATED? 


The Negro now stands at the cross roads of human destiny. 
He is at the place where he must either step forward or back- 
ward. If he goes backward he dies; if he goes forward it will be 
with the hope of a greater life. Those of us who have developed 
our minds scientifically are compelled, by duty, to step out among 
the millions of the unthinking masses and convince them of the 
seriousness of the age in which we live. 


From Adam and Eve 


We are either on the way to a higher racial existence or 
racial extermination. This much is known and realized by every 
thoughtful race and nation; hence, we have the death struggle 
of the different races of Europe and Asia in the scramble of the 
survival of the fittest race. 


As we look at things we see that the great world in which we 
live has undergone much change since the time of the creation. 
When God created the world, and all therein, He handed His 
authority over to the two beings He created in His own image; 
namely, Adam and Eve. From the time of Adam and Eve the 
human race has multiplied by leaps and bounds. Where we once 
had two persons to exercise authority over the world, we to-day 
have one billion five hundred millions claiming authority and 
possession of the same world that was once the property of the 
two. 


The Tragedy of Race Extinction 


When the Colonists of America desired possession of the 
Jand they saw that a weak aboriginal race was in their way. What 
did they do? They got hold of them, killed them, and buried them 
underground. This is a fair indication of what will happen to 
the weaker peoples of the world in another two or three hundred 
years when the stronger races will have developed themselves 
to the position of complete mastery of all things material. They 


64 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


will not then as they have not in the past, allow a weak and de- 
feneeless race to stand in their way, especially if in their doing 
so they will endanger their happiness, their comfort and their 
pleasures. These are the things that strike the thoughtful Negro 
as being dangerous, and these are the things that cause us who 
make up the Universal Negro Improvement Association to be 
fighting tenaciously for the purpose of building up a strong 
Negro race, so as to make it impossible for us to be exterminated 
in the future to make room for the stronger races, even as the 
North American Indian has been exterminated to make room for 
the great white man on this North American continent. 


The illiterate and shallow-minded Negro who can see no far- 
ther than his nose is now the greatest stumbling block in the way 
of the race. He tells us that we must be satisfied with our con- 
dition; that we must not think of building up a nation of our own, 
that we must not seek to organize ourselves racially, but that we 
must depend upon the good feeling of the other fellow for the 
solution of the problem that now confronts us. This is a danger- 
ous policy and it is my duty to warn the four hundred million 
Negroes of the world against this kind of a leadership—a leader- 
ship that will try to make Negroes believe that all will be well 
without their taking upon themselves the task of bettering their 
condition politically, industrially, educationally and otherwise. 

The time has come for those of us who have the vision of the 
future to inspire our people to a closer kinship, to a closer love 
of self, because it is only through this appreciation of self will 
we be able to rise to that higher life that will make us not an 
extinct race in the future, but a race of men fit to survive. 


The Price of leadership 


Those of us who are blazing the way in this new propaganda 
of the Universal Negro Improvement Association to enlighten 
our people everywhere are at times very much annoyed and dis- 
- eouraged by the acts of our own people in that consciously or un- 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 65 


consciously they do so many things to hurt our deeper feeling 
of loyaity and love for the race. But what can we do? Can we 
forsake them because they hurt our feelings? Surely not. Pain- 
ful though it may be to be interfered with and handicapped in the 
performance of the higher sense of duty, yet we must, martyr- 
like, make up our minds and our hearts to pay the price of leader- 
ship. We must be sympathetic, we must be forgiving, we must 
really have forbearance, so that when the ignorant and illiterate 
fellow who happens to be a member of your own race stands up 
to block the passage of some cause that you believe would be 
to his benefit and to yours as a people you will be able to over- 
look him, even though he fosters his opposition with the greatest 
amount of insult to your intelligence and to your dignity. 


The excuse that some of our most brilliant men give for not 
identifying themselves with race movements is, that they cannot 
tolerate the interference of the illiterate Negro, who, being a mem- 
ber of the same organization’ will attempt to dictate what you 
should do in the interest of the race, when his act is based upon 
no deeper judgment than his like or dislike for the person he is 
opposing, or the satisfaction it would give him to embarrass the 
person he feels like opposing. Many an able leader is lost to his 
race because of this fear, and sometimes we must admit the rea- 
sonableness of this argument; but as I have said leadership means 
martyrdom, leadership means sacrifice, leadership means giving 
up one’s personality, giving up of everything for the cause that 
is worth while It is only because of that feeling that I personally 
continue to lead the Universal Negro Improvement Association, 
because like every other leader, I have had to encounter the op- 
position, the jealousy, the plotting of men who take advantage 
cf the situation, simply because they happen to be members of 
the organization, and that we may have to depend upon their vote 
one way or the other for the good of the cause. Not that some 
of us care one row of pins about what the other fellow thinks, 
but when it is considered that we can only achieve success through 


66 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


harmony and unity, then it can be realized how much one has to 
sacrifice as a leader for getting that harmony that is necessary 
to bring about the results that are desired. 


The White Race 


We desire harmony and unity to-day more than ever, because 
it is only through the bringing together of the four hundred 
million Negroes into one mighty bond that we can successfully 
pilot our way through the avenues of opposition and the oceans 
of difficulties that seem to confront us. When it is considered 
that the great white race is making a herculean struggle to be- 
come the only surviving race of the centuries, and when it is 
further considered that the great yellow race under the leadership 
of Japan is making a like struggle, then more than ever the seri- 
ousness of the situation can be realized as far as our race is con- 
eerned. If we sit supinely by and allow the great white race to 
lift itself in numbers and in power, it will mean that in another 
five hundred years this full grown race of white men will in turn 
exterminate the weaker race of black men for the purpose of find- 
ing enough room on this limited mundane sphere to accommodate 
that race which will have numerically multiplied itself into many 
billions. This is the danger point. What will become of the 


Negro in another five hundred years if he does not organize now 


to develop and to protect himself? The answer is that he will 
be exterminated for the purpose of making room for the other 
races that will be strong enough to hold their own against the 
opposition of all and sundry. 


An appeal to the Intelligentsia 


The leadership of the Negro of to-day must be able to locate 
the race, and not only for to-day but for all times. It is in the 
desire to locate the Negro in a position of prosperity and happi 
ness in the future that the Universal Negro Improvement Asso- 
ciation is making this great fight for the race’s emancipation 
everywhere and the founding of a great African government. 





Ha Ne a sce le iat 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 67 


Every sober-minded Negro will see immediately the reason why 
we should support a movement of this kind. If we will survive 
then it must be done through our own effort, through our own 
energy. No race of weaklings can survive in the days of to- 
morrow, because they will be hard and strenuous days fraught with 
many difficulties. 


I appeal to the higher intelligence as well as to the illiterate 
groups of our race. We must work together. Those of us who 
are better positioned intellectually must exercise forbearance with 
the illiterate and help them to see the right. If we happen to be 
members of the same organization, and the illiterate man tries 
to embarras you, do not become disgusted, but remember that. 
he does it because he does not know better, and it is your duty to 
forbear and forgive because the ends that we serve are not of 
self, but for the higher development of the entire race. It is on 
this score, it is on this belief, that I make the sacrifice of self to 
help this downtrodden race of mine. Nevertheless, I say there is 
a limit to human patience, and we should not continue to provoke 
the other fellow against his human feelings for in doing so we may 
be but bringing down upon our own heads the pillars of the temple. 


68 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 
AFRICA FOR THE AFRICANS 


For five years the Universal Negro Improvement Association 
has been advocating the cause of Africa for the Africans—that 
is, that the Negro peoples of the world should concentrate upon 
the object of building up for themselves a great nation in Africa. 

When we started our propaganda toward this end several of 
the so-called intellectual Negroes who have been bamboozling the 
race for over half a century said that we were crazy, that the 
Negro peoples of the western world were not interested in Africa 
and could not live in Africa. One editor and leader went so far as 
to say at his so-called Pan-African Congress that American Ne- 
groes could not live in Africa, because the climate was too hot. All 
kinds of arguments have been adduced by these Negro intellec- 
tuals against the colonization of Africa by the black race. Some 
said that the black man would ultimately work out his existence 
alongside of the white man in countries founded and established 
by the latter. Therefore, it was not necessary for Negroes to 
seek an independent nationality of their own. The old time stories 
of ‘‘African fever,” “African bad climate,” “African mosquitos,” 
“African savages,” have been repeated by these “brainless intel- 
lectuals” of ours as a scare against our people in America and 
the West Indies taking a kindly interest in the new program of 
building a racial empire of our own in our Motherland. Now 
that years have rolled by and the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association has made the circuit of the world with its propaganda, 
we find eminent statesmen and leaders of the white race coming 
out boldly advocating the cause of colonizing Africa with the 
Negroes of the western world. A year ago Senator MacCullum 
of the Mississippi Legislature introduced a resolution in the House 
for the purpose of petitioning the Congress of the United States 
of America and the President to use their good influence in secur- 
ing from the Allies sufficient territory in Africa in liquidation of 
the war debt, which territory should be used for the establishing of 
an independent nation for American Negroes. About the same 














PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 69. 


time Senator France of Maryland gave expression to a similar. 
desire in the Senate of the United States. During a speech on the 
Soldiers’ Bonus.” He said: “We owe a big debt to 
Africa and one which we have too long ignored. I need 
not enlarge upon our peculiar interest in the obligation to the 
people of Africa. Thousands of Americans have for years been 
contributing to the missionary work which has been carried out 
‘by the noble men and. women who have been sent out in that field 
by the churches of America.” 


Germany To The Front 


This reveals a real change on the part of prominent states- 
‘men in their attitude on the African question. (Then comes an- 
other suggestion from Germany, for which Dr. Heinrich Schnee, 
e former Governor of German East Africa, is author. This Ger- 
man statesman suggests in an interview given out in Berlin, and 
‘published in New York, that America takes over the mandatories 
of Great Britain and France in Africa for the colonization of 
American Negroes. Speaking on the matter, he says “As regards 
the attempt to colonize Africa with the surplus American colored 
population, this would in a long way settle the vexed problem, 
‘and under the plan such as Senator France has outlined, might. 
enable France and Great Britain to discharge their duties to the 
United States, and simultaneously ease the burden of German 
reparations which is paralyzing economic life.” 


With expressions as above quoted from prominent world 
‘statesmen, and from the demands made by such men as Senators 
France and McCullum, it is clear that the question of African 
nationality is not a far-fetched one, but is as reasonable and feasi- 
ble as was the idea of an American nationality. 


A ‘‘Program’’ At Last 


I trast that the Negro peoples of the world are now convin- 
ced that the work of the Universal Negro Improvement Asso-; 


1 


40 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


ciation is not a visionary one, but very practical, and that it is 
not so far fetched, but can be realized in a short while if the en- 
tire race will only co-operate and work toward the desired end. 
Now that the work of our organization has started to bear fruit 
we find that some of these “doubting Thomases’’ of three and 
four years ago are endeavoring to mix themselvves up with the 
popular idea of rehabilitating Africa in the interest of the Negro 
They are now advancing spurious “programs” and in a short 
while will endeavor to force themselves upon the public as advo- 
cates and leaders of the African idea. 


It is felt that those who have followed the career of the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association will not allow them- 
selves to be deceived by these Negro opportunists who have al- 
ways sought to live off the ideas of other people. 


The Dream Of A Negro Empire 


It is only a question of a few more years when Africa will 
be completely colonized by Negroes, as Europe is by the white 
race. What we want is an independent African nationality, and 
if America is to help the Negro peoples of the world establish 
such a nationality, then we welcome the assistance. 


It is hoped that when the time comes for American and West 
Indian Negroes to settle in Africa, they will realize their responsi- 
bility and their duty. It will not be to go to Africa for the purpose 
of exercising an over-lordship over the natives, but it shall be the 
purpose of the Universal Negro Improvement Association to have 
established in Africa that brotherly co-operation which will make 
the interests of the African native and the American and West _ 
Indian Negro one and the same, that is to say, we shall enter / 
into a common partnership to build up Africa in the interests of 
our race. 


Oneness Of Interests 
Everybody knows that there is absolutely no difference be- 


~——eor 


4 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 71 


tween the native African and the American and West Indian Ne- 
groes, in that we are descendants from one common family stock. 
It is only a matter of accident that we have been divided and kept 
apart for over three hundred years, but it is felt that when the 
time has come for us to get back together, we shall do so in the 
‘spirit of brotherly love, and any Negro who expects that he will 
be assisted here, there or anywhere by the Universal Negro Im- 
provement Association to exercise a haughty superiority over the 
fellows of his own race, makes a tremenduous mistake. Such men 
had better remain where they are and not attempt to become in 
any way interested in the higher development of Africa. 


The Negro has had enough of the vaunted practice of race 
superiority as inflicted upon him by others, therefore he is not 
repared to tolerate a similar assumption on the part of his own 
eople. In America and the West Indies, we have Negroes who 
elieve themselves so much above their fellows as to cause them 
to think that any readjustment in the affairs of the race should 
be placed in their hands for them to exercise a kind of an auto- 
cratic and despotic control as others have done to us for cen- 
turies. Again I say, it would be advisable for such Negroes to 
take their hands and minds off the now popular idea of colonizing 
Africa in the interest of the Negro race, because their being iden- 
tsfed with this new program will not in any way help us because 
of the existing feeling among Negroes everywhere not to tolerate 
the infliction of race or class superiority upon them, as is the de- 
sire of the self-appointed and self-created race leadership that we 
have been having for the last fifty years. 











_ The Basis Of An African Aristocracy. 

The masses of Negroes in America, the West Indies, South 
and Central America are in sympathetic accord with the aspira- 
tions of the native Africans. We desire to help them build up 
‘Africa as a Negro Empire, where every black man, whether he 

s born in Africa or in the Western world, will have the oppor- 





72 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS — 


tunity to develop on his own lines under the protection of the most 
favorable democratic institutions. 


It will be useless, as before stated, for bombastic Negroes to 
leave America and the West Indies to go to Africa, thinking that 
ihey will have privileged positions to inflict upon the race that bas- 
tard aristocracy that they have tried to maintain in this Western 
world at the expense of the masses. Africa shall develop an aristo- 


cracy of its own, but it shall be based upon service and loyalty ~ 
to race. Let all Negroes work toward that end. Ifeel that it is only 


a question of a few more years before our program will be ac- 
cepted not only by the few statesmen of America who are now 
interested in it, but by the strong statesmen of the world, as the 
enly solution to the great race problem, There is no other way 
to avoid the threatening war of the races that is bound to engulf all 
t.ankind, which has been prophesied by the world’s greatest think- 
rs; there is no better method than by apportioning every race 
to its own habitat. 


The time has really come for the Asiatics to govern them- 
selves in Asia, as the Europeans are in Europe and the Western 
world, so also is it wise for the Africans to govern themselves at 
iome, and thereby bring peace and satisfaction to the entire human 
family. 


See ae tr WL 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 73 
THE FUTURE AS I SEE IT 


It comes to the individual, the race, the nation, once in a life 
time to decide upon the course to be pursued as a career. The 
hour has now struck for the individual Negro as well as the en- 
tire race to decide the course that will be pursued in the interest 
of our own liberty. 


We who make up the Universal Negro Improvement Asso- 
ciation have decided that we shall go forward, upward and onward 
toward the great goal of human liberty. We have determined 
among ourselves that all barriers placed in the way of our prog- 
ress must be removed, must be cleared away for we desire to see 
the light of a brighter day. 


The Negro is Ready 


The Universal Negro Improvement Association for five years 
has been proclaiming to the world the readiness of the Negro to 
carve out a pathway for himself in the course of life. Men of 
other races and nations have become alarmed at this attitude of 
the Negro in his desire to do things for himself and by himself. 
This alarm has become so universal that organizations have been 
brought into being here, there and everywhere for the purpose of 
deterring and obstructing this forward move of our race. Propa- 
ganda has been waged here, there and everywhere for the pur- 
pose of misinterpreting the intention of this organization; some 
have said that this organization seeks to create discord and dis- 
content among the races; some say we are organized for the pur- 
pose of hating other people. Every sensible, sane and honest- 
minded person knows that the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association has no such intention. We are organized for the 
absolute purpose of bettering our condition, industrially, com- 
mercially, socially, religiously and politically. We are organized 
not to hate other men, but to lift ourselves, and to demand respect 
of all humanity. We have a program that we believe to be 
righteous; we believe it to be just, and we have made up our 


74 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


minds to lay down ourselves on the altar of sacrifice for the 
realization of this great hope of ours, based upon the foundation 
of righteousness. We declare to the world that Africa must be 
free, that the entire Negro race must be emancipated from 
industrial bondage, peonage and serfdom; we make no compro- 
mise, we make no apology in this our declaration., We do not 
desire to create offense on the part of other races, but we are 
determined that we shall be heard, that we shall be given the 
rights to which we are entitled. 


The Propaganda Of Our Enemies 


For the purpose of creating doubts about the work of the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association, many attempts have 
been made to cast shadow and gloom over our work. They have 
even written the most uncharitable things about our organization ; 
they have spoken so unkindly of our effort, but what do we care? 
They spoke unkindly and uncharitably about all the reform move- 
nents that have helped in the betterment of humanity. They 
inaligned the great movement of the Christian religion; they 
inaligned the great liberation movements of America, of France, 
of England, of Russia; can we expect, then, to escape being ma- 
ligned in this, our desire for the liberation of Africa anid the 
freedom of four hundred million Negroes of the world? 

We have unscrupulous men and organizations working in op- 
position to us. Some trying to capitalize the new spirit that has 
come to the Negro to make profit out of it to their own selfish 
benefit; some are trying to set back the Negro from seeing the 
hope of his own liberty, and thereby poisoning our people’s mind 
against the motives of our organization; but every sensible far- 
seeing Negro in this enlightened age knows what propaganda 
means. It is the medium of discrediting that which you are op- 
posed to, so that the propaganda of our enemies will be of little 
avail as soon as we are rendered able to carry to our peoples 
scattered throughout the world the true message of our great 
orgagnization. 








PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 75 


‘*Crocodiles’’ As Friends 

Men of the Negro race, let me say to you that a greater 
future is in store for us; we have no cause to lose hope, to be- 
come faint-hearted. We must realize that upon ourselves de- 
‘pend our destiny, our future; we must carve out that future, that 
destiny, and we who make up the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association have pledged ourselves that nothing in the world 
shall stand in our way, nothing in the world shall discourage us, 
but opposition shall make us work harder, shall bring us closer to- 
gether so that as one man the millions of us will march on toward 
that goal that we have set for ourselves. The new Negro shall 
not be deceived. The new Negro refuses to take advice from 
anyone who has not felt with him, and suffered with him. We 
have suffered for three hundred years, therefore we feel that 
the time has come when only those who have suffered with 
us can interpret our feelings and our spirit. It takes the slave 
to interpret the feelings of the slave; it takes the unfortunate 
man to interpret the spirit of his unfortunate brother; and 
so it takes the suffering Negro to interpret the spirit of his 
comrade. It is strange that so many people are interested in 
the Negro now, willing to advise him how to act, and what or- 
ganizations he should join, yet nobody was interested in the Ne- 
gro to the extent of not making him a slave for two hundred and 
fifty years, reducing him to industrial peonage and serfdom after 
he was freed; it is strange that the same people can be so inter- 
ested in the Negro now, as to tell him what organization he should 
follow and what leader he should support. 

Whilst we are bordering on a future of brighter things, we 
are also at our danger period, when we must either accept the 
right philosophy, or go down by following deceptive propaganda 
‘which has hemmed us in for many centuries. 


Deceiving The People 
There is many a leader of our race who tells us that every- 


76 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


thing is well, and that all things will work out themselves and that 
a better day is coming. Yes, all of us know that a better day is 
coming; we all know that one day we will go home to Paradise, 
but whilst we are hoping by our Christian virtues to have an 
entry into Paradise we also realize that we are living on earth, 
and that the things that are practised in Paradise are not prac- 
ticed here. You have to treat this world as the world treats 
you; we are living in a temporal, material age, an age of activ- 
ity, an age of racial, national selfishness. What else can you 
expect but to give back to the world what the world gives to 
you, and we are calling upon the four hundred million Negroes 
of the world to take a decided stand, a determined stand, that 
we shall occupy a firm position; that position shall be an eman- 
cipated race and a free nation of our own. We are determined 
that we shall have a free country; we are determined that we 
shall have a flag; we are determined that we shall have a govern- 
ment second to none in the world. 
An Kye For An Eye 


Men may spurn the idea, they may scoff at it; the metro- 
politan press of this country may deride us; yes, white men may 
laugh at the idea of Negroes talking about government; but let 
me tell you there is going to be a government, and let me say to 
you also that whatsoever you give, in like measure it shall be re- 
turned to you. The world is sinful, and therefore man believes 
in the doctrine of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Every- 
body believes that revenge is God’s, but at the same time we are 
men, and revenge sometimes springs up, even in the most Chris- 
tian heart. 2 


Why should man write down a history that will react against 
him? Why should man perpetrate deeds of wickedness upon his 
brother which will return to him in like measure? Yes, the Ger- 
mans maltreated the French in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870, 


but the French got even with the Germans in 1918. It is history, 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS /7 


and history will repeat itself. Beat the Negro, brutalize the 
Negro, kill the Negro, burn the Negro, imprison the Negro, scoff 
at the Negro, deride the Negro, it may come back to you one of 
these finc days, because the supreme destiny of man is in the 
hands of God. God is no respecter of persons, whether that 
person be white, yellow or black. Today the one race is up, to- 
morrow it has fallen; today the Negro seems to be the footstool 
of the other races and nations of the world; tomorrow the Negro 
may occupy the highest rung of the great human ladder. 

But, when we come to consider the history of man, was not 
the Negro a power, was he not great once? Yes, honest students 
of history can recall the day when Egypt, Ethiopia and Timbuctoo 
towered in their civilizations, towered above Europe, towered 
above Asia. When Europe was inhabited by a race of cannibals, a 
race of savages, naked men, heathens and pagans, Africa was 
peopled with a race of cultured black men, who were masters in 
art, science and literature; men who were cultured and refined; 
men who, it was said, were like the gods. Even the great poets of 
old sang in beautiful sonnets of the delight it afforded the gods 
to be in companionship with the Ethiopians. Why, then, should 
we lose hope? Black men, you were once great; you shall be 
great again. Lose not courage, lose not faith, go forward. The 
thing to do is to get organized; keep separated and you will be 
exploited, you will be robbed, you will be killed. Get organized, 
and you will compel the world to respect you. If the world fails 
to give you consideration, because you are black men, because 
you are Negroes, four hundred millions of you shall, through 
organization, shake the pillars of the universe and bring down 
creation, even as Samson brought down the temple upon his head 
and upon the heads of the Philistines. 


An Inspiring Vision 


So Negroes, I say, through the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association, that there is much to live for. I have a vision of the 


78 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


future, and I see before me a picture of a redeemed Africa, with 
‘her dotted cities, with her beautiful civilization, with her millions 
of happy children, going to and fro. Why should I lose hope, 
why should I give up and take a back place in this age of progress? 
, Remember that you are men, that God created you Lords of this 
‘ereation. Lift up yourselves, men, take yourselves out of the 
‘inire and hitch your hopes to the stars; yes, rise as high as the 
_very stars themselves. Let no man pull you down, let no man 
destroy your ambition, because man is but your companion, your 
“sequal; man is your brother; he is not your lord; he is not ae 
sovereign master. 


We of the Universal Negro Improvement Association feel 
‘happy; we are cheerful. Let them connive to destroy us; let them 
,organize to destroy us; we shall fight the more. Ask me person- 
“ally the eause of my success, and I say opposition; oppose me, 

“and I fight the more, and if you want to find out the sterling 
worth of the Negro, oppose him, and under the leadership of the 
‘Universal Negro Improvement Association he shall fight his way 
\to victory, and in the days to come, and I believe not far distant, 
‘Africa shall reflect a splendid demonstration of the worth of the 
Negro, of the determination of the Negro, to set himself free and 

to establish a government of his own. 


CHAPTER V. 


SPEECH DELIVERED ON EMANCIPATION DAY AT 
LIBERTY HALL, NEW YORK CITY, N. Y. U.S. A, 


January 1, 1922 


Fifty-nine years ago Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipa- 
tion Proclamation declaring four million Negroes in this country 
free. Several years prior to that Queen Victoria of Eng- 
land signed the Emancipation Proclamation that set at liberty 
hundreds of thousands of West Indian Negro slaves. 


West Indian Negroes celebrate their emancipation on the 
first day of August of every year. The American Negroes 
celebrate their emancipation on the first of January of every 
year. Tonight we are here to celebrate the emancipation of the — 
slaves in this country. 


We are the descendants of the men and women who suf- 
fered in this country for two hundred and fifty years under 
that barbarous, that brutal institution known as slavery. You 
who have not lost trace of your history will recall the fact that 
over three hundred years ago your fore-bears were taken from 
the great Continent of Africa and brought here for the purpose: 
of using them as slaves. Without mercy, without any sympathy 
they worked our fore-bears. They suffered, they bled, they died. 
But with their sufferings, with their blood, which they shed in 
their death, they had a hope that one day their posterity 
would be free, and we are assembled here tonight as the children 
of their hope. 


I trust each and every one of you therefore will realize that. 


80 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


you have a duty which is incumbent upon you; a duty that you 
must perform, because our fore-bears who suffered, who bled, 
who died had hopes that are not yet completely realized. They 
hoped that we as their children would be free, but they also 
hoped that their country from whence they came would also be 
free to their children, their grand-children and great grand- 
children at some future time. It is for the freedom of that 
country—that Motherland of ours—that four and a half million 
Negroes, as members of the Universal Negro Improvement As- 
sociation, are laboring today. 


This race of ours gave civilization, gave art, gave science; 
gave literature to the world. But it has been the way with races 
and nations. The one race stands out prominently in the one 
century or in the one age; and in another century or age it 
passes off the stage of action, and another race takes its place. 
The Negro once occupied a high position in the world, scien- 
tifically, artistically and commercially, but in the balancing of the 
great scale of evolution, we lost our place and some one, other 
than ourselves occupies the stand we once held. 


God never intended that man should enslave his fellow, and 
the price of such a sin or such a violation of Heaven's law must be 
paid by every one. As for me, because of the blessed past, be- 
cause of the history that I know, so long as there is within me 
the breath of life and the spirit of God, I shall struggle on and urge 
others of our race to struggle on to see that justice is done to the 
black peoples of the world. Yes, we appreciate the sorrows of the 
past, and we are going to work in the present that the sorrows 
of our generation shall not be perpetuated in the future. On 
the contrary, we shall strive that by our labors, succeeding 
- generations of our own shall call us blessed, even as we call 
the generation of the past blessed today. And they indeed 
were blest. They were blest with a patience not yet known to 
man. A patience that enabled them to endure the tortures and 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 81 


the sufferings of slavery for two hundred and fifty years. Why? 
Was it because they loved slavery so? No. It was because 
they loved this generation more-Isn’t it wonderful. Transcen- 
dent? What then are you going to do to show your apprecia- 
tion of this love, what gratitude are you going to manifest in re- 
turn for what they have done for you? As for me, knowing the 
sufferings of my fore-fathers I shall give back to Africa that 
liberty that she once enjoyed hundreds of years ago, before her 
own sons and daughters were taken from her shores and brought 
in chains to this Western World. 

No better gift can I give in honor of the memory of the love 
of my fore-parents for me, and in gratitude of the sufferings they 
endured that I might be free; no grander gift can I bear to the 
sacred memory of the generation past than a free and a redeemed 
Africa—a monument for all eternity—for all times. 


As by the action of the world, as by the conduct of all the 
races and nations it is apparent that not one of them has the 
sense of justice, the sense of love, the sense of equity, the sense 
of charity, that would make men happy, and make God satisfied. 
It is apparent that it is left to the Negro to play such a part in 
human affairs-for Fwhen we look to the Anglo-Saxon we see 
him full of greed, avarice, no merey, no love, no charity. We 
ro from the white man to the yellow man, and we see the same 
unenviable characteristics in the Japanese. | Therefore we must 
believe that the Psalmist had great hopes of this race of ours 
when he prophesied ‘‘Princes shall come out of Egypt and 
Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hands unto God” 


If humanity is regarded as made up of the children of God 
and God loves all humanity (we all know that) then God will be 
more pleased with that race that protects all humanity than with 
the race that outrages the children of God. 

And so tonight we celebrate this anniversary of our emanci- 
pation, we do it not with regret, on the contrary we do it with an 





§2 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


abiding confidence, a hope and faith in ourselves and in our God. 
And the faith that we have is a faith that will ultimately take us 
back to that ancient place, that ancient position that we once 
occupied, when Ethiopia was in her glory. 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS — 83 


CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE NEGRO PEOPLES OF THE 
7 WORLD. 


December 1921 


Fellow men of the Negro Race, 

Greeting :— 

To us is born this day the Child Jesus—the Christ. The 
Shepherds and wise men are now wending their way toward 
Bethlehem, there to behold the Wonder of God. Because, there, 
in a manger, is to be found the Baby Christ who is to be the Re- 
deemer of the world. 

And so our thoughts go back for more than nineteen hundred 
years. We hear the shout ‘‘Hosanna in the Highest, blessed is 
He that cometh in the name of the Lord.”’ 

With all the preparation the human race has made to wel- 
come into the world the Christ who is to redeem us, we find our- 
selves still in confusion, still fighting, still exploiting, still merci- 
less in our onslaught one upon the other. But on this Christmas 
morn may we not all members and brothers of the great human 
family, forget our differences, and in one glorious chorus sing 
out to the world ‘‘Peace, perfect peace?’’. 


Christ died to free Mankind. 


When we come to consider the Brotherhood of Man and the 
Fatherhood of God, and that this Child. of our own flesh, «yet 
spirit of the Great Creator has been sent to link us nearer to our 
common Father, will we not admit of the reason that there should 
be but very little differences between us? What will we gain 
fighting the battle of man against man? Absolutely nothing 
but death; and was not this Child Jesus sent into this world to 
teach us the new life, the life of Love, of Charity, the Life of 
Mercy? What greater example do we desire than that which He 
gave in His own Life? He suffered, He died that others might 


84 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


be free. Yet even with the great object of the Cross before us, 
even though He died on Mount Calvary to make us free; even 
though He overcame death, the grave and hell to demonstrate to 
us the new life possible to each and every one, we have not yet 
turned from the path of sin to enter into the glory of His Eternal 
Kingdom. 


The Spirit of Christmas 


Instead of planning a career of sin on this Christmas Morn, 
may we not lift our thoughts to that grand and noble Father who 
wave to us on this day His Royal Son, whom He has made our 
brother, and ask Him to bless each and every one of us that our 
hearts may be touched with the true spirit of the first Christmas 
morn? That first day in the stable at Bethlehem was a beacon 
of a new born hope, for with the birth of the Prince of Peace 
there came to us an age of spiritual grace, which in its course 
sought to link man nearer to his God, and coming down the ages 
for more than nineteen hundred years, we have tried to preach 
Him as He appeared to us in His innocence, His Love and in His 
Charity. 

Christ labored for thirty three years to teach us the way to 
glory, but in His career man, his brother sought the life that he 
could not give; he persecuted Him, he derided Him, he jeered 
Him and at last he crucified Him. But when that which was phy- 
sical in the Christ died, the spiritual continued, and from earth 
betook its flight to heaven, there, probably, for all eternity, to look 
down upon the sinful, wicked world, and still to shower upon us 
blessings that we really need. 


We ghall never succeed in taking the Spirit of Christ out of 
the world, because in some of us, still, there is that spark of love, 
eharity, and mercy that links us to our God. But may we not 
ask the Great Omnipotent, the Great Creator, our Eternal 
Father to send once more into the world, just at this time and 
oh, how we pray that it be on this Christmas morn, our brother 





PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 85 


Christ, so that He may calm the raging storm and in truth pour 
out His benediction upon a corrupt world, a soulless human race, 
and make us subjects fit for Eternal Life? 


Haii! the New born King 


As with the angels let us sing, “Hail the New Born 
King, the Prince of Peace, Hail to the Son of Righteousness, for 
with Thee there is life, without Thee there is death’’. For as 
thou died upon Calvary’s mount to make us better, to redeem us 
from our sins, may we not hope for a continuance of that love 
even for today? and knowing Thee in Thy bountiful love for all 
mankind, may we not further ask that Thy Spirit lighten up our 
hearts and bring to us by the touch of Thy grace, the knowledge 
of the Everlasting Brotherhood of Man, and the Eternal Father- 
hood of God? 


As the angels now rejoice in heaven over this new birth, so 
we rejoice on earth, four hundred millions of us, who are members 
of this Negro race, feeling that Thou art our King, that Thou 
art our Savior, that thou shalt be our Emanuel. We love Thee 
because Thou art the Son of God. We praise, worship and adore 
Thee because Thou art the Prince of Peace. 


The Prince of Peace Our Guide to-day. 

Let others in their sin, in their wickedness seek after the in- 
fant Life that Thou gavest‘to all mankind. We in our simplicity 
shall find refuge for Thee even in the land of Egypt. Yes, the 
world of sinful, wicked men cried out “Crucify Him! Crucify 
Him! But Lord because Thou art our Master, because Thou art 
our Prince of Peace, because Thou art our Redeemer, we shall 
render unto Thee all help possible, even in bearing the Cross up 
the heights of Calvary, for in life Thou hast been our friend; in 
death we know Thou shalt remember us, and now that Thou art 
sitting at the right hand of God, the Father, now that Thou hast 
conquered death, the grave and hell, surely in Thy mercy Thou shalt 


36 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


remember us. Se today even though hundreds of years have rolled 
by since Thy crucifixion, we know that there is in Thine heart, 
there is in Thy sou) ¢ warm spot for the Sons and Daughters of 
Africa whose forebeais bore the cross for Thee up the heights of 
Calvary to Thy crufixion. 


We sing and shout with the angels; we ring our joy bells; 
we blow our horns in praise because Thou art indeed the Jesus, 
the Christ, the Emanuel to us, the Son of Righteousness, the 
Prince of Peace. 


As sons and daughters of Africa, may not four hundred mil- 
lions of us the world over on this Christmas morn pray for the 
redemption of that Motherland which sheltered our Blessed Re- 
deemer when the wild, wicked men of the world sought His life; 
in the same manner wild, wicked men seek the lives of Negroes 
today, and burn, lynch and kill them because they have not the 
strength that makes man mighty. But with the Almighty Power 
of God and with the guidance and mercy of our Blessed Lord we 
feel that one day Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hand, and 
whether it be at the second coming or before, we shall all sing our 
Hosannas, shout our praises to God for freedom, for liberty, for 
life. 


“For Christ is born of Mary, 
And gathered all above 
While mortals sleep, the angels keep 
Their watch of wondering love. 
O morning stars, together 
Proclaim the holy birth, . 


And praises sing to God our King, 
And peace to men on earth.” 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 87 
THE RESURRECTION OF THE NEGRO 


Easter Sunday Sermon Delivered at Liberty Hall, New York 
City, N. Y. April 16th, 1922. 


The Lord is risen! A little over nineteen hundred years ago 
a man came to this world called JESUS, He was sent here for 
the propagation of a cause—that of saving fallen humanity. 
When He came the world refused to hear Him; the world re- 
jected Him; the world persecuted Him; men crucified Him. A 
couple days ago He was nailed to the cross of Calvary; He died; 
He was buried. To-day He is risen; risen the spiritual leader of 
creation; risen as the first fruit of them that slept. To-day that 
erucified Lord, that crucified Christ sees the affairs of man from 
His own spiritual throne on high. 


After hundreds of years have rolled by, the doctrine He 
taught has become the accepted religion of hundreds of millions 
of human beings. He in His resurrection triumphed over death 
and the grave; He by His resurrection convinced humanity that 
His cause was spiritual. The world felt the truth about Jesus 
too late to have accepted His doctrine in His lifetime. But what 
was done to Jesus in His lifetime is just what is done to all re- 
formers and reform movements. He came to change the spiritual 
attitude of man toward his brother. That was regarded in His 
day as an irregularity, even as it is regarded to-day. The one 
who attempts to bring about changes in the order of human 
society becomes a dangerous imposter upon society, and to those 
who control the systems of the day. 


The desire to enslave others. 


It has been an historic attitude of man to keep his brother 
in slavery—in subjection for the purpose of exploitation. When 
Jesus came the privileged few were taking advantage of the un- 
fortunate masses. Because the teaching of Jesus sought to 
equalize the spiritual and even the temporal rights of man, those 


88 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


who held authority, sway and dominion sought His liberty by 
prosecution, sought His life by death. He was called to yield up 
that life for the cause He loved—because He was indeed a true 
reformer. 


The Example Set by Christ 


The example set by our Lord and Master nineteen hundred 
years ago is but the example that every reformer must make up 
his mind to follow if we are indeed to serve those to whom we 
minister. Service to humanity means sacrifice. That has 
been demonstrated by our blessed Lord and Redeemer whose 
resurrection we commemorate this day. As Christ triumphed 
nearly two thousand years ago over death and the grave, as He 
was risen from the dead, so do I hope that 400,000,000 Negroes 
of to-day will triumph over the slavishness of the past, intellec- 
tually, physically, morally and even religiously; that on this an- 
niversary of our risen Lord, we ourselves will be risen from the 
slumber of the ages; risen in thought to higher ideals, to a loftier 
purpose, to a truer conception of life. 


The Hope of the U. N. I. A. 

It is the hope of the Universal Negro Improvement Asso- 
ciation that the 400,000,000 Negroes of the world will get to real- 
ize that we are about to live a new life—a risen life—a life of 
knowing ourselves. 

How many of us know ourselves? How many of us under- 
stand ourselves? The major number of us for ages have failed 
to recognize in ourselves the absolute masters of our own destiny 
—the absolute directors and creators of our own fate. 

To-day as we think of our risen Lord may we not also think 
of the life He gave to us—the life that made us His instruments, 
His children—The life that He gave to us to make us possessors 
of the land that He himself created through His Father? How 
many of us can reach out to that higher life; that higher purpose; 
that creative world that says to you you are a man, a sovereign, 


Beata 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 89 


a lord—lord of the creation? On this beautiful spring day, may 
we not realize that God made Nature for us; God has given it to 
us aS our province, our dominion? May we not realize that God 
has created no superior being to us in this world, but Himself? 
May we not know that we are the true lords and creators of our 
own fate and of our own physical destiny ? 


_ The work of the Universal Negro Improvement Association 
for the past four and a half years has been that of guiding us to 
realize that there should be a resurrection in us, and if at no other 
time I trust that at this Easter-tide we will realize that there is a 
great need for a resurrection—a resurrection from the lethargy 
of the past—the sleep of the past—from that feeling that made us 
accept the idea and opinion that God intended that we should 
occupy an inferior place in the world. 

No Superiority or Inferiority 
Men and women of Liberty Hall, men and women of my race, 
do you know that the God we love, the God we adore, the God 
who sent His Son to this world nearly two thousand years ago 
never created an inferior man? That God we love, that God we 
worship and adore has created man in His own image, equal in 
every respect, wheresoever he may be; let him be white; let him 


be yellow; let him be red; let him be black; God has created him > 


the equal of his brother. He is such a loving God. He is such 
p merciful God. He is such a God that He is no respecter of per- 
sons, that He would not in His great love create a superior race 
and an inferior one. The God that you worship is a God that 
expects you to be the equal of other men. The God that I adore 
is such a God and He could be no other. 

Some of us seem to accept the fatalist position, the fatalist 
attitude, that God accorded to us a certain position and condition, 
and therefore there is no need trying to be otherwise. The 
moment you accept such an attitude, the moment you accept such 
an opinion, the moment you harbor such an idea, you hurl an in- 


90 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


sult at the great God who created you, because you question Him 
for His love, you question Him for His mercy. God has created 
man, and has placed him in this world as the lord of the creation, 
as the sovereign of everything that you see, let it be land, let it be 
sea, let it be the lakes, rivers and everything therein. All that you 
see in creation, all that you see in the world, was created by God 
for the use of man, and you four hundred million black souls have 
as much right to your possession in this world as any other race. 


Created in the image of the same God we have the same 
common rights, and to-day I trust that there will be a spiritual 
and material resurrection among Negroes everywhere; that you 
will lift yourselves from the doubts of the past; that you will 
lift yourselves from the slumbers of the past, that you will lift 
yourselves from the lethargy of the past, and strike out in this 
new life—in this resurrected life—to see things as they are. 


See life as Others see It. 


The Universal Negro Improvement Association desires that 
the four hundred million members of our race see life as the other 
races see it. The great white race seesgj life in, a attitude of sov- 
ereignity; the great yellow race sees life in a similar way, 
that is to say that man, let him be white or yellow, sees that 
he is master and owner and possessor of everything that God has | 
created in this world, and given to us in Nature; and that is why 
by knowing himself, by understanding, himself, and by under- 
standing his God, man has gone, throughout the length and 
breadth of this world, conquering the very elements, harnessing 
Nature and making a servant of everything that God placed 
within his reach. 


As he has done that for thousands of years pleasing God and 
justifying his existence, so we are appealing to the members of 
our race to do that now in this risen life, and if you have never 


made up your minds before I trust on this Easter Sunday you will 
do so. 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 91 
Masters of your own Destiny 


I repeat that God created you masters of your own destiny, 
masters of your own fate, and you can pay no higher tribute to 
your Divine Master than function as man, as He created you. 


The highest compliment we can pay to our Creator; the 
highest respect we can pay to our risen Lord and Savior, is that 
»f feeling that He has created us as His masterpiece; His perfect 
instruments of His own existence, because in us is reflected the 
very being of God. When it is said that we are created in His own 
image, we ourselves reflect His greatness, we ourselves reflect 
the part of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy 
Ghost, and when we allow ourselves to be subjected and create 
others as our superior, we hurl an insult at our Creator who made 
us in the fullness of ourselves. 


I trust that you will so live to-day as to realize that you 
are masters of your own destiny, masters of your fate; if there 
is anything you want in this world it is for you to strike out 
with confidence and faith in self and reach for it, because 
God has created it for your happiness wheresoever you may find 
it in nature. Nature is bountiful; nature is resourceful, and 
nature is willing to obey the command of man—Man the sovereign 
lord; man who is supposed to hold dominion and take possession 
of this great world of ours. 


The difference Between Strong and weak Races. 


The difference between the strong and weak races is that the 
strong races seem to know themselves; seem to discover them- 
selves; seem to realize and know fully that there is but a link be- 
tween them and the Creator; that above them there is no other 
but God and anything that bears human form is but their equal 
In standing and to that form there should be no obeisance; there 
should be no regard for superiority. Because of that feeling they 
have been able to hold their own in this world; they have been 


92 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


able to take care of the situation as it confronts them in nature; 
but because of our lack of faith and confidence in ourselves we 
have caused others created in a like image to ourselves, to take 
advantage of us for hundreds of years. 


For hundreds of years we have been the footstool of other 
races and nations of the earth simply because we have failed to 
realize to recognize and know ourselves as other men have known 
themselves and felt that there is nothing in the world that is 
above them except the influence of God. 


The understanding that others have gotten out of life is the 
same understanding at 400,000,000 Negroes must get out of this 
existence of ours. I pray that a new inspiration will come to us 
as a race; that we will think of nature as our servant; that we 
will think of man as our partner through life, and go through 
the length and breadth of this world achieving and doing as other 
men, as other nations and other races, — 









PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 93 


SPEECH DELIVERED AT LIBERTY HALL N. Y. C. DURING 


SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION OF NEGROES 
AUGUST 1921 


Four years ago, realizing the oppression and the hardships 
from which we suffered, we organized ourselves into an organiza- 
tion for the purpose of bettering our condition, and founding a 
government of our own. The four years of organization have 
brought good results, in that from an obscure, despised race we 
have grown into a mighty power, a mighty force whose influence 
is being felt throughout the length and breadth of the world. The 
Universal Negro Improvement Association existed but in name 
four years ago, today it is known as the greatest moving force 
among Negroes. We have accomplished this through unity of 
effort and unity of purpose, it is a fair demonstration of what we 
will be able to accomplish in the very near future, when the 
millions who are outside the pale of the Universal Negro Im- 
provement Association will have linked themselves up with us. 


By our success of the last four years we will be able to esti- 
mate the grander success of a free and redeemed Africa. In 
climbing the heights to where we are today, we have had to sur- 
mount difficulties, we have had to climb over obstacles, but the 
obstacles were stepping stones to the future greatness of this 
Cause we represent. Day by day we are writing a new history, 
recording new deeds of valor performed by this race of ours. It 
is true that the world has not yet valued us at our true worth 
but we are climbing up so fast and with such force that every day 
the world is changing its attitude towards us. Wheresoever you 
turn your eyes today you will find the moving influence of the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association among Negroes from 
all corners of the globe. We hear among Negroes the ery of 
‘‘Africa for the Africans’’. This ery has become a positive, de- 
termined one. It is a cry that is raised simultaneously the world 


94 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


over because of the universal oppression that affects the Negro. 
You who are congregated here tonight as Delegates representing 
the hundreds of branches of the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association in different parts of the world will realize that we in 
New York are positive in this great desire of a free and redeemed 
Africa. We have established this Liberty Hall as the centre from 
which we send out the sparks of liberty to the four corners of the 
globe, and if you have caught the spark in your section, we want 
you to keep it a-burning for the great Cause we represent. 


There is a mad rush among races everywhere towards 


national independence. Everywhre we hear the ery of liberty, 


of freedom, and a demand for democracy. In our corner of the 
world we are raising the ery for liberty, freedom and democracy. 
Men who have raised the ery for freedom and liberty in ages past 
have always made up their minds to die for the realization of the 
dream. We who are assembled in this Convention as Delegates 
representing the Negroes of the world give out the same spirit that 
the fathers of liberty in this country gave out over one hundred 
years ago. We give out a spirit that knows no compromise, a 
spirit that refuses to turn back, a spirit that says ‘‘Liberty or 
Death’’, and in prosecution of this great ideal—the ideal of a 
free and redeemed Africa, men may scorn, men may spurn us, and 
may say that we are on the wrong side of life, but let me tell you 
that way in which you are travelling is just the way all peoples 
who are free have travelled in the past. If you want liberty you 
yourselves must strike the blow. If you must be free you must 
become so through your own effort, through your own initiative. 
Those who have discouraged you in the past are those who have 
enslaved you for centuries and it is not expected that they will 
admit that you have a right to strike out at this late hour for 
freedom, liberty and democracy. 


At no time in the history of the world, for the last five hun- 
dred years, was there ever a serious attempt made to free Negroes. 





ena 
my 


FY leo. ee 


ply SP eo Ee ee Sa a eS oe 


+ 


>. = Ee RAS? ie Ray mS 




















PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS _ 95 


We have been camouflaged into believing that we were made free 
by Abraham Lincoln. That we were made free by Victoria of 
England, but up to now we are still slaves, we are industrial 
slaves, we are social slaves, we are political slaves, and the new 
Negro desires a freedom that has no boundary, no limit. We de- 
sire a freedom that will lift us to the common standard of all 
men, whether they be white men of Europe or yellow men of Asia, 
therefore, in our desire to lift ourselves to that standard we shall 
stop at nothing until there is a free and redeemed Africa. 


I understand that just at this time while we are endeavoring 
to create public opinion and public sentiment in favor of a free 
Africa, that others of our race are being subsidized to turn the 
attention of the world toward a different desire on the part of 
Negroes, but let me tell you that we who make up this Organiza- 
tion know no turning back, we have pledged ourselves even unto 
the last drop of our sacred blood that Africa must be free. The 
enemy may argue with you to show you the impossibility of a free 
and redeemed Africa, but I want you to take as your argument 
the thirteen colonies of America, that once owed their sovereignity 
to great Britain, that sovereignity has been destroyed to make a 
United States of America. George Washington was not God 
Almighty. He was a man like any Negro in this building, and if 
he and his associates were able to make a free America, we too 
can make a free Africa. Hampden, Gladstone, Pitt and Disraeli 
were not the representatives of God in the person of Jesus Christ. 
They were but men, but in their time they worked for the expan- 
sion of the British Empire, and today they boast of a British 
Empire upon which ‘‘the sun never sets.’’ As Pitt and Gladstone 
were able to work for the expansion of the British Empire, so 
you and I can work for the expansion of a great African Empire 
Voltaire and Mirabeau were not Jesus Christs, they were but men 
like ourselves. They worked and overturned the French 
Monarchy. They worked for the Democracy which France now 


06 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


enjoys, and if they were able to do that, we are able to work for 
a democracy in Africa. Lenine and Trotzky were not Jesus 
Christs, but they were able to overthrow the despotism of Russia, 
and today they have given to the world a Social Republic, the 
first of its kind. If Lenine and Trotzky were able to do that for 
Russia, you and I can do that for Africa. Therefore, let no man, 
let no power on earth, turn you from this sacred cause of liberty. 
I prefer to die at this moment rather than not to work for the 
freedom of Africa. If liberty is good for certain sets of humanity 
it is good for all. Black men, Colored men, Negroes have as 
much right to be free as any other race that God Almighty ever 
created, and we desire freedom that is unfettered, freedom that is 
unlimited, freedom that will give us a chance and opportunity to 
rise to the fullest of our ambition and that we cannot get in 
countries where other men rule and dominate. 


We have reached the time when every minute, every second 
must count for something done, something achieved in the cause 
of Africa. We need the freedom of Africa now, therefore, we 
desire the kind of leadership that will give it to us as quickly as 
possible. You will realize that not only individuals, but govern- 
ments are using their influence against us. But what do we care 
about the unrighteous influence of any government? Our cause 
is based upon righteousness. And anything that is not righteous 
we have no respect for, because God Almighty is our leader and 
Jesus Christ our standard bearer. We rely on them for that kind 
of leadership that will make us free, for it is the same God who 
inspired the Psalmist to write ‘‘Princes shall come out of Egypt 
and Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands unto God’’. At this mo-- 
ment methinks I see Ethiopia stretching forth her hands unto God 
, and methinks I see the Angel of God taking up the standard of the 
Red, the Black and the Green, and saying ‘‘Men of the Negro 
Race, Men of Ethiopia, follow me”. Tonight we are following. 
We are following 400,000,000 strong. We are following with a 








apes a= eee 


PHILOSOPHY, AND: OPINIONS: 97 


determination that we must be free before the wreck of matter, 
before the crash of worlds. 


It falls to our lot to tear off the shackles that bind Mother 
Africa. Can you do it? You did it in the Revolutionary War. 
You did it in the Civil War; You did it at the Battles of the 
Marne and Verdun; You did it in Mesopotamia. You can do it 
marching up the battle heights of Africa. Let the world know 
that 400,000,000 Negroes are prepared to die or live as free men. 
Despise us as much as you care. lgnore us as muck as you care. 
We are coming 400,000,000 strong. We are coming with our woes 
behind us, with the memory of suffering behind us—woes and 
suffering of three hundred years—they shall be our inspiration. My 
bulwark of strength in the conflict for freedom in Africa, will be 
the three hundred years of persecution and hardship left behind 
in this Western Hemisphere. The more I remember the suffering 
of my fore-fathers, the more I remember the lynchings and burn- 
ings in the Soutnern States of America, the more I will fight on 
‘even though the battle seems doubtful. Tell me that I must turn 
back, and I laugh you to scorn. Go on! Go on! Climb ye the 


heights of liberty and cease not in well doing until you have 


planted the banner of the Red, the Black and the Green on the 
hilltops of Africa, 


98 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


STATEMENT ON ARREST 
January, 1922 


I believe that true justice is to be found in the conscience:. of 
the people, and when one is deprived of it by the machinations 
and designs of the corrupt, there can be no better tribunal of 
appeal than that of public opinion, which gives voice to con- 
science and that is why I now appeal to the conscience of the 
American people for justice. 


T believe that all races have their peculiar characteristics, the 
Jew fights the Jew, the Irish fights the Irish, the Italian fights 
the Italian, and so we have the Negro fighting the Negro. As a 
Negro schooled in the academy of adversity, with the majority 
of my race, I have ever had a whole-souled desire to work for the 
race’s uplift. Recently out of slavery, we have had but a meagre 
chance to rise to the higher heights of human development as a 
people. At Emancipation we were flung upon the civilized world 
without a program. Unlike the Irish and the Jew we had no 
national aspiration of our own. We were left to the tender 
mercies of philanthropists and humanitarians who helped us to 
the best of their ability. 


In the Negro’s struggle to get somewhere every member of 
the race took a selfish course all his own. There was no group 
program or group interest. The only cause that held us together 
as a people was RELIGION. During the days of slavery Religion 
was the only consolation of the Negro, and then it was given to 


him by his masters. Immediately after the Emancipation, when 


the Negro was thrown back upon his own resources, the illiterate 
race preacher took charge of us, and with the eye of selfishness he 
exploited the zeal of the religious. Our emotions were worked 
upon by our illiterate preacher-leaders of the early days. 

The masses of us having found new employment for which 
we received pay, were able to contribute to the partial upkeep of 
our own church life, thus making it profitable for the preachers of 




















ai ioe ee wi ee et | 


ae baila ad 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 99 


our race to exploit us in the name of God, without giving us a 
program by which we could redeem ourselves. 

After the illiterate preacher-leader, came the illiterate race- 
politician who also had no program for the higher temporal de- 
velopment of the race. He, like the preacher, had his selfish plans 
of using and feeding upon the emotions of the people. These two 
illiterate parasites, who extracted all that was worth while from 
the people travelled hand in hand until we reached the first mile 
stone of higher intelligence, then the illiterate preacher and 
politician had to give way to a more intelligent class, who, un- 
fortunately, with only a few exceptions, scattered here and there, 
followed and are still following in the footsteps of the old 
preachers and politicians to plunder and exploit the masses, be- 
cause they had no vision. | 


And now I come to the source of my troubles, in fighting the 


_ battles of the masses. I come to the people in the role of the re- 


former and say to them, ‘‘ Awake! the day is upon you, go forth 
in the name of the race and build yourselves a nation, redeem 
your country Africa, the land from whence you came and prove 
yourselves men worthy of the recognition of others’’. 


This is the offence I have committed against the selfish Negro 
preachers and politicians who have for more than half a century 


_ waxed fat at the expense of the people. The shout goes up, ’’We 


cannot allow Garvey to preach his reformation and expose us to 
the people. The people will become too wise. We will lose our 
standing among them and they will not support us. We must 
“‘get’’? Garvey. We must discredit him before the people. We 
cannot do it ourselves, because we have no power. We will frame 
him up; we will lay traps for him; we will state all manner of 
charges against him to the various departments of government so 
that the government will prosecute him for us.’’ 


Such have been the ravings, machinations and designs of a 
certain class of Negro politicians and preachers against me be- 





100 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


cause of my reform work of three and a half years among 
my people that has over four million followers. 

Jews, Irish and Reformers of all races have had their troubles 
and trials with their own people, so I am satisfied to bear the 
persecution of my own that they might be free. 
| I trust no one from the people would believe that I could be 
so mean as to defraud a fellow Negro, either directly or indirectly. 
I have an ideal that is far above money, and that is to see my 
people really free. 

Others of my race oppose me because they fear my influence 
among the people, and they judge me from their own corrupt, | 
selfish consciences. There is an old adage that says, ‘‘A thief 
does not like to see another man carrying a long bag’’, and thus 
‘the dishonest ones of our preachers and politicians believing that 
I am of their stamp, try to embarras me by framing me up with 
the law. 

I have had to dismiss from the employ of the Association, and 
caused the arrest of many dishonest preachers and politicians, and 
now their fraternities are out for revenge. 

Poor misguided mortals! How can they, when the conscience 
and soul of a man cannot be incriminated from without? 

The Negro Ministry needs purging and with the help of God 
and the people, we shall in a short while, show to the world a new 
race by the purification of those who lead. 

I desire to say that I have a great amount of confidence in 
several of the preachers and politicians of my race today, but the 
great majority need purging, because among them we have 
gamblers, thieves, rogues, vagabonds and these are the ones who 
are fighting me at thig time. 



































a eae ee 


a a Sane 


PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 101 


CLOSING REGRET 


There has never been a Movement where the Leader has not 
suffered for the Cause, and not received the ingratitude of the 
people. I, like the rest, am prepared for the consequence, 


102 PHILOSOPHY AND OPINIONS 


NOTE 


The UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION 
referred to in this volume is an Organization of which Marcus 
Garvey is Founder and President-General. The American Head- 
quarters of this Organization is situated at 56 West 135th Street, 
New York City, New York, U.S. A. 


The following preamble to the constitution, of the Organiza- 
tion, was written by the Founder and speaks for itself :-— 


The Universal Negro Improvement Association and African 
Communities’ League is a social, friendly, humanitarian, chari- 
table, educational, institutional, constructive and expansive 
society, and is founded by persons, desiring to the utmost, to work 
for the general uplift of the Negro peoples of the world. And 
the members pledge themselves to do all in their power to con- 
serve the rights of their noble race and to respect the rights of 
all mankind, believing always in the Brotherhood of Man and the 
Fatherhood of God. The motto of the organization is: ‘‘One 
God! One Aim! One Destiny!’’ Therefore, let justice be done 
to all mankind, realizing that if the strong oppresses the weak 
confusion and discontent will ever mark the path of man, but 
with love, faith and charity towards all the reign of peace and 
plenty will be heralded into the world and the generations of 
men shall be called Blessed. 





y 
3 
* 7 
i 
Siew 
oft 
%. 
Pay 
s 
ee 
ah 
oa 
‘ 


PS RSet ements Wy Se 0 Ney 


Ei tae oe 











iit Rade ook 





SSSSSSSSSsSssssssssssssssessss 


Sx 


The Universal Negro Improvement Association 


NEEDS FUNDS 
To Carry on Its Work 





Its Aims and Objects are: 
To improve the general condition of Negroes every- 
where. 


To establish a government for Negroes in Africa 
where they will be given the opportunity to 
develop themselves. 


Send a donation to help the organization in its 
effort to carry out these objects. 


Make checks or money orders payable to 
UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT 
ASSOCIATION 
56 W. 135th Street, New York City, N. Y., U. S. A. 





In making your Will remember to bequeath some- 
thing to the organization to help in the work of 
African Redemption: | 


SSSSSSSSSSSSOSSSHSSHGHSSHSSSSSGSWPHSHSSSHOSSSSSHOHSOH SHSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSosoos 





BSSSSSSSSSS$SSSSSSSSSSSssss 








oS - 


eee) ys 7 ae 
os SA 
. eens I an 
n= ee ae = ; _ 


ee 

















BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY 


iia 


1045 8821 


All library items are subject to recall at any time. 


on 2 ¢ 201) 











—— 
= 


E eee ee ee ee 
So aon ee
