---
title: Thoughts and Sentiments on the Evil of Slavery
collection: 21-anti-colonial
region: Britain / West Africa (Fanti)
counter: the slave trade and empire
note: a formerly enslaved African’s 1787 argument against slavery
source: Internet Archive
source_url: https://archive.org/details/thoughtssentimen00cugo
language: English
license: public domain
---
Nicholas M. Williams 
IM enor 


Ethnological Collection’ { 


Boston College 
Library 























tae O UG Hoye 


‘ 


AND 


Se EFON Ti ME NN Ge 


ON THE 


a 


siyaes eae 





: i » 





SE ne uy tt a en ero mak sit) ts tate ela Tae 







| THOUGHTS anp SENTIMENTS 
| ON THE 
EVIL san wickED TRAFFIC - 
OF THE 
SLAVERY anp COMMERCE 
OF THE | 
HUMAN SPECIES, 


\ 


HUMBLY SUBMITTED TO 








“The Innazrrants of GREAT-BRITAIN, 
BY 


OTTOBAH CUGOANQO, 
A Native of 4FRICA. 








He that flealeth a man and felleth him, or maketh merchane r 
i dize of him, or if he be found in his hand: then that thief | 
me frall die. LAW OF GOD, : | 
: a 
bo D OR: ; {if 
: Wy 
aie ey oy | hi 
PRINTED IN THE YEAR ‘| 
_M.DCC.LXXXVIL. By 
j Hh 
| 





TAL TA IAG | 


{ 


eae: 








TA Ee gE Sa 


oy Sas 


SRY Mit VIG i 








THOUGHTS ano SENTIMENTS 


ON THE 


EVIL of. SLAVERY. 





One law, and one manner fhall be for you, and for 
the frranger that fojourneth with you; and there- 
fore, all things whatfoever ye would that men 
foould do to you, do ye even fo to them. 


Numb. xv. 16.—Math. vii. 12. 


S feveral learned gentlemen of diftinguifhed 
abilities, as well as eminent for their great 
humanity, liberality: and candour, have written 
various effays againft that infamous traffic of the 
African Slave Trade, carried on with the Weft- 
India planters and merchants, to the great fhame 
and difgrace of all Chriftian nations wherever it is 
admitted in any of their territories, or in any 
place or fituation amongft them; it cannot be 
. amifs that I fhould thankfully acknowledge thefe 
truly worthy and humane gentlemen with the 
warmett fenfe of gratitude, for their beneficent 
and laudable endeavours towards a total fuppref- 
fion of that infamous and iniquitous traffic of 
ftealing, kid-napping, buying, ielling, and cruel- 

ly enflaving men! re, 
es Thofe 





De a sail eos a Pe ncasa “ 


2 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

Thofe who have endeavoured to reftore to their 
fellow-creatures the common rights of nature, of 
which efpecially the poor unfortitnate Black Peo- 
ple have been fs unjuftly deprived, cannot. fail in 
meeting with the applaufe of all good men, and 
the approbation of that which will for ever 1e- 
dound to their honor; they have the warrant of 
that which is divine: Open thy mouth, judge right- 
coufly, plead the caufe of the poor and needy; for the 
liberal devifeth liberal things, and by liberal things 
foeall fiand._ And they can fay with the pious Job, 
Did not I weep for bim that was in trouble; was 
not my foul grieved for ihe poor ? 

The kind. exertions of many. benevolent and 


humane gentlemen, againft the iniquitous traffic 


of flavery and oppreffion; has been attended with 
much good to many, and. muft redound with 
great honor to themfelves, to humanity and their 
country ;. their-laudable endeavours have been 
productive of the moft beneficent effects in pre- 
venting that favage barbarity from taking place 
in free countries at-home. In this, as well as in 
many other refpects, there is one clafs of people 
(whofe virtues of probity and humanity are well 
known) who are worthy of univerfal approbation 
and imitation, becaufe, like men of honor «and 
humanity, they have jointly agreed to carry on no 


flavery and favage barbarity among them; and,. 


fince the laft war, fome mitigation of flavery has 
been obtained in fome refpective diftriéts of Ame- 
rica, though not in proportion to their own vaunt- 
ed claims of freedom ; but it is to be hoped; that 
they will yet go on to make a further and greater 
reformation. However, notwithftanding all that 
has been done and written againft it, that brutifh 


barbarity, and unparalelled injuftice, is fill care! 


ried 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 3. 


tied on toa very great extent in the colonies, and 
with an avidity as infidious, cruel and oppreffive 
as ever.. The longer that. men: continue in the 


practice of evil and wickednefs, they grow the . 


more abandoned ; for nothing in hiftory can equal. 
the barbarity and cruelty of the tortures and mur- 
ders committed under various pretences in’ mo= 
dern flavery, except the annals of the Inquifition 
and the bloody ediéts of.Popith maffacres. 

It is therefore manifeft, that fomething elfe 
' ought yet to be done; and what’ is required, is 
evidently the incumbent duty of all men of en- 
lightened underftanding, and of every man. that, 
has any claim or affinity to the name-of Chrittian,, 


that the bafe treatment which the African Slaves - 


undergo, ought to be abolifhed ; and it is more- 
over evident, that the whole, or any part of that 
iniquitous traffic of flavery, can no where, or in 
any degree, be admitted, but among thofe who 
muft eventually refign their own claim to any de- 
gree of fenfibility and humanity, for that of. bars 
barians and ruffans. 
But it would be needlefs. to arrange an hiftory 
of all the bafe treatment which the African Slaves 
are fubjected to, in order to thew the exceeding 
wickednefs and evil of that infidious traffic, as the 
whole may ecafily appear in every part, and at 
every view, to be wholly and totally inimical to 
every idea of juftice, equity, reafon and huma- 
nity. What I intend to advance againft that 
evil, criminal and wicked traffic of enflaving men, 
are only fome Thoughts and Sentiments which 
occur to me, as being obvious from the Scrip- 
tures of Divine Truth, or fuch arguments as are 
chiefly deduced from thence, with other fuch ob- 
fervations as I have been able to collect. Some 
B 2 ; of 









































4. THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


of thefe obfervations may lead into a larger field 
of confideration, than that of the African Slave . 
Trade alone; but thofe caufes from wherever 
they originate; and become the production of 
flavery, the evil effects produced by it, muft thew 
that its origin and fource is of a wicked and cri- 
minal nature. , 
No neceffity, or any fituation of men, however 
poor, pitiful and wretched they may be, can war- 
rant them to rob others, or oblige them to be- 
come thieves, becaufe they are poor, miferable 
and wretched: But the robbers of men, the kid- 
nappers, enfnarers and flave-holders, who take 
away the common rights and privileges of others 
to fupport and enrich themfelves, are univerfally 
thofe pitiful and deteftable wretches ; for the en- 
fnaring of others, and taking away their liberty 
by flavery and oppreffion, is the worft kind of 
robbery, as moft oppofite to every precept and 
injunction of the Divine Law, and contrary to 
that command which enjoins that a// men fbould 
love their neighbours as themfelves, and that they 
foould do unto others, as they would that men Jbould 
do to them. As to any other laws that flave- 
holders may make among themfelves, as refpect- 
ing flaves, they can be of no better kind, nor give 
them any better character, than what is implied 
in the common report—that there may be fome 
honefty among thieves. This may feem a harfh 
comparifon, but the parallel is fo coincident that, 
I muft fay, I can find no other way of expref- 
fing my Thoughts and Sentiments, without ma- 
king ufe of fome harfh words and comparifons 
againft the carriers on of fuch abandoned wicked- 
nefs. But, in this little undertaking, I muft 
humbly hope the impartial reader will excufe fuch 


defects 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 


defects as may arife from want of better educa- 
tion; and as to the refentment of thofe who can 
lay their cruel lafh upon the backs of .thoufands, 
for a thoufand times lefs crimes than writing 
againft their enormous wickednefs and_ brutal 
avarice, is what I may be fure to meet with. 
However, it cannot but be very. difcouraging 
to aman of my complexion in fuch an attempt 
as this, to meet with the evil afperfions of fome 
men, who fay, “ That an African is not entitled 
“< to any competent degree of knowledge, or ca- 
*‘ pable of imbibing any fentiments of probity; 
“‘ and that nature defigned him for fome inferior 
“¢ link in the chain, fitted only to be a flave.” 
But when I meet with thofe who make no {cruple 
to deal with the human fpecies, as with the beaits 
of the earth, I muft think them not only brutith, 
but wicked and bafe; and that their afperfions 
are infidious and falfe; Andif fuch men can boatt 
of greater degrees of knowledge, than any African 
is entitled to, I fhall let them enjoy all the ad- 
vantages of it unenvied, as-I fear it confifts only 
in a greater fhare of infidelity, and that of a 
blacker kind than only fkin deep. And if their 
complexion be not what I may fuppofe, it is at 
leaft the neareft in refemblance to an infernal hue. 
A good man will neither fpeak nor do as a bad 
man will; but if a man is bad. it makes no dif- 
ference whether he be a black or a white devil. 
By fome of fuch complexion, as whether black 
or white it matters not, I was early fnatched away 
from my native country, with about eighteen or 
twenty more boys and girls, as we were playing 
ina field. We lived but a few days journey from 
the coaft where we were kid-napped, and as we 
were decoyed and drove along, we were foon con- 


B 3 ducted 








6 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


ducted to a factory, and from thence, in the fa- 
fhionable way of traffic, configned to Grenada. 
Perhaps it may not be amifs to give a few re- 
marks, as fome account of myfelf, sn this tranf- 
pofition of captivity. ; 

I was born in the city of Agimaque, on the 
coaft of Fantyn; my father was a companion to 
the chief in that part of the country of Fantee, 
and when the old king died I was left in his houfe 
with his family ; foon after I was fent for by his 
‘nephew, Ambro Accafa, who fucceeded the old 
king in the chiefdom of that part of Fantee 
known by the name of Agimaque and Affinee. I 
lived with his children, enjoying peace and tran- 
quillity, about twenty moons, which, according 
to their way of reckoning time, is two years. J] 
was fent for to vifit an uncle, who lived at a con- 


_ fiderable diftance from Agimaque. The firft day 


after we fet out we arrived at Affinee, and the 
‘third day at my uncle’s habitation, where I lived 
about three months, and was then thinking of re- 
turning to my father and young companion at 
Agimaque; but by this time I had got well ac- 
quainted with fome of the children of my uncle’s 
hundreds of relations, and we were fome days too 
venturfome in going into the woods to gather fruit 
and catch birds, and fuch amufements as pleafed 
us. One day I refufed to go with the reft, being 
rather apprehenfive that fomething might happen 
to us; till one of my play-fellows faid to, me, 
becaufe you belong to the great men, you are 
afraid to venture your carcafe, or elfe of the 


bounfam, which is the devil. ‘This enraged me fo 


much, that I fet a refolution to join the reft, and 
we went into the woods as ufual; but we had not 
been above two hours before our troubles began, 
when 


“ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 7 


when feveral great ruffans came upon us fudden- 
ly, and faid we had committed a fault againft 
their lord, and we muft go and anfwer for it our- 
felves before him. 

Some of us attempted in vain to run away, but 
piftols and cutlaffes were foon introduced, threat- 
ening, that if we offered to ftir we fhould all lie 
dead on the fpot. One of them pretended to be 
more friendly than the reft, and faid, that he 
would fpeak to their lord to get us clear, and de- 
fired that we fhould follow him; we were then 
immediately divided into different, parties, and 
drove after him. We were foon led out of the 
way which we knew, and towards the evening, as 
we came in fight of a town, they told us that this 
great man of theirs lived there, but pretended it 
was too late to go and fee him that night. Next 
morning there came three other men, whofe lan- 


guage differed from ours, and {poke to fome of 


thofe who watched us all the night, but he that 
pretended to be our friend with the great man, 


and fome others, were gone away. We afked our 


keepers what thefe men had been faying to them, 
and they anfwered, that they had been afking 
them, and us together, to go and feaft with them 
that day, and that we muft put off feeing the 
great man till after; little thinking that our 
doom was fo nigh, or that thefe villains meant to 
feaft on us as their prey. We went with them 
again about half a day’s journey, and came to a 
great multitude of people, having different mufic 
playing ; and all the day after we got there, we 


were very merry with the mufic, dancing and 


finging. Towards the evening, we were again 
perfuaded that we could not get back to where 


the great man lived till next day ; and when bed- 
: time 








| : 8 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


time came,,we were feparated into different houfes. 

‘ with different people. When the next morning 
came, I afked for the men that brought me there, 
| -and for the reft of my companions; and I was 
told that they were gone to the fea fide to bring 
: home fome rum, guns and powder, and that fome 
| of my companions were gone with them, and that 
fome were gone to, the fields to do fomething 
4 or other. This gave me ftrong fufpicion that 
| there was fome treachery in the cafe, and] began 
d to think that my hopes of returning home again 
i were all over. I foon became very uneafy, not 
| knowing what to do, and refufed to eat or drink 
' for whole days together, till the man of the houfe 
told me that he would do all in his power to get > 
me back to my uncle; then I eat a little fruit 
with him, and had fome thoughts that I fhould be 
hy fought after, as I would be then miffing at home 
a about five or fix days. J enquired every day if 
: the men had come back, and for the reft of my 
companions, but could get no anfwer of any fatis- 

t faction. I was kept about fix days at this man’s 
houfe, and in the evening there was another man 
came and talked with him a good while, and I 
heard the one fay to the other he muft go, and 
the other faid the fooner the better ; that man 
came out and told me that he knew my relations 
at Agimaque, and that we mutt fet out to-morrow 
morning, and he would convey me there. . Ac- 
v cordingly we fet out next day, and travelled tll 
dark, when we came to a place where we had 
fome fupper and flept. He carried a large bag 

| with fome gold duft, which he faid he had to buy 

‘i fome goods at the ‘fea fide to take with him to 


Ny Agimaque. Next day we travelled on, and in 
7 the evening came to a town, where | faw feveral 
te white 
I, 
| ies 
Cy 
ee. 
ae . 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY.  ‘ 


defects as may arife from want of better educa- 
tion; and as to the refentment of thofe who can 
lay their cruel lafh upon the backs of thoufands, 
for a thoufand times lefs crimes than writing 
againft their enormous wickednefs and_ brutal 
avarice, is what I may be fure to meet with. 
However, it cannot but be very. difcouraging 
to aman of my complexion in fuch an attempt 
as this, to meet with the evil afperfions of fome 
men, who fay, “ That an African is not entitled 
** to any competent degree of knowledge, ,or ca- 
** pable of imbibing any fentiments of probity; 
** and that nature defigned him for fome inferior 
‘* link in the chain, fitted only to be a flave.” 
But when I meet with thofe who make no {cruple 
to deal with the human fpecies, as with the beafts 
of the earth, I muft think them not only brutith, 
but wicked and bafe; and that their afperfions 


are infidious and falfe; Andif fuch men can boatt- 


of greater degrees of knowledge, than any African 
is entitled to, I fhall let them enjoy all the ad- 
vantages of it unenvied, as_I fear it confifts only 
ina greater fhare of infidelity, and that of a 
blacker kind than only fkin deep. And if their 
_ complexion be not what I may fuppofe, it is at 
leaft the neareft in refemblance to an infernal hue. 
A good man will neither fpeak nor do as a bad 
man will; but ifa man is bad. it makes no dif- 
ference whether he be a black or a white devil. 
By fome of fuch complexion, as whether black 
or white it matters not, I was early fnatched away 
from my native courtry, with about eighteen or 
twenty more boys and girls, as we were playing 
ina field, We lived but a few days journey from 
the coaft where we were kid-napped, and as we 


were decoyed and drove along, we were foon con- 
. B 3 ducted 








‘A 
} 





40 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


we continued feveral days in fight of our native 
Jand; but I could find no good perfon to give any 
information of my fituation to Accafa at Agima- 
que. And when we found ourfelves at laft taken 
away, death was more preferable than life, and a 
plan was concerted amongft us, that we might 
burn and blow up the fhip, and to perifh all to- 
gether in the flames; but we were betrayed by 
one of our own countrywomen, who flept with 
fome of the head men of the fhip, for it was com- 
mon for the dirty filthy failors to take the African 
women and lie upon their bodies; but the men 
were chained and pent up in holes. It was the 
women and boys which were to burn the fhip, 
with the approbation and groans of the reft; 
though that was prevented, the difcovery was 
likewife a cruel bloody f{cene. 

But it would be needlefs to give a defcription 
of all the horrible fcenes which we faw,.and the 
bafe treatment which we met with in this dread- 
ful captive fituation, as the fimilar cafes of thou- 
fands, which fuffer by this infernal traffic, are well 
known. Let it fuffice to fay, that I was thus loft. 
to my dear indulgent parents and relations, and 
they tome. All my help was cries and tears, and 
thefe could not avail; nor fuffered long, till one 
fucceeding woe, and dread, {welled up another. 
Brought from a ftate of innocence and freedom, 
and, in a barbarous and cruel manner, conveyed 
to a itate of horror and flavery: This abandoned 
fituation may be eafier conceived than defcribed. 
From the time that I was kid-napped and con- 
ducted to a faétory, and from thence in the brut- 
ifh, bafe, but fafhionable way of traffic, confign- 
ed to Grenada, the grievous thoughts which I 
then felt, ftill pant in my heart; thotgh-my fears 

Np and 





“ON. THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 7 


when feveral great ruffians came upon us fudden- 
ly, and faid we had committed a fault againft 
their lord, and we muft go and anfwer for it our- 
felves before him. 

Some of us attempted in vain to run away, but 
piftols and cutlaffes were foon introduced, threat- 
ening, that if we offered to ftir we fhould all lie 
dead on the fpot. One of them pretended to be 
more friendly than the reft, and faid, that he 
would fpeak to their lord to get us clear, and de- 
fired that we fhould follow him; we were then 
immediately divided into different. parties, and 
drove after him. We were foon led out of the 
way which we knew, and towards the evening, as 
we came in fight of a town, they told us that this 
great man of theirs lived there, but pretended it 
was too late to go and fee him that night. Next 
morning there came three other men, whofe lan- 
guage differed from ours, and fpoke to fome of 
thofe who watched us all the night, but he that 
pretended to be our friend with the great man, 


and fome others, were gone away. We afked our 


keepers what thefe men had been faying to them, 
and they anfwered, that they had been afking 
them, and us together, to go and feaft with them 
that day, and that we muft put off feeing the 
great man till after; little thinking that our 
doom was fo nigh, or that thefe villains meant to 
feaft on us as their prey. We went with them 
again about half a day’s journey, and came to a 
great multitude of people, having different mufic 
playing ; and all the day after we got there, we 
were very merry with the mufic, dancing and 
finging. Towards the evening, we were again 
perfuaded that we could not get back to where 


the great man lived till next day ; and when bed- 
it : time 









































I2 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
in this pitiful, diftreffed and horrible fituation, 


o with all the brutifh bafenefs and barbarity attend- 
' ing it, could not but fill my little mind with 
t horror and indignation. But I muft own, to the 


fhame of my own countrymen, that I was firft 
kid-napped and betrayed by fome of my own 
complexion, who were the firft caufe of my exile 
and flavery ; but if there were no buyers there 
would be no fellers. So far as I can remember, 
fome of the Africans in my country keep flaves, 
which they take in war, or for debt; but thofe 
which they keep are well fed, and sood care taken 
-of them, and treated well; SGA. as to their 
cloathing, they differ according to the cuftom of 
the country. But I may fafely fay, that all the 
poverty and mifery that any of the inhabitants of 
Africa meet with among themfelves, is far inferior 
to thofe inhofpitable regions of mifery which they 
meet with in the Weft-Indies, where their hard- 
hearted overfeers have neither regard to the laws 
of God, nor the life of their fellow-men. _ 
Thanks be to Ged, I was delivered from Gre- 
nada, and ' that horrid brutal flavery.—A gentle- 
man coming to England, took me for his fervant, 
and brought me away, where I foon found my 
fituation become more agreeable. After coming 


had a ftrong defire to learn, and getting what ale 
fiftance I could, I applied myfelf to learn reading 
and writing, which foon became my recreation, 
pleafure, and delight ; and when my. mafter per- 
ceived that i could write fome, he fent me to a 


to England, and feeing others write and read, I 


i proper {chool for that purpofe to learn. Since, | 
i> have endeavoured to improve my mind in read- 


ing, and have fought to get all the intelligence I 
Soul in my fituation of life, towards the ftate of , 


a f my 





ee? eee oe EES, cae IG LOE ere 


ON THE EVIL.OF SLAVERY. .9 


white people, which made me afraid that they 
would eat me, according to our notion as children 
in the inland parts ot the country. This made 
me reft very uneafy all the night, and next morn- 
ing I had fome victuals brought, defiring me to 
eat and make hafte, as my guide and kid-napper 
told me that he had to go to the caftle with fome 
company that were going there, as he had told me 
before, to get fome goods. After I was ordered 
out, the horrors I foon faw and felt, cannot be 
well defcribed; I faw many of my miferable coun- 
trymen chained two and two, fome hand-cuffed, 
and fome with their hands tied behind. We were 
conducted along by a guard, and when we arrived 
at the caftle, I afked my guide what I was brought 
there for, he told me to learn the ways of the 
browfow, that is the white faced people. I faw 
_ him take a gun, a piece of cloth, and fome lead 
for me, and then he told me that he muft now 
leave me there, and went off. This made mecry 
bitterly, but I was foon conduéted to a prifon, 
for three days, where I heard the groans and cries 
of many, and faw fome of my fellow-captives. 
But when q veffel arrived to conduct us away to the 
fhip, it was a moft horrible fcene; there was no- 
thing to be heard but rattling of chains, fmack- 
ing of whips, and the groans and cries of our fel- 
low-men. Some would not ftir from the ground, 
when they were lafhed and beat in the moft horri- 
ble manner. I have forgot the name of this in- 
fernal fort ; but we were taken in the fhip that 
came for us, to another that was ready to fail from 
Cape Coaft. When we were put into the fhip, 
we {aw feveral black merchants coming on board, 
but we were all drove into our holes, and not fuf- 
fered to fpeak to any of them. In this fituation 

| we 





eens 














BEE ii) < OE Ip 








14 THOUGHTS,AND SENTIMENTS 


that ineftimable compilation of books, the Bible ? 
And, O what a treafure to have, and one of the 
greateft advantages to be able to read therein, 
and a divine bleffing to underftand *! 

But, to return to my fubject, I begin with the 
Curfory Remarker. This man ftiles himfelf a 
friend to the Weft-India colonies and their inha- 
bitants, like Demetrius, the filverfmith, a man 
of fome confiderable abilities, feeing their craft 
in danger, a craft, however, not fo innocent and 
juftifiable as the making of fhrines for Diana, 
though that. was bafe and wicked enough to en- 
flave the minds of men with fuperftition and ido- 
latry; but his craft, and the gain of thofe craftf- 
men, confifts in the enflaving both foul and body 
to the cruel idolatry, and. moft abominable fer- 
vice and. flavery, to the idol of curfed avarice: 
And as he finds fome difcoveries of their wicked 
traffic held up in a light where truth and -faéts are 
fo clearly feen, as none but the moft defperate 
villain would dare to,obftruct or oppofe, he there- 
fore fallies forth with all the defperation of an 


? 

* The jultly celebrated Dr. Young, in recommending this 
divine book of heavenly wifdom to the giddy and thoughtiefs 
world, in his Night Thoughts, has the following elegant 
lines : 

Perhaps thou’dft langh but at thine own expence, 
This counfel ftrange fhould I prefume to give; 
Retire and read thy Bible to be gay; 

There truths abound of fov’reign aid to peace. 
Ah, do not prize it lefs becaufe in{pired. 
Read and revere the facred page; a page, 
Where triumphs immortality ; a page, 

Which not the whole creation could produce ; 
Which not the conflagration fhall deitroy ; 

In nature’s ruin not one letter’s loft, 

*Tis printed in the mind of gods for ever, 
Angels and men affent to what I fing! 


Utopian 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. If 


and tears have long fince fubfided. And yet it is 
{till grievous to think that thoufands more have 
fuffered in fimilar and greater diftrefs, under the 
hands of barbarous robbers, and mercilefs tafk- 
matters ; and that many even now are fuffering in 
all the extreme bitternefs of erief and woe, that 
no language can defcribe The cries of* fome, 
and the fight of their mifery, may be feen and 
heard afar; but the deep founding groans of 
thoufands, and the great fadnefs of their mifery 
and woe, under the heavy load of oppreffions and 
calamities inflicted upon them, are fuch as can 
only be diftinétly known to the ears of Jehovah 
Sabaoth. ; 

This Lord of Hofts, in his great Providence, 
and in great mercy to me, made a way for my 
deliverance from Grenada.—Being in this dread- 
ful captivity and horrible flavery, without any 
hope of deliverance, for about eight or nine 
months, beholding the moft dreadful fcenes of 
mifery and cruelty, and feeing my miferable com- 
' panions often cruelly lafhed, and as it were cut 
to pieces, for the moft trifling faults; this made 
me often tremble and weep, butI efcaped better 
than many of them. For eating a piece of fugars _ 
cane, fome were cruelly lafhed, or ftruck over the 
face to knock their teeth out. ‘Some of the 
ftouter ones, I fuppofe often reproved, and grown 
hardened and ftupid with many cruel beatings and 
lafhings, or perhaps faint and preffed with hunger 
and hard labour, were often committing trefpaffes 
of this kind, and when detected, they met with 
exemplary punifhment. Some told me they had 
their teeth pulled out to deter others, and to pre- 
vent them from eating any cane in future. Thus 
{eeing my miferable companions and countrymen | 

iN 











NR I a 


16 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


cafe, according to the proverb, there may be fome 
honor among thieves; but thefe are the only peo- 
ple in the world that ought to fuffer fome punith- 
ment, imprifonment or flavery; their external 
complexion, whether black or white, fhould be 
no excufe for them to do evil. Being aware of 
this, perhaps he was afraid that fome of his 
friends, the great. and opulent banditti of flave- 
holders in the weftern part of the world, might be 
found guilty of more atrocious and complicated 
crimes, than even thofe of the highwaymen, the 
robberies and the petty larcenies committed in 
England. Therefore, to make the beft of this 
fad dilemma, he brings in a ludicrous inveétive 
comparifon that it would be “ an event which 
“would uadoubtedly furnith a new and pleafant 
** compartment to that well known and moft de- 
*‘ letable print, call’d, The world turn’d up fide 
** down, in which the cook is roafted by the pig, 
“the man faddled by the horfe,” &c. If he 
means that the complicated banditties of pirates; 
thieves, robbers, oppreffors and enflavers of men; 
are thofe cooks and men that would be roafted 
and faddled, it certainly would be no unpleafant 
fight to fee them well roafted, faddled and bri- 
dled too; and no matter by whom, whether he 
terms them pigs, horfes or affes. But there is 
not much likelihood of this filly monkeyifh com- 
parifon as yet being verified, in bringing the opu- 
lent pirates and thieves to condign punifhment, 
fo that he could very well bring it in to turn it 
off with a grin. However, to make ufe of his 
words, it would be a moft delectable fight, when 
thieves and robbers get the upper fide of the 
world, to fee them turned down; and I fhould 
ot interrupt his mirth, to fee him laugh at his 

: : own 


‘ 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. ¥3 ° 


my brethren and countrymen in complexion, and » 
of the miferable firuation of thofe who are ‘bar- 
baroufly fold into captivity, and unlawfully held 
in flavery. | 

But, among other obfervations, one great duty 
F owe to Almighty God, (the thankful acknow- 
ledgement I would not omit for any confidera- 
tion) that, although I have been brought away 
from my native country, in that torrent of rob- 
bery and wickednefs, thanks be to God for his 
good providence towards me; I have both ob- 
tained liberty, and acquired the great advantages 


“of fome little learning, in being able to read and 


write, and, what is ftill infinitely of greater ad- 
vantage, I truft, to know fomething of Hrm who 
is that God whofe providence rules over all, and who 
is the only Potent One that rules in the nations over 
the children of men. It is unto Him, who is the 
Prince of the Kings of the earth, that I would give 
all thanks. And, in fome manner, I may fay 
with Jofeph, as he did with refpe& to the evil 
intention of his brethren, when they fold him 
into Egypt, that whatever evil intentions and bad 
motives thofe infidious robbers had in carrying — 
me away from my native country and friends, I 
truft, was what the Lord intended for my good, 
In this refpect, 1 am highly indebted to many of 
the good people of England for learning and prin- 
ciples unknown to the people of my native coun- 
try. But, above all, what have I obtained from 
the Lord Ged of Hofts, the God of the Chrifti- 


ans! in that divine revelation of the only true 


God, and the Saviour of men, what a treafure of 


wifdom and blefflings are involved? How won- 
derful is the divine goodnefs difplayed in thofe 
invaluable books the Old and New Teftaments, 

that 














¥8 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


perior to that of beafts; and, in like manner, 
whatever circumftances poor freemen may be in, 
their fituation is much fuperior, beyond any pro- 
portion, to that of the hardfhips and cruelty of 
modern flavery. But where can the fituation of 
‘any freeman be fo bad as that of a flave; or, 
_ could fuch be found, or even worfe, as he would 
have it, what would the comparifon amount to ? 
Would it plead for his craft of flavery and op- 
preflion? Or, rather, would it not cry aloud for 
fome redrefs, anc what every well regulated fo- 
ciety of men ought to hear and confider, that 
none fhould fuffer want or be oppreffed among 
them? And this feems to be pointed out by the 
circumftances which he defcribes; that it is the 
great duty, and ought to be the higheft ambition 
of all governors, to order and eftablifh fuch po- 
licy, andin fuch a wife manner, that every thing 
fhould be fo managed, as to be conducive to the 
moral, temporal and eternal welfare of every in- 
dividual from the loweft degree to the higheft ; 
and the confequence of this would“be, the har- 
mony, happinefs and good profperity of the 
whole community. 

But this crafty author has alfo, in defence of 
his own or his employer’s craft in the Britifh 
Weft-India flavery, given fundry comparifons 
and defcriptions of the treatment of flaves in the 
French iflands and fettlements in the Weft-Indies 
and America. And, contrary to what is the true 
cafe, he would have it fuppofed that the treat- 
ment of the flaves in the former, is milder than 
’ the latter; but. even in ‘this, unwarily for his 
own craft of flavery, all that he has advanced, 
‘can only add matter for its confutation, and 
ferve to heighten. the ardour and with of every 

| : generous 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. rs 


Utopian affailant, to tell lies by a virulent con- 
tradiction, of facts, and with falfe afperfions en- 
-deavour to calumaiate the worthy and judicious 
effayeit of that difcovery, a man, whofe character 
is irreproachable. . By thus artfully fuppofing, if 
he could bring the reputation of the author, who 
has difcovered fo much of their iniquitous traffic, 
into difpute, his work would fall and be lefs 
regarded. However, this virulent craftfman has 
done no great merit to his caufe and the credit of 
that infamous craft; at the appearance of truth, 
his underftanding has. got the better of his ava- 
rice and infidelity, fo far; as to draw the’ follow- 
ing conceffion: ‘I fhall not: be fo far mifunder- 
** ftood, by the candid and judicious part of man- 
“ kind, as to be ranked among the advocates of 
*< flavery, as I moft fincerely join Mr, Ramfay *,; 
“© and every other man of fenfibility, in hoping 
“¢ the bleffings of freedom will, in due time, be 
** equally diffufed over the whole globe.” 

By this, ic would feem that he was a little 
afhamed of his craftfmen, and would not like to 
be ranked or appear amongft them. But as long 
as there are any hopes of gain to be made by thag 
infidious craft, he can join with them well enough; 
and endeavour to juftify them in that.moft aban- 
doned traffic of buying, felling, and enflaving 
men. He finds fault with a plan for punifhing 
robbers, thieves and vagabonds, who diltrefs their 
neighbours by their thrift, robbery and. plunder, 
without regarding any laws human or divine, ex- 
cept the rules of their own fraternity, and in that 


* The worthy and judicious author of ‘* An Effay on the 
** Treatment and Converfion of the African Slaves in the 
** Britith Sugar Colonies. : | 


cafe, 






























20 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


fare, is not to be regarded. He will exclaim 
againft the teachers of obedience to it; and tells 
us, that the poor, and the opprefied, and the 
heavy burdened-flave, fhould not lay down’ his 
load that day, but appropriate thefe hours of fa- 
cred reft to labour in fome bit of ufeful ground. 
His own words are, ‘‘ to dedicate the unappro- 
“* priated hours of Sunday to the cultivation of 
‘* this ufeful fpot, he is brought up to believe 
‘© would be the worft of fins, and that the fab- 
‘© bath is a day of abfolute and univerfal reft is a 
‘* truth he hears frequently inculcated by the cu- 
‘* rate of the parith,” &c. But after bringing it 
about in this round-about way and manner, what- 
ever the curate has to fay of it as a truth, he 
would have us by no means to regard. This may 
ferve as a {pecimen of his crafty and deteftable 
production, where infidelity, falfe afperfions,. vi- 
rulent calumnies, and lying contradiétions abound 
throughout. I fhall only refer him to that de- 
{cription which he meant for another, as moft 
applicable and beft fuited for himfelf; and fo 
long as he does not renounce his craft, as well as 


- to be fomewhat afhamed of his craftfmen and 


their infenfibility, he may thus ftand as defcribed 
by himfelf: ‘* A man of warm imagination (but 
‘* ftrange infatuated unfeeling fenfibility) to paint 
*‘ things not as they really are, but as his rooted 
“« prejudices reprefent them, and even to fhut his © 
** eyes againft the convictions afforded him by his 
** own fenfes.” 

But fuch is the infenfibility of men, when their 
own craft of gain is advanced by the flavery and. 
oppreffion of others, that after all the laudable 
exertions of the truly virtuous and humane, to- 
wards extending ‘the beneficence of liberty and 

freedom 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY, I7 


own invective monkeyith comparifon as long as 
he pleafes. ; | 
But again, when he draws a comparifon of the 
many hardfhips that the poor in Great-Britain 
and Ireland labour under, as well as many of 
thofe in ot \er countries ; that their various .dif= 
treffes are worfe than the Weft India flaves—It 
may be true, in part, that fome of them fuffer 
greater hardfhips than many of the flaves; but, 
bad as it is, the pooreft in England would not 
change their fituation for that of flaves.. And 
there may be fome mafters, under various cir- 
cumitances, worfe off than their fervants; but 
they would not change their own fituation for 
theirs: Nor as little would a rich man with to 
change his fituation of affluence, for that of a 
beggar: and fo, likewife, no freeman, however 
poor and diftreffing his fituation may be, would 
. refign his liberty for that of a flave, in the fitua- 
tion of a horfe or a dog. The cafe of the poor, 
whatever their hardthips may be, in free coun- 
tries, is widely different from that of the Wett- 
India flaves. For the flaves, like animals, are - 
bought and fold, and dealt with as their capri- 
cious owners may think fit, even in torturing and 
tearing them to pieces, and wearing them out 
with hard labour, hunger‘and oppreffion ;- and 
fhould the death: of -a flave enfue by fome other 
more violent way than that which is commonly 
the death of thoufands, and tens of thoufands in 
the end, the haughty tyrant, in that cafe, has 
only to pay a {mall fine for the murder and death. 
of his flave. _ he brute creation-in general may 
fare better than man, and fome dogs may refufe: 
_ the crumbs that the diftrefled poor would be glad 
of ; but the natire and fituation ef man is far fu-. 
Cc perior 














22 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

of them) be what it will, it is not the intention of 
thofe who bring them away to make them better 
by it ; ror is the defign of flave-holders of any 
Other inténtion, but that they may ferve them as 
a kind of éngines and beafts of burden’; that — 
theit Own'eafe and profit may be advanced, by a 
fet of poor helptefs men and women, whom they 
defpife ‘and rank with brutes, ‘and keep them in 
perpetual flavery, both themfelves and children, 
and merciful death is the only releafe from their 
toil. By the benevolence of fome, a few may 
ot their, liberty, and by their own induftry and 
ingenuity, may acquire fome learning, mechani- 
cal trades, or ufeful bufinefs ; and {ome may be 
brought away by different gentlemen to free 
countries, where they get their liberty, but no 
thanks to flave-holders for it. But amoneft thofe 
who get their liberty, like all other ignorant 
men, are generally more corrupt in their morals, 
than they poffibly could have been among ft their _ 
6wn people in Africa; for, being moftly amongtt 
the wicked and apoftate Chriftians, they fooner 
learn théir oaths and blafphemies, and their evil 
ways, than any thing elfe.. Some few, indeed, 
May eventuaily arrive at fome knowledge of the 
Chriftiah religion, and the great advantages of it. 
Such was the cafe of Ukawfaw Groniofaw, ‘an 
African prince, who lived in England. He was 
along time in a ftate of gteat poverty and dif- 
trefs, and muft have died, at one time for want, 


if a‘ good and charitable Attorney had not fup- 


orted him. He was long after in a very poor 
tate, but he would not have given his faith in 
the Chriftian religion, in exchange for all the 
kingdoms of Africa, if they could have been 
given to him, in place of his poverty, we im 
n 


»- 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 19 


/ generous mind, that the whole fhould be abo- 


lifhed. An equal degree of enormity found in 
one place, cannot juitify crimes of as great or 
greater enormity committed |in another. The 
various depredations committed by robbers and 
plunderers, on different parts of the globe, may 
not be all equally alike bad, but their evil and 
malignancy, in every appearance and fhape, can 
only hold up to view the juft obfervation, that 

Virtue berfelf hath fuch peculiar mein, — 

Vice, to be hated, needs but to be seen. 
The farther and wider that the difcovery and 
Knowledge of fuch an enormous evil, as the bafe 
and villainous treatment and flavery which the 
poor unfortunate Black People meet with, is 
{pread and made known, the cry for juftice, even 
virtue lifting up her voice, mutt rife the: louder 
and higher, for the feale of equity and juftice to 
be lifted up in their defence. And doth not wif- 
dom cry, and underftanding put forth ber voice? 


But who will regard the voice and hearken to the 


ery? Not the fneaking advocates for flavery, 
though a little afhamed of their craft; like the 
monftrous crocodile weeping over their prey 
with fine conceffions (while gérging their own 
rapacious appetite) to hope for univerfal freedom 
taking place over the globe: Not thofe inebri- 
ated with avarice and infidelity, who hold in de- 


fiance every regard due to the divine law, and 


who endeavour all they can to deftroy and take 
away the natural and common rights and privi- 
leges of men. Not the infolent and crafty author 
for flavery and oppreffion, who would have us to 
believe, that thé benign command of God in ap- 
pointing the feventh day for a fabbath of reft tor 


the good purpofes of our prefent and eternal wel- 


ae : vo fine 


_ 








24 .THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


flavery is an evil of the firft magnitude, anda 
moft horrible iniquity to traffic with flaves and 
fouls of men; and an evil, forry. I am, that it fill 
fubfifis, and more.aftonifhing to think, that it is 
an iniquity committed amongft Chriftians, and 
contrary to all the genuine principles of Chritti- 
anity, and-yet carried on by ‘men denominated 
thereby. 


In a Chriftian zxra, in dana where Chriftiani- 


‘ty is planted, where every one might expedt to 


behold: the flourifhing growth of every virtue, 
extending their harmonious branches with uni- 
verfal philanthropy wherever they came 3 but, 
on the contrary, almoft nothing: elfe is to be feen 
abroad but the bramble of ruffians, barbarians 
and flave-holders, grown up to a powerful luxu- 
fiance, 11» wickednefs. 1 cannot but with, for 
the honor of Chriftianity, that the bramble grown 
up amongft them, was known to the~ heathen 
nations by a different name, for. fure the depre- 
dators, robbers and en{narers of men can never 
be Chriftians, but ought to be held as the abhor- 
ence of ali men, and the abomination of all man- 
kind, whether Chriftians or heathens. Evéry man 
of any fenfibility, whether: he be a Chriftian or 
an heathen, if he has any difcernment at all, mutt 
think, that.for any man, or any clafs of men, to - 
deal with their fellow-creatures as with the beafts 
of the field; or to account them as fuch; how- 
ever ignorant they may be, and in whatever fitu- 
ation, or, wherever they may find them, and 
whatever country or complexion they may be of, 
that thofe men, who are the procurers and hold- 
ers of flaves, are the greateft villains in the world. 
And furely thofe men mutt be loft to all fenfibili- 
ty themfelves, who can think that the ftealing, 
YRVER robbing, 





DM miie Lites ote RMS en ® eo oe, ae AER ERG RRORRTO RCE pe tects ote 


> ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 21, 


freedom to the much degraded and unfortunate 
Africans, which is the common right and privi-, 
lege of all men, in every thing that is juft, iaw- 
ful and confiftent, we find the principles of juftice 
and equity, not only oppofed, and every duty in 
religion and humanity. lett unregarded ; but that 
unlawful traffic of dealing with our fellow-crea-. 
tures, as with the beafts of the earth, . ftill carried 
on with as great affiduity as ever; and that the 
infidious piracy of procuring and holding flaves 
is countenanced and fupported by the govern- 
ment of fundry Chriftian nations. . This feems to 
be. the fafhionable way of getting riches, but very 
difhonourable ; in doing this, the flave-holders 
are meaner and bafer than the African flaves, for: 
while they fubjeét and, reduce, them to a degree 
with brutes, they feduce themfelves to a. degree 
with devils. ; eee 

‘«* Some pretend that the Africans, in general, 
‘* are a fet of poor, ignorant, difperfed, unfoci- 
‘* able people ; and that they think it no crime to 
‘* fell one another, and even their own wives and 
‘* children ; therefore they bring them away toa 
‘* fituation where many of them,may. arrive to 2 
‘* better ftate than ever they could obtain in their 
«‘ own native country.” This fpecious pretence 
is without any fhadow of juftice and truth, and, 
if the argument was eventrue, it could afford no 
juft and warrantable matter for any fociety of 
men to hold flaves. But the argument is falfe ; 
there can.be no ignorance, difperfion, or unfoct- 
ablenefs fo found among them, which can_ be 
made better by bringing them away to a ftate of 
a degree equal to that of a cow or a horfe. i 

But let their ignorance in fome things (in 
which the Europeans have, greatly the advantage 

Cs : 3 


3 of 











26 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


ropean market, and fold. They have a great 
averfion to murder, or even in taking away the 
lives of thofe which they judge guilty of crimes s 
and, therefore, they prefer difpofing of them 
otherwife better than killing them *. This gives 
their merchants and procurers of flaves a powef 
to travel a great way into the interior parts of the 
country to buy fuch as are wanted to be difpofed 
of. Thefe flave-procurers are a fet of as great 
villains as any in the world. They often fteal and 
kidnap many more than they bay at firft, if they 
ean meet with them by the way; and they have 
only their certain boundaries‘ to go to, and fell 
them from one to another; fo that if they are 
fought after and detected, the thieves are feldom 
found, and the others only pleadthat they bought . 
them fo and fo, | Thefe ‘kidnappers and flave- 
‘procurers, called merchants,’ are ‘a. fpecies: of 
African villains, which are’ greatly corrupted, 
and even viciated by their intercourfe with the 
Europeans; but,’ wicked and barbarous as they 
certainly. ate, I can hardly think, if they 
knew what horrible barbarity they were fending 
their fellow-creatures to, that they would do 
it: But the artful Europeans have fo deceived 
them, that they are bought by their inventions 
of merchandize, and beguiled into it by their 
artifice ; for the Europeans, at their factories, in 
fome various manner, have always kept ‘ome as 
fervants to thém, and with gaudy cloaths, ina 


* It may be true, that fome of the flaves tranfported from 
Africa, may have committed crimes in their own: country, 
that require fome flavery as 2 punifhment; but, according te 
the laws of equity and juftice, they ought to become free, as 
foon as their labowr has paid for their purchafe in the Weit- 
indies of elfewhere, ; aiitga 


ey 


X 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERYS 23 
And fuch was A. Morrant in America. Whena 
boy, he could ftroll away into a defart, and 
prefer the fociety of wild beafts to the abfurd 
Chriitianity of his mother’s houfe. He was con- 
duéted to the king of the Cherokees, who, ina 
miraculous manner, was induced by him to em- 
brace the Chriftian faith.. This Morrant: was in 


the Britifh fervice laft war, and his royal convert; © 


the king of the Cherokee Indians, accompanied 
General Clinton at the fiege of Charles- Town. 


_ Thefe; and all fuch, I hope thowfands, as meet - 


with the knowledge and grace of the Divine cle- 
mency, are brought forth quite contrary to the 
end and intention of. all flavery, and, in general; 
of all flave-holders too. And fhould it pleafe the 
Divine goodnefs to vifit fome of the poor dark 
Africans, even inthe brutal ftall of flawery, and 
from thence to iftal them among the princes of 
his grace, and toinveft them with a robe of ho- 
nor that will hang about their necks for ever ; 
but who can then fuppofe, that it will be well 
pleafing unto him to find them fubjedted there in 
that dejeéted ftate ? Or can the flave-holders think 
that the Univerfal Father and Sovereign of Man- 
kind will be well pleafed with them, for the bru- 
tal tranfgreffion of his law, in bowing down the 
necks of thofe to the yoke of their cruel bondage ? 
Sovereign goodnefs may eventually vafit fome 
men even ina ftate of flavery, but their flavery 
is not the caufe of that event and benignity ; and 
therefore, fhould fome event of good ever hap- 
pen to fome men fubjeéted to flavery, that can 
plead nothing for men to do evil. that good may 
come; and fhould it apparently happen from 
thenee, it is neither fought for nor defigned by 
the-enflavers of men. But. the whole bufinefs of 
C 3 flavery 














28 THOUGHTS'AND SENTIMENTS 


and nothing can diftrefs them more, than to part 
with any of their relations and friends.. Such are 
the tender feelings of. parents. for their children, 


that, for the lofs of a child, they feldom can. be 
rendered happy, even with the intercourfe and 


enjoyment) of their friends, for years. For any 
aman to think.that-it fhould. be otherwife, when 
he may fee a thoufand inftances of a natural in- 
ftinct, even in the brute creation, where they 
havea fympathetic. feeling for their offspring; it 
muit be great want of confideration not to think, 
that much more. than meerly what is natural to 


animals, fhould.in a higher degree be implanted 


in the breaft.of every part-of the rational creation 
of man... And,what man of feeling can help la- 
menting thelofs. of parents, friends, liberty, and 


perhaps. property and other ,valuable and) dear 


connections. ):~"Ehofe ; people. annually brought 
‘away. from Guinea, are born, as free, and. are 
brought up with’as great a predilection for their 
wn country, freedom and liberty, as the. fons 
and daughters. of fair Britain. Their free fub- 


jects .are-trained up to.a kindof military fervice,; 


notfo much by the defire of the chief, as by their 


own, voluntary. inclination. ;; It is looked upon as 


the greateft refpect they can fhew to their king, 
to,ftand. up for his,and their own defence in time 
of need... ‘Their. different chieftains; which bear 
a reliance on the great chief, or king, exercife a 
kind of government fomething like that feudal 
inftitution which prevailed fome time in Scotland, 
In this refpect, though the common people are 
free, they often fuffer by the villainy of their 
different chieftains, and by the wars and feuds 
which happen among them. Neverthelefs their 


. freedom and rights are.as dear to them, as thofe 


privileges 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERYS 26 
robbing, enflaving, and murdering of. men‘can 
be'no crimes; but the holders of men in flavery 
are at the head of all thefe oppreffions and crimes, 
And, therefore, however unfenfible they may be 
_of-it now, and however long they may laugh. at 

the calamity of others, if they do:not repent of 
their evil way, and the wickednefs of their do- 
ings, by keeping and holding» their fellow-crea- 
tures in flavery, and trafficking with them as 
with the brute creation, and to give up and fur- 
render that evil traffic, with anawful abhorrence 
of it, that this may be averred, if they do not, 
and if they can think, they muft and cannot 
otherwife butiexpect in one day at laft, to meet 
with the full-ftroke of the long fufpended ven- 
geance of sheaven;.when death will cut them 
down to a flate-as:‘mean as that of the moft ab- 
jected flave, and: to. a'very eminent danger ofa 
far more dreadful fate: hereafter, when they have 
the juft,reward of their iniquities to meet: with. 

+ And now,:as: to ‘the Africans. being» difperfed 
and :unfociable; if it was fo,:that could be no war= 
rant for the Europeans to enflave them; and even 
though they may have many different feuds and 
bad practices. among them, the continent of 
Africa-is of vaft extent, and the numerous inha- 
bitants are divided into feveral kingdoms and 
principalities, which are governed by their re- 
ipective kings and princes, and thofe are abfo- 
lutely maintained by their free fubjeéts. Very 
few nations make flaves of any of thofe under 
their government ; but fuch as are taken prifon- 
ers of war from their neighbours, are generally 
kept in that fate, until they can exchange and 
difpofe of them otherwife ; and towards the weft 
 coaft they are generally procured for the Eu- 
ropean 











30 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

when rightly confidered, teach, is, that no man 
ought to enflave another; and fome, who have 
been rightly guided thereby, have made. noble 
defences for the univerfal natural rights and pri- 
vileges of all men. But in this cafe, when the 
learned take neither revelation nor reafon for 


- their guide, they fall into as great, and worfe er- 


rors, than thé unlearned; for they only make 
ufe of that fyftem of Divine wifdom, which 
fhould guide them into truth, when they can 
find or pick out any thing that will fuit their 
purpofe, or that they can pervert to fuch—the 
very means of leading themfelves and others into 
error. And, in confequence thereof, the pre- 
tences that fome men make ufe of for holding of 
flaves, muft be evidently the groffeft.perverfion 
of reafon, as well as an inconfiftent and diaboli- 
eal ufe of the facred writings. For it muft be a 
firange perverfion of reafon, and a wrong ufe or 
difbelief of the facred writings, when any thing 
found there is fo perverted by them, and fet up 


- as a precedent and rule for men to commit wick- 
_ednefs. They had better have no reafon, and no 


belief in the {criptures, and make no ufe of them 
at all, than only to believe, and make ufe of that 
which leads them into the moft abominable. evil 
and wickedneds of dealing unjuftly with their fel- 
low men. 

But this will appear evident to all men that be- 
lieve the fcriptures, that every reafon neceffary is 
given that they fhould be believed; and, in this 
cafe, that they afford us this information : ‘* That 
** all mankind did {pring from one original, and 


€that there are no different fpecies among men. 


«© For God who inade the world, hath made of 
“* one blood all the nations of men that dwell on 
Ae acer ' hail 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 29 


gay manner, as decoy ducks to deceive others, 
and to tell them that they want many more to go 
over the fea, and be as they are. So im that re 
— fpect, wherein it may be faid that they will fell 
one another, they are only enfnared and enlift- 
ed to be fervants, kept like fome of thofe which 
they fee at the faCtories, which, for fome gew~ 
gaws, as prefents given to themfelves and friends, 
they are thereby enticed to 90’; and fomething 
after the fame manner that Eaft-India foldiers are 
procured in Britain; and thé inhabitants here, 
Juft‘as much fell themfelves, and one another, as 
they do ; and the kid-nappers here, and the flave= 
procurets in Africa, are much alike: But many 
other barbarous methods are made ufe of by the 
vilé inftigators, procurers and enfnarers of men‘ 
and fome of the wicked and profligate- princes 
and chiefs of Africa accept of prefents, from the 
Europeans, to procure a certain number ‘of 
flives; and thereby they are wickedly inftigated 
to go to war with one another on purpofe to get 
them, which produces many terrible depreda 


| tlons ; and fometimes when thofe engagements 


are entered into, and they find themfelves defeat» 
éd of their purpofe, it has happened that fome of 
their own people have fallen a facrifice to theit 
avarice and cruelty. And it may be faid of thé 
Europeans, that they have made ufe of every in« 
fidious method to procure flaves whenever they 
can, and in whatever manner they can lay hold of 
them, and that their forts and faGories are the 
avowed dens of thieves for robbers, plunderers 
and depredators. Not ot 

But again, as to the Africans felling their own 
wives and children, nothing can be more oppo“ 
fite to every thing they hold dear and valuable 3 

an 






































ee 


ae 
2 eS 


/ 


32 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


country, and differing i in fomething from thofe 
in another, even in the fame latitudes, as well as 
from thofe in different climates. Long cuftom 
and the different way of living among the feveral 
inhabitants of the different parts of the earth, has 
avery great effect in diftinguifhing them by a 
difference of features and complexion. Thefe 
effects are eafy to be feen; as: to the caufes, it is 
fufficient for us to know, that all is ‘the work of 
an Almighty hand, Therefore, as we find the 
diftribution of the human fpecies inhabiting the 
barren, as well as the moft fruitful parts of the 
earth, and the cold as well as the moft hot, dif- 
fering from one another in complexion accord- 
ing to their fituation ; it may be reafonably, as 
well as religioufly, inferred,’ that He who placed 
them in their various fituations, hath extended 
equally his care and protection to all; and from 
thence, that it becometh unlawful to counteract 
his benignity, by reducing others of different 
complexions to undeferved bondage. 

According, as we find that the difference of 
colour among men is only incidental, and equal- 
ly natural to all, and agreeable to the place of 
their habitation; and that if nothing elfe be dif- 
ferent or contrary among them, but that of fea- 
tures and complexion, in that refpeét, they are 
all equally alike entitled to the enjoyment of eve- 
ry mercy and bleffing of God. But there are 
fome men of that complexion, becaufe they are 
not black, whofe ignorance and infolence leads 
them to think, that thofe who are black, were 
marked out in that manner by fome fignal inter- 
diction or curfe, as originally defcending from 
their progenitors. . To thofe I muft fay, that the 
only mark which we read of, as generally alluded 

to, 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY! 29 


privileges are to other people. And it may be 
faid that freedom, and the liberty of enjoying 
their own privileges, burns with as much zeal. 
and fervour in the breaft of an A&thiopian, as in 
the breaft of any inhabitant on the globe. 

But the fupporters and favourers of flavery 
make other things a pretence and an excufe in 
their own defence; fuch as, that they find that 
it was admitted under the Divine inftitution by 
Mofes, as well-as the long continued praétice of 
different nations for ages; and that the Africans 
are peculiarly marked out by fome fignal predic- 
tion in nature and complexion for that purpofe, ~ 

This feems to be the greateft bulwark of de- 
fence which the advocates and favourers of flave- 
ry can advance, and what is generally talked of 
in their favour by thofe who do not underftand 
it. Ifhall confider it in that view, whereby it 
will appear, that they deceive themfelves and 
miflead others. Men are never more liable to 
be drawn into error, than when truth is made ufe 
of in aguileful manner to feduce them. Thofe, 
who do not believe the {criptures to be a Divine 
revelation, cannot, confiftently with themfelves, 
make the law of Mofes, or any mark or predic- 
tion they can find refpecting any particular fet of 
men, as found in the facred writings, any reafon 
that one clafs of men fhould enflave another. In 
that refpect, all that they have to enquire into 
fhould be,’ whether it be rizht, or wrong, that 
any part of the human fpecies fhould enflave ans 
other; and when that is the cafe, the Africans, 
though not fo learned, are juft as wife as the Eu- 
ropeans ; and when the matter is left to human 
wifdom, they are both liable to err. But what 
the light of nature, and the dictates of ent 

when. 














BERS OME R GS 


34 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
defcendants of one of his fons fhould become the 
fervants of fervants to their brethren, the defeen- 
‘dants of Shem and Japheth. This affords a grand 
pretence for the fupporters of the African flavery 
‘to build’a falfe notion upon, ‘as it is found by hif- 
‘tory that Africa, in’ general, was ‘peopled by: the 
defcéndants of Ham; but they ‘forget, that the 
predicth on has’ alieady been’ fulllled as far as it 
‘Can g0. Wht oi 

“There canbe no doubt, eae heke was a fhame- 


fol ‘mifconduét in Ham himfelf, by what is relat- 


ed of him’ but the fault,’ according ro thé pre- 
diction aft curfe, defcended only to the families 
of the: défcendants of his youngeft fon, Canaan. 
ThE ‘occafion ‘was, that’ Noah, his father, «had 
dtank » wine, and (perhaps unawares) became ine- 

Briated by Zt, dnd fell afleep in his tent. It feems 


: that Ham’ was ereatly deficient of ‘that filial vir- 


ruélas either: ‘becoming « ‘a father or a fon, went in- 
to his fathers tent, ‘and,’ it may be fuppofed; ‘in 
an undecent manner, he had fuffered his‘own fon, 
Canaan; ‘foto meddle with, or tincover, his fa- 


‘ther; that’ he: faw his hated netics! : for which he did 


hot check’ the audacious | rudenefs of Canaan, but 
went 4nd-told his ‘brethréH without in ridicule of 
his aged parent. This rude audacious behaviour 
of Cailani, and the obloquy of his father Ham, 
brought on “him ‘the curfe of his grandfather, 
Noah, but*he'bleffed Shei and Japheth for their 
deceit! and “Alial virtues, and denoun¢ed,’ in the 
fpirit ‘of Bropkedy, that Canaan fhould be theit 
fetvant, and fhould ferve them. 

Tt’ ray be'obferved, that it is a great +AABAOE: 
tune for‘children,' when their parents are not en- 
dowed With that wifdom and prudence which is 
nee ANE for’ the'early initiation of their offspring 

in 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 3% 


*s all the face of ‘the earth.” Wherefore we 
may jaftly infer, as there are no inferior {pecies, 
but all of one blood and of one nature, that 
there does not an inferiority tubfift, or depend, 
on their colour, features or form, whereby fome 
men make a pretence to enflave others ; and cons 
fequently, as they have all one creator, one ori- 
ginal, made of one blood, and all brethren de- 
fcended from one father, it never could be Jawful 
and juft for any nation, or people, to opprefs and 
enflave another. 

And again, as all the prefent inhikbicenta of the 
world fprang from the family of Noah, and were 
then ail of one complexion, there is no doubt, 
but the difference which we now find, took its 
rife very rapidly after they became difperfed and 
fettled on the different parts. of the globe. There 
feems tobe a tendency to this, in many inftances; 
among children of the fame parents, having dif- 
ferent colour of hair and features from one anos 
ther. And God alone who eftablifhed the courfe 
of nature, can bring about and eftablifh what va- 
riety he pleafes; and it is not in the power of 
man to make one hair white or black. But a- 
mong the variety which it hath pleafed God to 
eftablifh and caufed to take place, we may meet 
with fome analogy in nature, that as the bodies of 
men are tempered with a different degree to ena- 
ble them to endure the refpective climates of their 
habitations, fo their colours vary, in fome de- 

' gree, in a regular gradation from the equator to 
wards either of the poles. However, there are 
other incidental caufes arifing from time and 
place, which conftitute the mott diftinguifhing 
variety of colour, form, appearance and features, 
as peculiar to the inhabitants of one tract of 

country, 





ii ncetemeeeatll Data eiripliimarateee sess Sacenataamentatiee, aaaeeell <a Tae 
eS ES DER AREER” eS SE a ae: ie by needy ee 











26 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
fome of them came to England, and fettled about 
Cornwall; as far back as that time; fo that, for 
any thing that.can be known to the contrary, there 
may be fome of the defcendants of that wicked 
generation {till fubfifting among the flave-holders 
‘in the Weft-Indies. For if the curfe of God ever 
refted upon them, or upon any other) men; the 
only vifible mark thereof was always upon. thofe 
who committed the moft outrageous. acts of; vio- 
lence and oppreffion. But colour and complexion 
has nothing to do with that mark; every, wicked 
man, and the-enflavers of others, bear the ftamp of 
their own iniquity, and that marks which was fet 
upon Cain. 

Now, ‘the defcendants: of the other three fons 


of Ham, were not included under the curfe of his 


father, and as they difperfed and fettled. on/ the 
different parts of: the;earth, they became alfo fun- 
dry diftinét-and»very: formidable nations. ._Cuth, 

the oldeft, fettled in the fouth -weft, of Arabia, and 
his defcendants were anciently known to the. He- 
brews by the name of Cufhites, or Cufhie;_ one 
of his fons, Nimrod, founded the kingdom of Ba- 


‘bylon, in Afia,; and. the. others made their, de- 
{cent fouthward} by the Red,Sea,, and came over 
‘to Abyffiniayand Ethiopia, and, likely, difperfed 


themfelves throughout all the fouthern and inte- 
rior parts of Africa; and as they lived moftly un- 


der the torrid zone, or near-the tropics, they be- 


came black, as being natural. tothe: inhabitants 


_of thofe fultry hot climates; and, in that: cafe, 
theirs complexion bears the fignification of: the 
-name of their original progenitor, Cuth, as known 
by the Hebrews by that name, }both on the eaft 
and. on;the, weit,; beyond. ‘the, Red Sea; but -the 
lye called them dined or black: faced 


people. 


-ON. THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 33 


to,. and. by them applied wrongfully, is.-that 
mark or fign which God gave to.Cain, to affure 
him that he fhould not. be deftroyed. Cain un- 
derftood by the nature.of the crime he had com- 
mitted, that the law required. death, or, cutting 
_off,.as the punifhment thereof, But God in his 
providence doth not always punifh the wicked in 
this life according to their.enormous crimes, (we 
are told, by a facred poet, that he faw the wicked 
flourifhing like a green bay tree) though he ge- 
nerally: marks them out by fome fignal token of 


his vengeance; and. that is a fure token of | it, 


when men become long hardened in their wick- 
ednefs., The denunciation that paffed upon Cain 
was, that he fhould be a fugitive and a vagabond 


on. the earth, bearing the curfe, and reproach of © 


his iniquity; and the reft of men.were prohibited 
as much from meddling with» him,.., or. _defiling 
their hands by him, as it naturally i Maa not to pull 
down the dead carcafe of an atrocious criminal, 

hung up ia chains by. the laws. of his, country. 
But allow the mark fet upon Cain..to have.con- 
fifted in a black fkin,. ftill no conelufion’ can be 
drawn at all, that any of the black people are of 
that defcenr, as the whole pofterity of Cain were 
deftroyed in the univerfal deluge. . 

Only. Noah, a righteous and juft man, —- 
found grace in the fight of God, and his_ three 
fons, Japheth, Shem and Ham, and. their ¥ wives 
eight perfons, , were preferyed from the. sabres 
deluge, in. the ark which Noah. was. directed to 
build. The three fons of Noah had each children 
born after the flood,, from whom all. the, -prefent 
world of men defcended. But it came to.pafs, i in 
the days, of Noah, that an, interdiction, or ;curfe, 
took place in the family of Ham, and .that the 

D g defcendants 





Jet 

slats Brace 
Rea na 
* ‘by ARS hot anes 


a 


Co = te 
tS ne ee i ae w ae 


~ eal 














+ 
Saat 


j 
pe ne oe 


48. FHOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

any other. Nothing but ignorance) and: the 
dreams of a viciated imagination, arifing from 
the general countenance given to the evil: ‘practice 
of wicked men, to ftrengthen their hands in wick- 
ednefs, could ever make any perfon to fancy 
otherwife, or ever to think that the ftealing, kid- 
napping, enflaving, perfecuting or killing a black 
man, is in any way and manner Jefs criminal, than - 
the fame evil treatment of any other man of ano- 
ther complexion. — 

But again, in anfwer to another part of the pre- 
tence which the favourers of flavery make ufe of 
in their defence, that flavery was an ancient cuf- 
tom, and that it became the prevalent and uni- 
verfal practice of many different barbarous na- 
tions for ages: This muft be granted; but. not 
becaufe it was right, or any thing hike right and 
equity. A lawful fervitude was always neceffary, 
and became contingent with the very nature of 
human fociety.. But when the laws of .civiliza- 
tion ‘were broken through, and when the rights 
and properties of others were invaded, that 
brought the oppreffed into a kind of compulfive 
fervitude, though often not compelled to it by 
thofe whom they were obliged to ferve. This 
arofe from the different depredations and robbe- 
ries which were committed upon one another ; 
the helplefs were obliged to feek protection from 
fuch as could fupport them, and to give unto 
them their fervice, in order to preferve themfelves 
from want, and to deliver them from the injury 
either of men or beafts. For while civil fociety 
continued in a rude ftate, even among the efta- 
‘blifhers of kingdoms, when they became power- 
ful and proud, as they wanted to enlarge their 
territories, they drove and expelled others from 


their 








‘ON 'THE EVIL“OF°SLAVERY; 35 
inthe paths of virtue and righteoufnefs. © Hara 
was guilty of the offence as well as his’ fon; ‘he 
did not pity the weaknefs of his father, who was 
overcome with wine in that day wherein, it is 
likely, hehad fome folemn work ‘to do.) But the 
prediction and curfe refted wholly upon the off- 
{pring of Canaan, who-fettled in the land knowa 
by his name, in the welt of Afia, as is evident 
from the facred writings. The 'Canaanites obe+ 
came an exceeding wicked people; and were vifit- 
ied with many calamities, according to the pre- 
diction’ of Noah, for ‘their abominable wicked- 
inefs and idolatry. 

Chederluomer, a defeendane of Sheisis reduced 
the Canaanitith kingdoms: to.a tributary fubjec- 
‘tion; and fome ‘time after, upontheir revolt, in- 
syaded and pillaged their country: ‘Not long af- 
ter Sodom, Gomorrah, ‘Admah and Zeboim, *four 
‘Kingdoms ‘of the Canaanites were overthrown: for 
their @reat wickednefs; and utterly deftroyed by 
-fire and brimftone from heaven,’ « The Hebrews, 
“chiefly under Mofes,. Jofhua °and Barak, as they 
-were directed by God, cut off moft of the: other 
-Canaanitifh kingdoriis; and reduced many of them 
‘to fubjection and ‘vaffalage. Thofe: who fettled 
‘In the north-weft.of Canaan, and formed the once 
--flourifhing ‘ftates of ‘Tyre and’Sidon,’ were by the 
-Affyrians, the’Chaldeans, ‘andthe Perfians fuccef- 
ively reduced to great »mifery and bondage ; ‘but 
“chiefly by the!Greeks, ‘the Romans, and! the Sa- 
'-Yacens, and laftly by the Turks, they’ were com- 
spleatly and totally ‘ruined, and have noimore*fince 
been» a diftin€peopleoamong the different na- 
tions.’ Many of che Caaaanites who' fled’ away in 
othe Pikae of Jofhua;!became mingled with the 
ocianesd nations; and? fome: ‘hiftorians think that 


D 2 fome. 














-<— — 


40 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


in anicient times, m whatever degree flavery was 
admitted, and: whatever hardfhips they were, in 
general, fubjected to,;’it was not nearly fo bad as 
the modern: barbarous and cruel Weft-India 
feorery ivd -¢ivied, 

Now, inrefpect.to that kind of fervitude which. 
was admitted into’ the law of Mofes, that was not 
contrary to the natural liberties of men, but a 
ftate of equity and juftice, according as the mature 
and circumftances of the times required. There 
was no more harm in entering into a covenant 
with another man-as.a bond-fervant; than there is 
for two men to enter into partnerfhip’ the one with 
the other ; and fometimes the nature of the cafe 
may -be, and their. bufinefs require it, that the 
one may find money and live at a diftance and 
eafe, and the other manage the bufinefs for him: 
So a bond-fervant was generally the fteward in a 
man’s houfe,; and fometimes his heir. There was 
no harm in buying a man who was in a ftate of 
captivity and bondage by others, and keeping 
him in fervitude till fuch time as his purchafe was 
redeemed by his labour and fervice. And there 
could be no harm in paying a man’s debts, and 
keeping him in fervitude until fuch time as an 


equitable agreement of compofition was paid by 


him. Ando, in general, whether they had been 
bought or fold'in order to pay their juft debts 
when they became poor, or: were bought from 
fuch as held them in an unlawful captivity, the 
{tate of bondage which they and their children fell 
under, among the Ifraelites,; was into that of a 
vaflalage ftate, which rather might be termed a 
deliverance from debt and captivity, than a ftate 
of-flavery. . In that -vaffalage ftate which they 
were reduced to, they had a tax of fome fervice to 


pay, 








‘ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 37 


pleople.. The Egyptians and Philiftines were the 
defcendants of Mizraim; and the country which 
they inhabited: was called the land. of Mizraim, 
and Africa, in general, was anciently called the 


whole land of Ham. Phut, another of his fons, | 


alfo fettled on the weft of Egypt, and as the 
youngeft were obliged to emigrate fartheft, after- 
wards difperfed themfelves chiefly up the fouth of 
the Mediterranean fea, towards Lybia and Mauri- 
tania, and might early mingle with fome of the 
Cufhites on the more fouthern, and, chiefly, on 
the weftern parts of Africa. But all thefe might 
be followed by fome other families and tribes 
from Afia; and fome think that Africa got its 
name from the King of Lybia marrying a daugh- 
ter of Aphra, one of the defcendants of Abraham, 
by Keturah. 3 

But it may be reafonably fuppofed, that the 
moft part of the black people in Africa, are the 
defcendants of the Cufhites, towards the eaft, the 
fouth, and interior parts, and chiefly of the Phu- 
tians towards the weft; and the various revolu- 
tions and changes which have happened among 
them have rather been local than univerfal ; fo that 
whoever their original progenitors were, as de- 
{cending from one generation to another, in a 


long continuance, it becomes natural for the in- | 


habitants of that traét of country to be a dark 
black, in general. The learned and thinking 
part of men, who can refer to hiftory, muft know, 
that nothing with refpect to colour, nor any mark 
or curfe from any original prediction, can in any- 
wife be more particularly afcribed to the Africans 
than to any other people of the human fpecies, fo 
as to afford any pretence why they fhould be 
more evil treated, perfecuted and enflaved, than. 


P94 ay 


a: Ee ee eT 









; si oS 
es i ; iene 
i eae a % Fa 
Bera oe Bok ee Tee acai abe ins i a 
Ca ee ae ee \g a 
Ss vaacs era 2 PARP myn x 











42. THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
heads, as it is the cafe in the Weft-Indies for any- 
that can find a ftrayed flave; and he who can 
bring fuch a head warm reeking with his blood; 
as a token that he had murdered him—inhuman 
and fhocking to think!—he is paid for it; and, 
cruel and dreadful as it is, that law is ftill in 
force in fome of the Britifh colonies. | 

But the Canaanites, although they were pre- 
dicted, to be reduced to a ftate of fervitude, and 
bondage to that poor and: menial employment, 
fared better than the Weft-India flaves; for when 
they were brought into that flate of fervitude, 
they were often employed in an honourable fer- 
vice. The Nethenims, and others, were to affitt 


“in the facred folemnities and worfhip of God at 


the Temple of Jerufalem. They had the fame 
laws and immunities refpecting the folemn days 
and fabbaths, as their mafters the Ifraelites, and 
they were to keep and obferve them. | But they 
were not fuffered, much lefs required, to labour 
in their own {pots of ufeful ground on the days of 
facred reft from worldly employment; and that, 
if they did not improve the culture of it, in thefe 
times and feafons, they might otherwife perith for 


~ hunger and want; as it ts the cafe of the Weft- 


India flaves, by their inhuman, infidel, hard- 
hearted. mafters. And, therefore, this may be 
juftly faid, that whatever fervitude: that was, or 


_ by whatever name it may be called, that the-fer- 


vice which was required by the people of Ifrael in 
old time, was of a far milder nature, than that 
which became the prevalent practice of other difs — 
ferent and barbarous nations; and, if compared 
with modern flavery, it might be called liberty, 
equity, aud felicity, in refpeét to that abomina- 
ble, mean, beaftly, cruel, bloody flavery carried 

| on 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 39 
their peaceable habitations, who were not fo 
powerful as themfelves. This made thofe wha 
were robbed of their fubftance, and drove from 
the place of their abode, make their efcape to 
fuch as could and would help them; but. when. 
fuch a relief could not be found, they were oblig- 
ed to fubmit to the yoke of their oppreffors, who, 
in many cafes, would not yield them any protec- 
tion ‘upon any terms. . Wherefore, when. their 
lives were in danger otherwife, and they could 
not find any help, they were obliged to fell them- 
felves for bond fervants to fuch as would buy 
them, when they could not get a fervice that was 
better. But as foon as buyers could be found, 
robbers began their traffic to enfnare others, and. 
fuch as fell into their hands were carried captive 
by them, and were obliged to fubmit to their. be- 
ing fold by them into the hands of other robbers, 
for there are few buyers of men, who intend there- | 
by to make them free, and fuch as they buy are he 
generally fubjected to hard labour and. bondage. 

Therefore at all times, while a man is a flave, he | 1 | 
is {till in captivity, and under the. jurifdiction of Hy’ 
robbers; and every man who keeps a flave, is a co 
robber, whenever he compels him to his fervice 
without giving him a jult reward. The barely 
{upplying his flave with fome neceffary things, to : i a 
keep him in life, is no reward at all, that is only , 
for his own fake and benefit; and the very’nature 
of compulfion and taking away the liberty of 
others, as well as their property, is robbery ; and 
that kind of fervice which fubjeéts men to a ftate 
of flavery, muft at all times, and in every cir- 
cumftance, be a barbarous, inhuman and: unjuft 
dealing with our fellow men. A voluntary fer- 
vice, and flavery, are quite different things ; but 
| in 








ki 
ny 
* 








44 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

vants; and that the ftate of bondage’ which the 
Jaw denounces and defcribes, was ‘thereby fo’ in 
tended to point out fomething’ neceflary, as well 
as fimilar to all the other ritual and ceremoniat 
fervices ;, and that the whole is fet forth in fuch a 


_ ™manner, as containing the very effence and foun- 


dation of the Chriftian religion. And, moreover, 
that it muft appear evident. to any Chriftian bes 
Hever, that it was neceffary that all thefe things 
fhould take place, and as the moft beautiful fabric 
of Divine goodnefs, that in all their variety, and 
ialltheir, forms, they fhould ftand recorded: un- 


_der the fanétion of the Divine law. 


And this muft. be obferved, ‘that ‘it hath’ fo 
pleafed the Almighty Creator, ‘to eftablifh all the 
variety of things in nature; different complexions 
and other circumftances ‘among'‘men, and to re 
cord the various tranfaCtions of his own: provi+ 


“dence, with all the ceremonial ceconomy written 


in the books of Mofes, as more particularly re- 
fpecting and enjoined to the Ifraehtifh nation and 
people, for the ufe of facred language, in order 
to convey wifdom to the fallen apoftate human 
race. Wherefore, all the various things eftablifh+ 
ed, admitted and recorded, whether natural, mo- 
ral, typical or ceremonial, with all the various 
things in nature referred to, were fo ordered and 
admitted, as figures, types and emblems, and o- 
ther fymbolical  reprefentations, to bring forward, 

ufher in, hold forth and illuftrate that moft amaz- 
ing tranfaction, and the things concerning it, of 
all. things the moft wonderful that ever could take 


place amongft the univerfe of intelligent beings; 


as in that, rand the things concerning it, of the 
falvation of apoftate men, and the wonderful be- 
i vst of their Almighty Redeemer. - Oh. 3 
‘ Whoever 





“ON THE EVIL’ OF SLAVERY! 437 
pay, which might only be reckoned ‘equivalent: 
to a poor man in England paying ‘rent ‘for ‘his’ 
cottage... In this fair land of liberty, there’ are’ 
many thoufands of the inhabitants who have no’ 
right to fo much land as an inch of ground to fet 
their foot upon, fo as to’take up their refidence 
upon it, without paying a lawful and reafonable 
vaflalage of rent for it—and yet the whole com- 
munity is free from flavery. And fo, likewife, 
thofe who were reduced to a ftate of fervitude, or 
vaflalage, in the land of Ifrael, were not negoci- 
able like chattels and goods; nor could: they be’ 
difpofed of like cattle and beafts of burden, or’ 
ever transferred or difpofed of without their own’ 
confent ; and perhaps not one man in all the land 
of Ifrael would buy another man, uniefs that man 
was willing to ferve him.» And when any man. 
had gotten fucha fervant, as he had entered into 
a covenant of agreement with, as a bond-fervant, 


if the man liked his mafter and his fervice, he’: 


could not oblige him to go away; and it fome- 
times happened, that they refuled to go out free 
when the. year of jubilee came. But even that 
_ ftate of fervitude which the Canaanites were re- 
duced to,. among thofe who furvived the general 
overthrow of their country, was nothing worfe, in 
many refpects, than that of poor labouring peo- 


ple in any freecountry. Their being made hew-. 


ers of wood and drawers of water, were laborious 
employments; but they were paid for it in fuch a 
manner as the nature of their fervice required, and’ 
were fupplied with abundance of fuch neceflaries 
of life as they and their families had need of; and 


they were at liberty, if they chofe, to go away, 


there was no reftriction laid onthem. They were 
not hunted after, and a reward offered for their 
heads, 
























46 THOUGHTs AND SENTIMENTS 
effected by ‘therm, ‘as it is ‘fora black man to 


SER EASE 


‘tain through the’blood of Jefus, for fin and for 
‘uncleanneis, Wherein ‘all the ftains and blackeft 
‘dyes of fin‘and polution ¢an’be wafhed ‘away for 
ever, and the darkeft finner'be made to fhine as 
the brightelft angel in heaven... And for that end 
and purpofe, God ‘alone has appointed all the 


‘channels of ‘conveyance of the everlafting Gofpel 


for. thefe ‘healing ‘and purifying ‘ftreams of the 
sae , é water 









—_ — ~ ~ 


SITE = 






ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 43 
on by the inhuman, barbarous.Europeans, againft 
the poor unfortunate Black Africans. 

But again, this may be averred, that the fervi- 
tude which took place under the fanction of the di- 
vine law, in the time of Mofes, and what was en- 
joined as the civil and religious polity of the peo- 
ple of Ifrael, was in nothing contrary to the natu- 
ralrights and common liberties of men, though it 
had an appearance as fuch for great and wife ends, 
The Divine Law Giver, in his good providence, 
for great and wife purpofes intended by it, has 
always admitted into the world riches and pover- 
ty, profperity and adverfity, high and low, rich 
and:poor; and in fuch manner, ‘as in all-their va- 
_riety and difference, mutation and change, there 
is nothing fet forth in the written law, by Mofes, 
contrary, unbecoming, or inconfiftent with that 
goodnefs of himfelf, as the wife and righteous 
Governor of the Univerfe.. Thofe things admit- 
ted into the law, that had a feeming appearance 
contrary to the natural liberties of men, were 
only fo admitted for a local time, to point out, 
and to eftablifh, and to give inftruction thereby, 
in an analogous-allufion to other things. 

And therefore, fo far as I have been able to 
coniult the law written by Mofes, concerning that 


kind of fervitude admitted by it, I can find no- . 


thing imported thereby, in the leaft degree, to 
warrant the modern practice of flavery. But, on 
the contrary, and what was principally intended 
thereby, and in the moft particular manner, as 
refpecting Chriftians, that it.contains the ftrongeft 
prohibition againft it. And every Chriftian man, 
that can read his Bible, may find that which is of 
the greateft importance for himfelf to know, im- 


plied even under the very inftitution of bond-fer- 


vants 5 











| 
| 


= 


ae 
a oats 





48 THOUGHTS, AND SENTIMENTS 


fion which men have committed upon one ano- 
ther, as well as that kind of. bondage and fervi- 
stude which was admitted under the fan@ion of 
the Divine law.. But there is nothing fet forth 
dn the law as.a rule, or any thing recorded there- 
in that can ftand as a precedent, or make it law- 


ful, for,men to practice flavery ; nor can any laws 


an favour .of. flavery be deduced from thence, for 
-to enflave men, be otherwife, than as unwarrantble, 
as it would be .unnecefflary and wrong, to. order 


and command the facrifices of beafts to be ftill 


continued... Now the great thing imported by it, 
and what is chiefly to be deduced from it in this 


zefpect, is, that fo far as the law concerning bond- 


fervants, and.that eftablifhment of fervitude, as ad- 
anitted i in.the Mofaical inftitution, was -fet forth, 


sit was thereby. intended to. prefigure and point 


out, that {piritual fubjetion and bondage to fin, 


sthat all mankind,. by their original, transgreffion, 
owere fallen.into. ~ All.men in their fallen “deprav- 


éd ftate, being under a fpirit, of, bondage, funk 
nto anature of brutith carnality, 2 and by ‘the lufts 
thereof, they .are carried captive and enflaved ; 

‘and the confequence is, that..they. are fold under 


fin and.in bondage..to. iniquity, and carried cap- 


tive by the devil at his will.:, This being the cafe, 
the thing proves itfelf ; for_if there had heen no 
evil and ‘fin among ft men, there never would have 
heen any. kind of bondage, flavery and oppreffion 
found amongtt, them ; and if there was none of 
thefe things. to be found, the great caufe of it 
could. not,, in. the prefent fituation of men, be 
pointed out to them, j in that eligible manner as it 
is... Wherefore .it..was neceflary that fomething 
of that bondage and fervitude should. be cas 
into, the ritual law fora figurative, ule, which, in 
art 


\ 


“TON | THE/EVILOF SLAVERYs 45 
»» Whoever will give a ferious and, unprejudiced 
attention to the various things alluded to in the 
language of -facred writ, muft fee reafon to be- 


lieve that they imply.a purpofe and defign far. 


more, glorious and important, than what feems 
generally to be underftood by them; and to point 
to, objects and-eyents. far, more extenfive. and in- 
terefting, than what is generally afcribed to them, 
But. as. the. grand.eligibility and importance. of 
thofe things,, implied and pointed out. in facred 
writ, and. the right: underftanding , thereof, be- 
longs-to the, fublime. fcience: of, metaphyfics and 
theology to enforce, illuftrate andexplain, I fhall 
only feleé&t a few inftances, which I think have a 
relation to my fubject in hand. | 

Among other things it may be confidered, that 
the different colours and complexions among men 
-were intended for another purpofe. and defign, 
»than that of being only eligible in-the variety of 
the feale of nature... And, accordingly, had it 
been otherwife, and.if, there had never been any 
black-people among the children of men, nor.any 
{potted leopards among the beafts of the earth, 
fuch an inftructive queftion, by the prophet, could 
not have been propofed, .as this, Can the Ethiopian 
change bis fkin, or the leopard his:fpots? Then, may 
‘ye alfo-.do good, that are accuftomed to do evil. 
Jer. xii. 23. . The inftruction intended by this is 
evident, that it. was a convincing and forcible 
argument to fhew, that none among the fallen 
and apoftate race of men, can by any effort of 
their own, change their nature from the blacknefs 


and guilt of the fable dye of fin and polution, or 


alter their way accuftomed to do evil, from the 
variegated {pots of their iniquity ; and that fucha 
change is as impoffible to be totally and radically 
IR . effected 








50 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


blem that there was any fpiritual reftoration and 
deliverance afforded to us.. By that which is 
evil in captivity and flavery among men, we are 
thereby fo reprefented to be under a like fubjec- 
tion to fin; but by what is inftituted in the law | 
by Mofes, in that refpecét we are thereby repre- 
fented as Ifrael to have dominion over fin, and to 
rule over and keep in fubjection all our fpiritual | 
enemies. And, therefore, any thing which had 
a feeming appearance in favour of flavery, fo far 
as it was admitted into the law, was to fhew that 
it was not natural and innocent, like that of dif- 
ep ferent colours among men, butas neceflary to be. 
pee | : made an emblem of what was intended by it, 
ee : and, confequently, as it ftands enjoined among 
ay other typical reprefentations, was to fhew that 
el Ae every thing of any evil appearance of it, was to 
1) Be ; be removed, and.to end with the other typical, 
and ceremonial injunctions, when the time of 
| that difpenfation was over, This muft appear 
hao | evident to all Chriftian believers; and fince there- 
| fore all thefe things are fulfilled in the eftablith- 
ment of Chriftianity, there is now nothing re- 
maining in the law for a rule of practice to men, 
but the ever abiding obligations, and ever bind- 
ing injunctions of moral rectitude, juftice, equi- 
ty and righteoufnefs. All the other things in the 
Divine law, are for fpiritual ufes and fimilitudes, 
for giving inftruction to the wife, and under- 
ftanding to the upright in heart, that the man of. 
God may be perfect, throughly furnifhed unto all 
‘ good works. 
Among other things alfo, the wars of the If 





— 
ene 


f |  yaelites, and the extirpation of the Canaanites, 
Hs, : and. other circumftances as recorded in facred 
hiftory, were intended to give inftruction to men, 


but 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 4% 
water of life to run in, and. to bring life and fale 
_yation, with light and sladnefs to men; but he 
denounces woe to thofe whe do hot receive it 
themfelves, but hinder and debar others who 
would, from Coming to thofe falutary ftreams for 
life: Yet not alone confined to thefe, nor hinder} 
ed in his purpofe by any oppofers, Hz, who can 
open the eyes of the blind, and make 'the deaf to 
hear, can open ftrésms in the’ defart;' and make 
his benignity to flow, and his falvation-to vifit, 
even the meaneft and moft ignorant’man, ‘in the 
darkeft fhades ‘of ‘nature, as well as the moft 
learned on the earth; and he ufually carries on his 
own gracious work of quickening and redeeming 
grace, in a fecret, fovereign manner. To this I 
‘muft again obferve, and what I chiefly intended 
by this fimilitude, that the external blacknefs of 
the Ethiopians, is as innocent and natural, as 
fpots in the leopards; and that the difference of 
colour and complexion, which in: hath pleafed 


God to appoint among men, are no more unbe- 


coming unto either of them, than the different 
fhades of the rainbow are unfeemly to’ the whole, 
or unbecoming to any part of that apparent arch. 
It does not alter the nature and quality ofa man, 
whether he wears a black or a white coat, whether 
he puts it on or ftrips it off, he is ftill the fame 
‘man. And fo likewife, when aman comes to 
die, it makes no difference whether‘he was black 
or white, whether he was male’ or fémale, whe- 
ther he was great or fmall, or whether he was old 
or young; none of thefe differences alter the'ef- 
fentiality of the man, any more than he had wore 
a black or a white coat and thrown it off for ever. 
~ Another form of inftruction for the fame pur- 
pofe, maybe taken from the flayery and oe 
3 10h 





52 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


they have need always to be upon their guard, 
and to have all their armour on. They are com- 
manded to caft off the works of darkne/s, and to put 
on the whole armour of righteoufne/s and light ; and 
that they may be ftrong in the Lord,.and in the power 
of bis might. For it is required that they fhould be 
able to ftand againft thé wiles of the devil, the powers 
of the rulers of the darkne/s of this world, againft 
Spiritual wickedne/s in high places. And as their 
foes are mighty and tall like the dnakiims, and fenced 
up to beaven, they mmuft be mighty warriors, men’ 
of renown, valiant for the truth, fireng in the ‘faith, 
fighting the Lord’s battles, and overcoming all their 
enemies, through the dear might of the Great Cap- 
tain of their falvation. 1n this warfare, fhould 
they meet with fome mighty gag, fome firong 
corruption, or befetting fin, they are command- 
ed to cut it down, and with the fword of Samuel 
to hew it to pieces before the Lord. This, in its 
literal fenfe, may feem harth, as if Samuel had 
been cruel; and fo will our fins, and other fin- 
ners infinuate. and tell us not to mind fuch things 
as the perfect law of God requires. But if we 
confider that the Lord God who breathed into 
a . man the breath of life, can fufpend and take it~ 
| fl a : away when he pleafeth, and that there is not a 
| i moment we have to exift, wherein that life may 
: not be fufpended before the next; it was there- 
fore of an indifferent matter for that man Agag, 
when the Lord, who hath the breath and life of 
every man in his hand, had appointed him at 
that time to die, for his great wickednefs and the 
a “murders committed by him, whether he was 
| ae flain by Samuel or any other means. But what ) 
a Samuel, the fervant of the Lord, did in that in- “a 
ae, fiance, was in obedience to his voice, and in it- 





I OL Pe Late ee Fetal inal ad a eS ee a tela aerate! 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 49 


all other refpeéts and circumftances, was, in it- 
felf, contrary to the whole tenure of the law, and 
naturally initfelf unlawful for men to praétice. 
Nothing bat heavenly wifdom, and heavenly 
grace, can teach men to underftand. The moft 
deplorable of all things is, that the dreadful fitu- 
ation of our univerfalde praved ftate, which all 
mankind lyeth under, is fuch, that thofe who are 
not redeemed in time, muft for ever continue to 
be the fubjects of eternal bondage and mifery. 
Bleffed be God! he hath appointed and fet up a 
deliverance, and the Saviour of Men isan Al- 
mighty Redeemer. When God, the Almighty 
Redeemer and Saviour of his people, brought his 
Ifrael out of Egypt and temporal bondage, it was 
intended and defigned thereby, to fet up an em- 
blematical reprefentation of their deliverance from 
the power and captivity of fin, and from the do- 
minion of that evil and malignant fpirit, who had 
with exquifite fubtilty and guile at firft feduced 
the original progenitors of mankind. And when 
they were brought to the promiied land, and had 
gotten deliverance, and fubdued their enemies 
under them, they were to reign over them; and 
their laws refpecting: bond-fervants, and other 
things of that nature, were to denote; that they 


were to keep under and in fubjeétion the whole 


body of their evil affections and lufts. This is fo 
declared by the Apoftle, that the law is fpiritual, 
and intended for {piritual ufes. The general ftate 
of flavery which took place in the world, among 


other enormous crimes of wicked men might have 


ferved for an emblem and fimilitude of our fpi- 


ritual bondage and flavery to fin; but, unlefs it : 


‘had been admitted into thé fpiritual and divine 
law, it could not have ftood and be¢omé an em- 
Et blem 











‘ 


54 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
none of all thefe grand pretenfions, as generally 


made ufe of by the favourers of flavery, to en- 


courage and embolden them, in that iniquitous 
traffic, can have any foundation or fhadow of 
truth to fupport them; and that there is nothing 
in nature, reafon, and {cripture can be found, 
in any Manner or way, to warrant the enflaving 
of black people more than others. 

But I am aware that fome of thefe arguments 
will weigh nothing againft fuch men as do not 
believe the fcriptures themfelves, nor care to un- 
derftand; but let them be aware not to make ufe 
of thefe things againft us which they do not be- 
lieve, or whatever pretence they may have for 
committing violence againft us. Any property 
taken away from others, whether by fiealth, 
fraud, or-violence, muft be wrong; but to take 
away men themfelves, and keep them in flavery, 
muft be worfe. Skin for /kin, all that a man hath: 
would he give for his life; and would rather lofe 
his property to any amount whatever, than. to 
have his liberty taken away, and be kept as a 
flave. It muft be an inconceivable fallacy to 
think otherwife: none but the incontiderate, 
moft obdurate and ftubborn, could ever think 
that it was right to enflave others. But the way 
of the, wicked is, brutifo: bis own iniquity. fhall 
take the wicked himfelf, and be fhall be holden with 
the cords of bis fins: he fhall die without infiruction, 
and in the greatnefs of his folly be fhall go aftray. 

Among the various fpecies of men that com- 
mit rapine, and violence, and murders, and theft, 
upon, their fellow-creatures, like the ravenous 
beafts of the night, prowling for their prey, there 
are alfo thofe that fet out their heads in the open 
day, oppofing all the obligations of civilization 


or 
among 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 656f 


but have often been perverted to the moft fla- 


grant abufe, and even inverted to the moft no- 
torious purpofes, for men to embolden them- 
{elves to commit wickednefs. Every poffeifion 
that men enjoy upon earth are the gifts of God, 
and he who gives them, may either take them 
away again from men, or he may take men away 


themfelves from the earth, as it pleafeth him. | 


But who dare, even with Lucifer, the malignant 
devourer of the world, think to imitate the moft 
High? The extirpation of the Canaanites out of 
their land, was fo ordered, not only to punith 
them for their idolatry and abominable wicked- 
nefs, but alfo’ to fhew forth the honour of his 
power, and the fovereignty of him who is the 
only potent one that reigneth over the nations ; 
that all men at that time might learn to fear and 
know him who is Jehovah ; ‘and ever fince that it 
might continue @ ftanding memorial of him, and 
a flaridard of honor unto him who doth accords 
ing to his will among the armies of heaven, and 
whatever pleafeth him with the inhabitants of the 
earth. And, in general, thefe tranfactions ftand 
recorded for an emblematical ufe and fimilitude, 
in the {piritual warfare of every true Ifraelite 
throughout all the ages of time. Every real be- 
_ ltever and valiant champion in the knowledge and 
faith of their Omnipotent Saviour and Almighty’ 
Deliverer, as the very nature of Chriftianity re- 
quires and enjoins, knoweth the ufe of thefe 
things, and they know how to endure hardne/s as 
good J Soldiers of Fefus Chrift. They have many bat- 
tles to fight with their unbelief, the perverfenefs 
of their’ nature, evil tempers and befetting fins, 
thefe Canaanites which ftill dwell in their land. 
ogg are fo furrounded with adverfaries, that 

E 2 they 


entrar SOSA, 








Bo 





56 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


or any thiug like it, can be repeated again, with- 
out tranfgrefling and breaking through every 
other injunction, precept, and command of the 
juft and tremendous law of God. 
The confequence of their apoftacy from God, 
and difobedience to his law, became a fnare to 
thofe men in times of old, who departed from 
it; and becaufe of their difobedience and wicked- 
nefs, the feveral nations, which went aftray af- 
ter their own abominations, were vifited with 
many dreadful calamities and judgments. But 
to fet up the ways of the wicked for an example, 
and to make the laws refpecting their fuppref- 
fion, and the judgments that were inflifted upon 
them for their iniquity, and even the written 
word of God, and the tranfaétions of his provi- 
dence, to be reverfed and become and prece- 
dents and pretences for men to commit depreda- 
tions and extirpations, and for enflaving and ne- 
gociating or merchandizing the human f{pecies, 
muft be horrible wickednefs indeed,. and finning 
with a high hand. And it cannot be thought. 
otherwife, but that the abandoned agereffors, 
among the learned nations will, in due time, as 
the juft reward of their aggravated iniquity; be 
vifited with fome more dreadful and tremendous 
judgments of the righteous vengeance of God, 
than what even befel to the Canaanites of old. 
And it may be confidered further, that to draw 
any inferences in favour of extirpation, flavery, 
and negociation of men, from the written word 
of God, or from any thing elfe in the hiftory 
and cuftoms of different nations, .as a precedent 
to embolden wicked men in their wickednefs ; 
cannot be more wicked, ridiculous, and abfurd 
to fhew any favour to thefe infidious negociators 
Wits Pd 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. &3 


felf a righteous deed, and a juft judgment upon 
Agag. “And the matter imported by it, was alfo 
intended to thew, that all our Amalekite fias, 
and even the chief and darling of them, the ava- 
ricious and covetous Agags, fhould be cut off for 
ever. But if we fpare them, and leave them to 
remain alive in ftubborn difobedience to the law 
and commandments of God, we fhould in that 
cafe, be like Saul, cut off ourfelves from the king- 
dom of his grace. According: to this view, it 
may fuffice to ; thew (and what infinite wifdom in- 
tended, no doubt,) that a wife and righteous ufe 
may be made of thofe very things, which other- 
wife are generally perverted to wrong purpofes. 
And now, as to thefe few inftances which J 
have collected from that facred hypothefis, where- 
by it is fhewn,, that other things are implied and 
to be underftood by the various incidents as re- 
corded in facred writ, with a variety of other 
things in nature, bearing an analogous allufion 
to things of the greateft importance for every 
Chriftian man to know and underftand; and 
that the whole of the ritual law, though thefe 
things themfelves are not to be again repeated, is 
of that nature and ufe as never ta be forgot. 
-And therefore to fuppofe, or for any Chriftians 
to fay, that they have nothing to do with thofe 
things now in the right ufe thereof, and what 


was intended and imported thereby refpecting ' 


themfelves,’ would be equally as abfurd as to hear 
them {peaking in the language of devils; and 
they might as well fay as they did, when (peaking: 
out of the demoniac, that they have nothing to do 
with Chrift. 
Having thus endeavoured to fhew, and what, 
I think, muft appear evident and obvious, that 
3 none 











58 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


fors of men, have only to become more aban- 
doned in wickednefs than thefe f{uppofed wretches 
could be ; and to pafs on in the moft abomin- 


able bye paths of wickednefs, and make every 


thing that they can fee an example for their 
brutal barbarity; and whether it be a man 
hanged for his crimes, or an innocent man for 
the wretched wickednefs of others; right or 
wrong it makes no difference to them, if they 
can only fatisfy their own wretched and brutal 
avarice, Whether it be the Ifraelites fubjeGting 
the Canaanites for their crimes, or the Canaan- 
ites fubjecting the Ifraelites, to gratify their own 
wickednefs, it makes no difference to them. 


When they fee fome bafe wretches like them- - 


felves enfnaring, enflaving, oppreffing, whip- 
ping, ftarving with hunger, and cruelly tortur- 
ing and murdering fome of the poor helplefs 
part of mankind, they would think no harm in 
it, they would do the fame. Perhaps the Greeks 
and Romans, and other crowds of barbarous na- 


_tions have done fo before ; they can make that a 


recedent, and think no harm in it, they would 
ftill do the fame, and worfe than any barbarous 
nations. ever did before: and if they look back- 
wards and forwards they can find no better pre- 
cedent, ancient or modern, than that which is 
wicked, mean, brutifh, and bafe. To practife 
fuch abominable parallels of wickednefs of en- 
{naring, negociating, and enflaving men, is the 
fcandal and fhame of mankind; And what muft 


we think of their crimes? Let the groans and 


cries of the murdered, and the cruel flavery of 
the Africans tell 1 

» They that can ftand and look on and behold 
no evil in the infamous traffic of flavery muft be 


funk 





RO Ne ne age RN ge ne A TL a a OR ne a — So 





a 


en ee Pe Ce 





>. 


oe ee ee Oe re ee el 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. &8 


among men, and breaking through all the laws 
of juftice and equity to them, and making even 


the very things which are analogous to the obli- 


gations, which ought to warn and _ prohibit 
them, a pretence for their iniquity and injuftice. 
Such are the infidious merchants and pirates that 
gladen their oars with the carnage and captivity 
of men, and the vile negociators and enflavers 
of the human {pecies. The prohibitions againft 
them are fo ftrong, that, in order to break 
through and to commit the moft notorious and 
flagrant crimes with impunity, they are obliged 
to oil their poifonous pretences with various per- 
verfions of fundry tranfactions of things even in 
facred writ, that. the acrimonious points of their 
arfenic may be fwallowed down the better, and 


the evil effects of their crimes appear the lefs. In 


this refpect, inftead of the facred hiftory of the If- 
raclitifo nation being made profitable to them, for 
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for inftruc- 
tion in righteoufne/s, as it was intended, and given 
to men for that purpofe; but, inftead thereof, 
the wars of the Ifraelites, the extirpation and 
fubjection of the Canaanites, and other tranf- 
actions of that kind, are generally made ufe of 
by wicked men as precedents and pretences to 


encourage and embolden themfelves to commit 


cruelty and flavery on their fellow-creatures : 
and the mercilefs depredators, negociators, and 
enflavers of men, revert to the very ritual law of 
Mofes as a precedent for their barbarity, cruelty, 
and injuftice; which law, though devoid of any 
iniquity, as bearing a parallel allufion to other 
things fignified thereby, can afford no precedent 
for their evil way, in any fhape or view: what 
was intended by it is fulfilled, and in no refpect, 

OF 














69 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


into that evil way of brutith itupidity as well as 


wickednefis, that they can behold nothing of mo- 
ral rectitude and equity among men but in the 
gloomy darknefs of their own hemifphere, like 
the owls and night- hawks, who can fee nothing 
but mift and darknefs in the meridian blaze. of 
day. When men forfake. the paths of virtue, 
righteoufnefs, juftice, and mercy, and become 
vitiated in any evil way, all their pretended vir- 
tues, fenfibility, and prudence among men, how- 
ever high they may fhine in their own, and of 


‘ others eftimation, will only appear to be but {pe- 


cious villainy at laft. That virtue which will ever. 
do men any good in the end, is as far from that 
which fome men call fuch, as the gaudy appear- 


‘ance of a glow-worm in ce dark, is to the in- 


trinfic value and luftre of a diamond: for if a 
man hath not love in his heart to his fellow- 
creatures, with a generous philanthropy diffufed 
throughout his whole foul, all his other virtues 
are not worth a ftraw. 

The whole law of God is founded upon love, 
and the two grand branches of it are. thefe: 
Thou fhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart 
and with all thy foul; and thou fhalt love thy neigh- 
bour as thyfelf.. And fo it was when man was firft, 
created and made: they were created male and 
female, and pronounced to be in the image of 
God, and, as his reprefentative, to have domi- 
nion aver ‘the lower creation: and their Maker, 
who is love, and the intelleétual Father of Spi-. 
rits, blefled them, and commanded them to arife 
in a bond of union of nature and of blood, each 
being a brother and a fifter together, and each, 
the Eyer and the ioved of one another. . But 
when they were enyied and invaded by the grand 

enflaver 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 57 


and enflavers, than it would be to ftand and 
laugh, and look on with a brutal and favage.im- 
punity, at beholding the following fuppofition 


traniacted. Suppofe two or three. half-witted — 


foolith fellows happened to come paft a crowd of 
people, gazing at one which they had hung up 
by the neck on a tree, as a victim fuffering for 
breaking the laws of his country ; and fuppofe 


thefe foolith fellows went ona little way ina bye _ 


path, and found fome innocent perfon, not fuf= 
pecting any harm till taken hold of by them, and 
- could not deliver himfelf from them, and juft 
becaufeé they had feen among the crowd of people 
which they came paft, that there had beena man 
hung by the neck, they took it into their foolifh 
wicked heads to hang up the poor innocent man 
on the next tree, and juft did as they had feen 
others do, to pleafe their own fancy and bafe 
foolifhnefs, to fee how he would fwing. Now if 
any of the other people happened to come up to 
them, and faw what they had done, would they 
hefitate 2 moment to determine between them- 
felves and thefe foolifh rafcals which had done 
wickednefs? Surely not; they would immedi- 
ately take hold of fuch ftupid wicked wretches, 
if it was in their power, and for their brutith 
foolithnefs, have them chained in a Bedlam, or 
hung on agibbet. But what would thefe bafe 
foolith wretches fay for themfelves? That they 
faw others do fo, and they thought there had 
been no harm in it, and they only did as they 
had feen the-crowd of people do before. A poor 
foolith, bafe, rafcally excufe indeed‘! But not a 
better excufe than this, can the brutith enflavers 
and negociators of men find in all the annals of 


hiftory. Theenfnarers, negociators, and oppref- 


fors 








62 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


compulfory fervice, is an injury and robbery 
contrary to all law, civilization, reafon, juftice, 
equity, and humanity: theréfore when men 
break through the laws of God, and the rules of 
civilization among men, and go forth to fteal, 
to rob, to plunder, to opprefs and to enflave, and 
to deftroy their fellow-creatures, the laws of God 
and man require that they fhould be fuppreffed, 
and deprived of their liberty, or perhaps their 
lives, 

But juftice and equity does not always refide 
among men, even where fome confiderable de- 
gree of civilization is maintained ; if it had, that 
moft infamous refervoir of public and abandoned © 
merchandizers and enflavers of men would ‘not 
have been fuffered fo long, nor the poor unfor- 
tunate Africans, that never would have croffed 
the Atlantic to rob them, would not have be- 
come their prey. But it is juft as great and as 
heinous a tranfgreffion of the law of God to 
fteal, kidnap, buy, fell, and enflave any one of 
the Africans, as it would be to enfnare any other’ 
man in the fame manner, let him be who he will. 
And fuppofe that fome of the African pirates had 
been as dextrous as the Europeans, and that they 
had. made excurfions on the coaft of Great-Bri- 
tain or elfewhere, and though even aflifted by 
fome of yonr own infiduous neighbours, for there, 
may be fome men even among you vile enough 
to do fuch a thing if they could get money by 
it; and that they fhould carry off your fons and 
your daughters, and your wives and friends, to 
a perpetual and barbarous flavery, you would 
certainly think that thofe African pirates were 
juftly deferving of any punifhment that could be 
put upon them. But the European pirates and 
oe | merchandizers 


.* 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 59 


funk to a wonderful degree of infenfibility ; but 
furely thofe that can delight in that evil way for 
their gain, and be pleafed with the wickednefs of 
the wicked, and fee no harm in fubjecting their 
fellow-creatures to flavery, and keeping them in 
a ftate of bondage and fubjecétion as a brute, 
muft be wretchedly brutifh indeed. But fo be- 
witched are the general part of mankind with 
fome fottifh or felfifh principle, that they care 
nothing about what is rignt or wrong, any far- 
ther than their own intereft leads them to; and 
when avarice leads them on they can plead a 
thoufand excufes for doing wrong, or letting 


others do wickedly, fo as they have any advan-’ 


tage by it, to their own gratification and ufe, 
‘That fottifh and felfifh principle, without con- 
cern and difcernment among men is fuch, that if 
they can only profper themfelves, they care no- 
thing about the miferable fituation of others; 
-and hence it is, that even thofe who are elevated 
to high rank of power and affluence, and as be- 
coming their eminent ftations, have opportunity 
of extending their views afar, yet they can fhut 
their eyes at this enormous evil of the flavery and 
commerce of the human fpecies ; and, contrary 
to all the boafted accomplifhments, and fine vir- 
tues of the civilized and enlightened nations, they 
can fit ftill and let the torrent of robbery, fla- 
very, and oppreffion roll on. 

There is a way which feemeth good unto a man, 
but the end thereof are the ways of death. Should 
the enflavers of men think to juftify themfelves 
in their evil way, or that it can in any poffible 
way be right for them to fubjeé others to fla- 
very ;. it is but charitable to evince and declare 
unto them, that they are thofe who have gone 

intQ 


be 





Si 








Le mace alli tliat, 


ee le 


ai ig a ASR! IE at Dab cage ust 


64 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


be doing as great an injury to them, without any 
reparation or benefit to ourfelves. For what man 
can reftore an eye that he may have deprived 
another of, and if even a double punithment was 
to pafs upon him, and that he was to lofe both 
his eyes for the crime, that would make no repa- 
ration to the other man whom he had deprived of 
one eye. And fo, likewife, when aman is car- 
ried captive and enflaved, and maimed and cru- 
elly treated, that would make no adequate repa- 


ration and reftitution for the injurics he had re- | 


ceived, if he was even to get the perfon who had 
enfnared him to be taken captive and treated in 
the fame manner. What he is to feek after is a 
deliverance and protection for himfelf, and not a 
revenge upon others. Wherefore the honeft and 
upright, like the juft Bethlehem Jofeph, cannot 
think of doing evil, nor require an equal retalia- 
tion for fuch injuries done to them, fo as to re- 
venge themfelves upon others, for that which 
would do them no manner of good, Such ven- 
geance belongeth unto the Lord, and he will ren- 
der vengeance and recompence to his enemies and 
the violaters of his law. 


© But thus faith the law of God: If a man be 
found ftealing any of bis neighbours, or be that fleal-. 


eth a man (let him be who he will) and felleth him, 
or that maketh merchandize of him, or if he be found 
in bis hand, then that thief fhall die. However, in 
all modern flavery among Chriftians, who ought 
to know this law, they have not had any regard 
to it. Surely if any law among them admits of 
death as a punifhment for robbing or defrauding 
others of their money or goods, it ought to be 
double death, if it was poffible, when'a man is 
robbed of himfelf, and fold into captivity and 

: cruel 


: 
; 
| 
: 
} 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 61 
enflaver of men, all their jarring incoherency 
arofe, and thofe who adhered to their pernicious 
ufurper foon became envious, hateful, and ha- 
ting one another. And thofe who go on to in- 
jure, enfnare, opprefs, atid enflavé their fellow - 
creatures, manifeft their hatred to men, and 
maintain their own iiffamous dignity and vaifal- 
age, as the fervants of fin and the devil: but the 
man that has any honour as a man feorns their 
ignominious dignity: the noble philanthropift 
looks up to his God and Father as his only fove- 


reign ; and he looks around on his fellow men as — 


his brethren and friends ; and in every fituation 
and cafe, however mean and contemptible they 
may feem, he endeavours to do them good: and 
fhould he meet with one in the defert, whom he 
never faw before, he would hail him my brother ! 
my fifter! my friend.! how fares it with thee ? 
And if he can do any of them any good it would 
gladden every nerve of his foul. 


But as there is but one law and: oné manner pre- 


feribed univerfally for all mankind, for you, and 
for the franger that fojourneth with you, and where- 
fover they may be fcattered throughout the face 
of the whole earth, the difference “of. fuperiority 
and, inferiority which are found fubfifting amongtt 
them is no way incompatible with the univerfal 
law of love, honor, righteoufnefs, and equity ; 
fo that a free, voluntary, and fociable fervitude, 


which is the very bafis of human fociety, either’ 


civil or religious, whereby we ferve one another 
that we may be ferved, or do good that good 
may be done. unto us, is in all things requlifite 
and agreeable to all law and juftice. But the 
taking away the natural liberties of men, and 
compelling them to pap involuntary flavery, or 

compulfory 











66 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


meet with: fome mitigation in the. punifhment, 
becaufe of the forbearance of God; and the un- 
righteoufnefs of men, it cannot thereby be thought 
the lefs criminal in itfelf’ But it alfo fuppofes, | 
where {trict feverities are made ufe of in the laws 
of civilization, that the doers of the law, and thé a 
judges of it;,ought to be'very:righteous them-. 
felves;. And with regard: to that law of men= 
ftealers, merchandizers, and of flaves found in 
their hands, that. whatever mitigation and for- 
bearance fach offenders ought’to meet with, their 
erimes denote a very heinous offence, and a great © 
violation of the law of God; they ought, there- 
fore, to be punifhed according*to their trefpaffes, 
which, in fome cafes, fhould -be death, if the 
perfon fo robbed and ftole fhould die in confe« 
quence thereof, or fhould: not be reftored and 
brought back; and even then to be liable to 
‘every damage and penalty: that the judges fhould | 
think proper: for fo it is annexed to this law . 
‘and required, that men fhould put away evil :from | 
‘among them. But this cannot now extend to’the . 
-Weft-India flavery: what fhould rather be: re- ! 
‘quired of them, in their prefent ‘cafe of infatua- | 
tion, is to furrender and give it up, and heal the 
-ftripes that they have wounded, and to pour the 
healing balm of Chriftianity into’ the bleeding 
wounds of Heathen barbarity: and cruelty. | 
All the criminal laws of civilization feem to be . 
founded upon that law of God which was pub- 
; lifhed to Noah and his fons; and, confequently, | 
, ‘as it is again and again repeated, it becomes ir- | 
f reverfible, and univerfal..to all. mankind. °id | 
a Surely your blood of your lives will Irequire: at the | 
: hand of every beaft will I require it; and at the band ’ 
‘of man, at the hand of every man’s brother, will I ; 





he eg require 
ee 

(hee 

oe 4 

pay}. 








ON..THE.EVIL OF SLAVERY.“ 63 


merchandizers of the human fpecies, let them 
belong to what nation they will, are equally as 
bad ; and they have no better right to fteal, kid- 
nap, buy, and carry away and fell the Africans, 
than the Africans would have to carry away any 


of the Europeans in the fame barbarous and un- | 


lawful manner. | _ 
_ But again, let us follow’ the European piracy 
to the Weft-Indies, or any where among Chrit- 
tians, and this law of the Lord Chri muft flare 
every infidel flave-holder in the face, dud as ye 
would that men fhould do to you, do ye alfo to them 
likewife. “But there is no flave-holder would like 
to have himfelf enflaved, and to be treated as a 
dog, and fold like a beaft; and therefore the 
flave-holders, and merchandizers of men, tranf- 
grefs this plain law, and they commit a greater 
violation againft it, and act more contrary unto 
it, than it would be for a parcel of flaves to af- 
fume authority over their mafters, and compel 
them to flavery under them; for, if that was not 
doing as they would with to be done to, it would 
be doing, at leaft, as others do to them, in a way 
equally as much and more wrong. But our Di- 
vine Lord and Majer Chrift alfo teacheth men to 
forgive one another their trefpaffes, and that we are 
not to do evil becaufe others do fo, and to re- 
venge injuries done unto us, Wherefore it is 
better, and more our duty, to fuffer ourfelves to 
be lafhed and cruelly treated, than to take up the 
tafk of their barbarity. The, juft law of God re- 
quires an equal retaliation and reftoration for 
every injury that men may do to others, to fhew 
the greatnefs of the crime; but the law of for- 
- bearance, righteoufneis and forgivenefs, forbids 
the retaliation to be fought after, when it would 
be 











68) THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


he fhould die for his crime. And as murder is 
irreverfibly to be punifhed with death, fometimes 
when it is-not done, but only implied or. even- 


_tually intended, it even then requires death ; and 


in this fenfe it becomes right to face our enemies 
in the field of battle, and to cut them off. And 
when fpies and incendiaries rife up, or when re- 
bellions break forth, and the lives of the Sove- 
reign-and others, and the good of the commu- 
nity is not fafe while fuch pretenders and their 
chief fupporters are fuffered to live; then it may 
be lawful; in fome cates, that they fhould die; 
but in cafes of this kind there is generally more 
cowardice and cruelty than juftice and mercy re- 
garded, and more diferetionary power left for. 
men to ufe their authority in, and to eftablifh 
criminal laws or precedents than in any thing 
elfe. Hence we may find many of the different. 
chiefs and kings in different parts of the world, 
in ‘all ages, wading through a fea of blood to 
their thrones, or fupporting themfelves upon it, 
by defolating and deftroying others ; and we may 
find good and bad in all ages fetting up wretched 
examples for men to be guided by; and herein 
we may find a David, a Solomon, a Cromwell, 
committing murder and death, and a Charles the 
Second committing a greater carnage upon more, » 
innocent people than thofe who fuffered in the 
reign of a bloody Queen Mary; and even in a 
late rebellion there were many fuffered in Britain, ._ 
which, if they had been, preferved to this mild. 
reign, they would have been as good neighbours, 
and as faithful fubjects, as any other. But among | 
all pretences for taking away the lives of men by. 
any form of law, that for religion is the mott . 
s' : ° aa unwar- 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 65 


cruel flavery... But becaufe of his own. goodnefs, 
and becaufe of the-univerfal depravity of men, 
the Sovereign Judge ofall has introduced a law 
of forbearance, to {pare fuch tranfgrefiors, where 
in many cafes the law denounces death as the 
punifhment for their crimes, unlefs for thofe 
founded upon murder, or fuch abominations as 
cannot be forborn with in any civilization among 
men. But this law of forbearance is no altera- 
tion of the law itfelf; it is only a refpite in order 
to {pare fuch as will fly to him for refuge and 
forgivenefs for all their crimes, and for all their 
iniquities, who is the righteous fulfiller of the 
law, and the furety and reprefentative of men 
before God: and if they do not repent of their 
iniquity, and reform to a life of new obedience, 
as being under greater obligations to the law, 
but go on in their evil way, they muft at laft for 
ever lie under the curfe and every penalty of the 
juft and holy law of tht Moft High. This feems 
to be determined fo by that Great Judge of the 
law, when the accufers of a woman, taken in ia 
adultery, brought her before him, he ftooped : i 





ye 
down as a man and wrote, we may fuppofe, the - ae 
crimes of her accufers in the duft, and as the ee | 


God of all intelligence painted them in their cons || 
{ciences, wherefore they fled away one by one, a 
and the woman was left alone before him; and 
as there was none of her accufers in that caf@ 
righteous-enough to throw the firft ftone, and to i) 
execute the law upon her, fhe was, Bid togo and . aA 
fin no more. But it is manifeft that every crime | ] 
that men may commit, where death is mentioned 
as the penalty thereof in the righteous law of 
‘God, it denotes a very great offence and a heinous | 
‘trangreffion ; and although, in many cafes, it may’ We 
F meet Y 














70 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


‘fas much*.” According to this law, when the ~ 
property of others is taken away, either by ftealth, 
fraud, or violence, the agereffors fhould be fub- 
jected to fuch bondage and hard labour, (and 
efpecially when the trefpafs is great, and they 
have nothing to pay) as would be requifite to 
make reftitution to the injured, and to bring 
about a reformation to themfelves. And if. they 
have committed violence either by threats or 
force, they ought to fuffer bodily punifhment, 
and the feverity of it according to their crimes, 
and the ftubbornnefs of their obduracy ; and all 
fuch punifhments as are neceffary fhould be in- 
flicted upon them without pitying or fparing 
them, though perhaps not to be continued for 
ever in the brutal manner that the Weft-India 
Slaves fuffer for almoft no crimes. 

But whereas the robbing of others in any man- 
ner of their property is often attended with fuch 
cruelty and violence, and a fevere lofs to the fuf- 
ferers, it may, in fome cafes, be thought that 
the law of God fufficiently warrants the taking 
away the lives of the aggreffors; for the taking 
away of a man’s property in general may be con- 
fidered as taking away his life, or at leaft the 
means of his fupport, and then the punifhing the 
tranfgreffors with death can only in that cafe be 
sxeckoned a conftructive murder. Wherefore the 
tranfereflors ought to be punifhed feverely ; but 
hever with any laws of civilization where death is 
concerned, without a regard to the law of God. 


* A great part of this law, is ftritly obferved in Africa, 
and we make ufe of facrifices, and keep a fabbath every {e- 
venth day, more ftriétly than Chriftians generally do. 


And 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 67) 
require the life of man. Whofo foeddeth man’s blood, 
by man fall his blood be foed: for in the image of 
God made be man. If this law of God’had not 
been given to men, murder itfelf would not 
have been any crime; and thofe who punifhed 
it with death would juft have-been as guilty as. 
the other. » But the law of God is juft. righteous’ 
and holy, and ought'to be regarded and revered 
above all the laws of men; and this is added’ 
unto it: What thing Joever I command you, obferve 
to doit: thou foalt not add, thereto, nor diminifo — 
from it. But it is an exceeding impious thing 
for men ever to prefume, or think, as fome will 
fay, that they would ‘make it death as a punifh- 
ment for fuch a thing, and fuch a trefpafs; or 
that they can make any criminal laws of civiliza- 
tion as binding with a penalty of death for any 
thing juft what they pleafe. No fuch thing can 
be fuppofed; no man upon earth ever had, or 
ever can have, a right to make laws where a pe- 
nalty of cutting off by death is required as the - 
punifhment for the tranfgreffion thereof: what is 
required of men is to be the doers of the law, 
and fome of them to be judges of it; and if they 

‘judge wrongfully in taking away the lives of theif 
fellow-creatures contrary to the law of God, they 
- commit murder. 
' The reafon why a man fuffers death for breale- 
ing the laws of his country is, becaufe he tranf 
greffeth the law of God in that community he be» 
longs to; and the laws of civilization are bind 
ing to put that law in force; and to point out 
and fhew a fufficient warrant wherefore he fhould 
- fuffer, according as the juft law of God requires 
for his trefpafs ; ‘and then it-is juft and right sie 
| - S e 


= 











72, THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS | 


diminfh any thing to the law of God, with refpeck 
to taking away their lives. Wherefore, if the law 
of God does not fo clearly warrant, that they 
fhould die for their theft, it, at Jeaft, fully war- 
rants that they fhould be fold into flavery for 
their-crimes ; and the laws of ‘civilization may 
juftly bind them, and hold them in perpetual 
bondage, becaufe they have fold themfelves to 
work iniquity; but not that they fhould be fold 
to the heathen, or to fuch as would not inftruct 
them: for there might be hope, that if good in- 
ftruction was properly adminiftered unto them, 
there might be a poffible reformation wrovght 
upon fome of them. Some, by their ingenious 
affiduity, have tamed the moft favage wild beatts ; 
it is certainly more laudable to tame the moft 
brutifh and favage men, and, in time, there might 
be fome Onefimus’s found amongft them, that 


would become ufeful to reclaim others. Thofe 


that break the laws-of civilization, in any flagrant 
manner, are the only fpecies of men that others 
have a right to enflave ; and fuch ought to be fold 
to the community, with every thing that can be 
found belonging to them, to make a commuta- 
tion of reftitution as far as could be; and they 
fhould be kept at fome ufeful and laborious em- 
ployment, and it might be at fome embankation, 
or recovering of wafte ground, as there might be 


‘land recovered on rivers and fhores,; worth all the 


expence, for the benefit of the community they 
belonged to. The continuance of that criminal 
flavery and bondage, ought to be according to the 
nature of their crimes, with a reference to their 
good behaviour, either to be continued or pra- 


~ traéted. Such as were condemned for life, when 


their crimes were great, and themfelves ftubborn, 
ne might 





ON THE EVIL OF. SLAVERY. 66 


unwarrantable: it is the command of God to 
fupprefs idolatry, and to break down the images 
and external pomp of grofs fuperftition, but not 
to deftroy men themfelves : that perfecution is 
murder if it takes away the lives of men fot- 
their religion, for it has nothing to do with what 
men may think with refpect to their own duty ; 
and if a man is foolifh enough to make an image 
of wood or ftone, and to worfhip it, or even to 
adore a picture, if he keeps it to himfelf, perfe- 
cution has nothing to do with him. 

The law of God forbids all manner of cove- 
toufnefs and theft: but when any thing is taken 
away by ftealth, it is not like thofe injuries which - 
cannot be reftored, as the cutting off or wound- 
ing any of the members of the body; but it ad- 
mits of a poffible reftoration, whether the viola- 
tors can reftore. it or not as the law requires, fo 


_ if a man owes a juft debt it is not the lefs due 


¢ 


by him if he has got nothing to pay it with; 
fuch trangreffors ought to be punifhed according 
to their trefpaffes, bur not with death: for the 


- Jaw of God 1s, * If a thief be found breaking up, 


‘© and he be {mitten that he die, if it was in the 
«¢ night there fhall be no blood fhed for hims 
“‘ but if the fun be rifen upon him, there was — 
<< blood required for him if he was killed; for 
*¢ faith the law it required only he fhould make. 
< full reftitution; and if he had nothing, then 
“‘ he fhould be fold for his theft. And if any 
«¢ manner of theft be found in a man’s hand, the 
“¢ law requires a retaliation and _reftoration; that 
*€ is, that he fhould reftore double; but if it be 
“ fold or made away with, it was then to be four; 
66 fold, and, in fome cafes, five, fix or feven times 
F F 3 Cag 


a ES 8 eee 














74 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


man from flavery, but by enflaving his matter, it 
would be lawful for him to do fo if he was able, 
for this would be doing juftice to himfelf, and be 
guftice. as the law requires, to chaftife his matter 
for enflaving of him wrongfully. 

Thence this general and grand duty fhould be 
obferved by every man, not to follow the multi- 
tude to do evil, neither to recompence evil for 
evil; and yet, fo that a man may lawfully defend 
himfelf, and endeavour to fecure himfelf, and 
others, as far as he can, from injuries of every 
kind. Wherefore all along, in the hiftory of 
mankind, the various depredations committed in 
the world, by enflaving, extirpating and deftroy- 
ing men, were always contrary to the laws of 
God, and what he had ftriily forbidden and com- 
manded not to be done. But infolent, proud, 
wicked men, in all ages, and in all places, are 
alike; they difregard the laws of the Moft High, 
and ftop at no evil in their power, that they can 


_ contrive with any pretence of confiftency in doing 


mifchief to others, fo as it may tend to promote 
their own profit and ambition. Such are all the 
depredators, kidnappers, merchandizers and en- 
flavers of men ; they do not care, nor confider, 
how much they injure others, if they can make 
any advantage to themfelves byit. But whenever 
thefe things were committed by wicked men, a 
retaliation was fought after, as the only way of 
deliverance ; for he who. Jeadeth into captivity, 
Should be carried captive ; and he which deftroy- 
eth with the fword, fhould die with the fword, 


And as it became neceffary to punifh thofe that 


wronged others, when the punifhers went beyond 
the bounds of a juft retaliation, and fell into the 
fame. crimes .of the. oppreffors, not to prevent 
sist : them-< 








© ON THE EVIL-OF SLAVERY. 7 


‘And when the Jaw of.God admits of a forbear- 
ance, and a kind of forgivenefs in many things, 
it ought to be the.grand law of civilization to 
feek out fuch rules of punifhment as are beft cal- 
culated to prevent injuries of every kind, and to 
reclaim the tranfgreffors ; and it is beft; if it can 


be done, to punifh with a lefs degree of feverity. 


than their crimes. deferve. But all the laws of 
civilization muft jar greatly when the law of God 
is {crewed up in the greateft feverity to punith 
men for their crimes on the one hand, and on 
the other to be totally difregarded*. When the 
Divine law points out a theft, where the thief 
fhould make reftitution for his trefpafs, the laws 
of civilization fay, he muft die for his crime: 
and when that Jaw tells us, that he who ftealeth 
or maketh merchandize of men, that fuch a thief 
fhal] furely die, the laws of civilization fay, in 
many cafes, that it is nocrime. In this the ways 
of men are not equal; but let the wife and juit 
determine whether the laws of God or the laws of 
men are right. ; 

_ Amongft fome of the greateft tranfgreffors of 
the laws of civilization, thofe that defraud the 
public by forgery, or by fubftituting or falfifying 
any of the current fpecie, ought to have their 
lives or their liberties taken away; for although 
they may not do any perfonal injury, they commit 
the greateft robbery and theft, both to indivi- 
dualsand the whole community, But even in the 
fuppreffion of thofe, men have no right to add or 


* This confeffional minftrel may be often repeated, but, I 
fear, feldom regarded: ‘* We have offended againft thy holy 
** laws ; we have left undone thofe things which we ought to 
¢* have} done; and we have done thofe things which we 
#¢ ought not to have done,” gente: tte | 
: | diminifh 











it 
Ma 
Wan ibe 
onl Ra 
St 
y Q ay 


76 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


defire: fo they wrap it up. Among the bef in 
Africa, we have found them /harp as a briar; 
among the moft upright, we have found them 
Sharper than a thorn-hedge in the Weft-Indies, 
Yet, O Africa! yet, poor flave! The day of thy 
watchmen cometh, and thy vifitation dtaweth nigh, 
that fhall be their perplexity. Therefore I will look 
unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my falva- 
tion; my God will hear me. Rejoice not againft me, 
O mine enemy ; though I be fallen, I fhall yet arife ; 
though I fit in darknefs, the Lord fhall yet be a light 
unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, 
becaufe I have finned againft him, until he plead my 
caufe, and execute judgment for me, and I foall behold 
bis righteoufne/s. Then mine enemies fhall fee it, and 
feoame foall cover them which faid unto me, Where is 
the Lord thy God, that regardeth thee: Mine eyes 
fhall behold them trodden down as the mire of the 
fireets. In that day that thy walls of deliverance 
are to be built, in that day fhall the decree of flavery 
be far removed. : : 
What revolution the end of that predominant 
evil of flavery and oppreffion may produce, whe- 
ther the wife and confiderate will furrender and 
give it up, and make reftitution for the injuries 
that they have already done, as far as they can; 
or whether the force of their wickednefs, and the 
iniquity of their power, will lead them on until 
fome univerfal calamity burft. forth againft the 
abandoned carriers of it on, and againft the cri- 
minal nations in confederacy with them, is not 
for me to determine? But this mutt appear evi- 
dent, that for any: man to carry on a traffic in the 
merchandize of flaves, and to keep them in fla- 
very; or for any nation to opprefs, extirpate and 
deftroy others ; that thefe are crimes of the greatett 
“th . magnitude, 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 73 


might be fo marked as to render their getting 
away impoffible without being difcovered, and 
that the very fight of one of them might deter 
others from committing their crimes, as much as 
hanging perhaps a dozen of them; and it might 
be made fo fevere unto them, that it would ren- 
der their own fociety in bondage, almoft the only 
preferable one that'they could enjoy among men. 
‘The manner of confining them would not be fo 
impracticable as fome may be apt to think; and 
all thefe feverities come under the laws of men to 
punifh others for their crimes, but they fhould 
not go beyond the juft law of God; and neither 
fhould his laws be fufpended, where greater tref- 
paffes are committed. : 
In this fenfe every free community might keep 
flaves, or criminal prifoners in bondage; and fhould 
they be fold to any other, it fhould not be to ftran- 
gers, nor without their own confent ; and if any were 
fold for a term of years, they would naturally be- 
come free as foon as their purchafe could be paid. 
But if any man fhould buy another man without 
his own confent, and compel him to his fervice 
and flavery without any agreement of that man to 
‘ferve him, the enflaver is a robber, and a de- 
frauder of that man every day. Wherefore it is 
as much the duty of a man who is robbed in that 
manner to get out of the hands of his enflaver, as 
it is for any honeft community of men to get out, 
of the hands of rogues and villains. And how- 
ever much is required of men to forgive one ano- 
ther their trefpaffes in one refpect, it is alfo mani- 
feft, and what we are commanded, as noble, to 
refift evil in another, in order to prevent others 
‘doing evil, and to keep ourfelves from harm. 
Therefore, if there was no other way to deliver a 
M3n 








78 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

doned evil and wickednefs, fo very difgraceful t6 
human nature, but even partakers in thofe crimes 
of the moft vile combinations of various pirates, 
kidnappers, robbers and thieves, the ruffians and 
ftealers of mén, that ever made their appearance 
in the world, as 1710 
- Soon after Columbus had difcovered America; 
that great navigator was himfelf greatly embar- 
raffed and treated unjuftly, and his beft defigns 
éounteracted by the wicked bafenefs of thofe 
whom he led to that difcovery. The infernal 
conduct of his Spanifh competitors, whofe lead~- 
mg motives-were covetoufnefs, avarice and fana- 
ticifm, foon made their appearance, and became 
cruel and dreadful. At Hifpaniola the bafe per- 
fidy and bloody treachery of the Spaniards, led 
on by the perfidious Ovando, in feizing ’ the 


“peaceable Queen Anacoana and her attendants, 


burning her palace, putting all to deftruction, 
arid the innocent Queen and her people to a cruel 
death, is truly horrible and lamentable. And 
ted on by the treacherous Cortes, the fate of the 
great Montezuma was dreadful and thocking ; 
how that American monarch ‘was. treated, ‘be- 
trayéd and deftroyed, and his vaft extenfive em+ 
pire of the Mexicans brought to ruin and devas 
ftation, no man of fenfibility and feeling can read 
the hiftory without pity and refentment. And 
looking over another page of that hiftory, fenfi- 
bility would kindle into: horror and indignation, — 
to fee the bafe treacherous baftard Pizarra at the 
head of the Spanifh banditti of mifcreant depre- 
dators, leading them on, and overturning one of 
the moft extenfive empires in the world. ‘To 
recite a little of this as a fpecimen of the -reft: 
It feems Pizarra, with his company: of, depreda= 
tors, 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY, 7§ 
themfelves from harm, and.to deliver the oppref- 


fed and the captive, but to opprefsand enflave 


others, as much as they before them had done, 
the confequence is plain, that an impending overs 


throw mut ftill fali upon them likewife. In thar . 


refpect, fo far as conquerors are permitted to be- 
come a judgment and a fcourge to others, for 


their enormous tranfgreffions, they are themielves - 


not a bit the more fafe, for what they do, they 
often do wickedly for their own purpofe; and 
when the purpofe of Divine Providence, who raif- 
ed them up, is fulfilled by them, in the punith- 
ment,of others for their crimes; the next wave 
thereof will’be to vifit them alfo according to 
their wickednefs with fome dreadful overthrow, 
and to {wallow them up in the fea of deftruction 

and oblivion. 
Hiftory affords us many examples of fevere re« 
_taliations, revolutions and dreadful overthrowss 
and of many crying under the heavy load of fub- 
jection and oppreffion, feeking for deliverance, 
And methinks I hear now, many of my country- 
men, in complexion, crying and groaning under 
the heavy yoke of flavery and bondage, and pray- 
ing to be delivered; and the word of the Lord is 
thus {peaking for them, while they are bemoan- 
ing themfelves under the grievous bonds of their 

mifery and woe, faying, Woe is me! alas Africa! 
for Lam as the laft gleanings of the Jummer fruit, as 
the grape gleanings of the vintage, where no clufter és 
tocat. The good are perifhed out of the earth, and 
there is none upright among men; they all lie in wait 
for blood ; they hunt every man bis brother with a 
net. That they may do evil with both bands earnef= 

ly, the prince afketh, and the judge afketh for a res 
ward; and the great man he uttereth bis mifchievous, 
defire 














80 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


Pope, and fubmit to the Great Monarch of Caf 
tile; but if he fhould refufe an immediate com- 
pliance with thefe requifitions, they were to. de- 
clare war again{ft him, and that he might expec 
the dreadful effects of their vengeance. This 
ftrange harangue, unfolding deep myfteries, and 
alluding’ to fuch unknown facts; of which no 
power of eloquence could tranflate, and convey, 
at once, a diftinct idea to an American, that its 
general tenor was altogether incomprehenfible to 
Atahualpa. Some parts in ity as more obvious 
than the reft, filled -him with. aftonifhment. and 
indignation. . His reply, however, was temper- 
ate, and as fuitable as could be well expected. 
He obferved that he was Lord of the dominions 
over which he reigned by hereditary fucceffion ; 
and, faid, that he could not conceive how a fo- 
reign prieft.fhould pretend to difpofe of territories 
which did not belong to him, and that if fuch 
a -prepofterous ‘grant had been made, he, who 
was the rightful poffeffor, refufed to confirm its 
that he had_no inclination to renounce the reli- 
gious inftitutions eftablifhed by his anceftors; 
nor would he forfake the fervice of the Sun, the 
immortal divinity whom he and his_ people: re- 
vered, in order to worfhip the God of the Spa- 
niards, who was fubject to death; _and that with 
refpect to other matters, he had never heard of 


_them before, and did not then underftand their 


meaning. And he defired to know where Val- 
verde had learned things fo extraordinary. . In 
this book, replied the fanatic Monk, reaching 
out his breviary. The Inca opened it eagerly, 


cand turning.over the leaves, lifted it to his ear: 
‘This, fays he, is filent; it tell tells me nothing; 
and threw it with difdain to the ground. The 


enraged 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERYs 77 
magnitude, and a moft daring violation of. the 
laws and commandments of the Moft High, and 
Which, at laft, will be evidenced in the deftruc- 
tion and overthrow of all the tranfgreffors. And 
nothing elie can be expected for fuch violations 
of taking away the natural rights and liberties of 
men, but that thofe who are the doers of it will 
meet with fome awful vifitation of the righteous 
judgment of God, and in fuch a manner as it 
cannot be thought that his juft vengeance for 
their iniquity will be the lefs tremendous becaufe 
his. judgments are long delayed. : 

None but men of the moft brutith and depra- 
ved nature, led on by the invidious influence of 
infernal wickednefs, could have made their fet- 
tlements in the different parts of the world dif- 
covered by them, and have treated the various 
Indian nations, in the manner that the barbarous 


inhuman Europeans have done: and their efta- . 


blifhing and carrying on that moft difhoneft, un- 
juft and diabolical traffic of buying and felling, 
and of enflaving men, is fuch a monftrous, auda- 


cious and unparallelled wickednefs, that the very | 


idea of it is fhocking, and the whole nature of it 
is horrible and infernal. It may be faid with 
confidence as a certain general fact, that all their 
foreign fettlements and colonies were founded on 
murders and devaftations, and that they have 
continued their depredations in cruel flavery and 
oppreffion to this day: for where fuch predomi- 
nant wickednefs as the African flave-trade, and 
the Weft Indian flavery, is admitted, tolerated 


and fupported by them, and carried on in their 


colonies, the nations and people who are the 
fupporters, and encouragers thereof muft be not 


only guilty themlelves of that fhameful and aban- 


doned 


Te om Mth h cly Mite seared, 


spel ale 














82 - THOUGHTS AND.SENTIMENTS 


‘ tive confequences that attended ‘his confinement, 


and hy beholding the vaft treafures of fpoil that 
the Spantartds had fo eagerly’ gathered up, he 
learned: fomething of .their covetous difpo- 
fition.: and he ee as a ranfom what afto- 
nithed ‘the Spaniards, even after all they now 
knew concerning the opulence of his kingdom : 
the apartment.in which he was dottieen! was 
twenty-two feet in length and fixteen in breadth, 
he undertook to: fill-it swith veftels of gold as: hich 


as’ he could: reach. This temipting propofal was 


eagerly agreed to by Pizarra, and a line was 
drawn upon ‘the walls of the chamber to “mark 


the flipulated height to which the treafure was 


to rife. The gold was accordingly colleéted 
from various parts with the greateft expedition 
by the Inca’s: obedient and loving fubjects, who 


thought nothing too much for ‘his ranfom and 


life ; “but, after all, poor Atahualpa was cruelly 
murdered, and his body burnt by a military in- 
quifition, and his extenfive and: rich dominions 
devoted to deftruction and ruin by thefe merci- 


~ lefs depredators. 


The hiftory. of thofe FeeabGalby perfidious me- 
thods of forming fettlements, and acquiring riches 
and territory, would make humanity: tremble, 
and even recoil, at the: enjoyment of fuch ac- 
quifitions andi become reverted: into rage and) in- 
dignation at fuch horrible injuftice and barba- 
rous cruelty, ‘* It is faid: by the Peruvians, that 
** their Incas, or Monarchs, -had uniformly ex- 
“ tended their power with attention to the good 
“of their fubje&ts, that they might diffufe the 
«* bleffings of Civilization, and the knowledge of 
“ the arts which they poffefled, among the people 
< that. opel tong their protection ;, and during a 

“© fucceffion 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 79 


tors, had artfully penetrated into the Peruvian 
empire, and pretended an embafly of peace from 
a great monarch, and demanded an audience of 
the noble Atahualpa, the great Inca or Lord of 
that. empire, that the terms of their embafly 
might be explained, and the reafon of their 
coming into the territories of that monafch. 
Atahualpa fearing the menaces of thofe terrible 
invaders, and thinking to appeafe ‘them by 
complying with their requeft, relied on Pizar+ 
ra’s feigned pretenfions of friendfhip; accord= 
ingly the day was appointed, and Atahualpa 
made his appearance with the greateft decency 
and {plendor he could, to meet fuch fuperior 


beings as the Americans concéived their inva= 


ders to be, with four hundred men in an uni 
form drefs, as harbingers to clear the way before 
him, and himfelf fitting on a throne or couch, 
adorned with plumes of various colours, and al+ 
moft covered with plates of gold and filver, en 
riched with precious ftones, and was carried on the 
fhoulders of his principal attendants. As he ap- 
proached near the Spanifh quarters the arch fa+ 
natic Father Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the 
expedition, advanced with a crucifix in one hand 
and a breviary in the other, and began with a 
long difcourfe, pretending to explain fome of the 
general dottrines of Chriftianity, together with 
the fabulous notion of St. Peter’s vicegerency, 
‘and the tranfmiffion of his apoftolic power con- 
tinued in the fucceffion of the Popes; and that 
‘the then Pope, Alexander, by-donation, had in- 
vefted their mafter as the-fole Monarch of all the 
New World. In confequence of this; Atahualpa 
was inftantly required to embrace the Chriftian 
religion, acknowledge. the jurifdiction, of the 

ace ieee 

















84. THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

what has yet. appeared. But, alas! at that time 
there, was no Chriftians to fants and very few 
now), thefe were oblige! to hide themfelves in 
the . obfcure. places of the earth; that was, ac- 
cording to Sir Ifaac Newton, to. mix in ebfcu- 
rity.among the mcaneft of the people, having no 
power and authority; and it feems at that. time 
there was no, power among Chriftians on earth to 
have fent fuch as:would have been ufeful to the 


‘Americans ; .if there had they would have fent 


after the depredat. ws, and refcued the innocent. 
But as I faid before, it is furely to the great 
fhame and fcandal of Chriftianity among all the 
Heathen nations, that thofe robbers, plunderers, 
deftroyers and enflavers of men fhould call them- 
felves Chriftians, and exercife their power under 


any Chriftian government and authority. I 


would have my African countrymen to. know 
and underftand,. that the deftroyers. and. enfla- 
vers of men can be no Chriftians ; for Chriftian- 
ity is the fyftem of benignity and love, and all 
its votaries are devoted. to -honefly, juftice, hu- 
manity, meeknefs, peace and good-will to alk, 
men. But, whatever title or claim ‘fome may af- 
fume to call themfelyes by it, without poffeffing. 
any of its virtues, can only een them , to be 
the more abominable liars, and. the greatett ene 
mies unto it, and as belonging to the {ynagogue , 
of Satan, and not the adherers to Chrift. For 
the enflavers and oppreffors of men, among thofe 
that have obtained the name of Chriftians, they 
are ftill acting as its greateft encmics, and con- 
trary to all its genuine principles ; they fhould 
therefore be called by: its oppofite, the Anti- 
chrift. Such are fitly belonging to that moft 
diffolute forcerets of all religion in the world, 


“* With 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY, 87 


enraged father of ruffians, turning towards his’ 
countrymen, the affaffinatots, cried out, To 
arms, Chriftians, to arms; the word of God is 
infulted; avenge this profanation on thefe im- 
pious dogs. (ety ) 

At this the Chriftian defperadoes impatient in 
delay, as foon as the fignal of affault was given 
their martial mufic began to play, and their at- 
tack was rapid, rufhing fuddenly upon the Pe- 
ruvians, and with their hell-invented enginery of 
thunder, fire and fmoke, they. foon: put them to 
flight and deftruétion. The Inca, though his 
nobles crouded round him with officious zeal, 


and fell‘in numbers at his feet, while they vied. 


one with another in facrificing their own lives 
that they might cover the facred: perfon of: their 
Sovereign, was foon penetrated to by the affaflin- 
ators; dragged from his throne, and carried to 
the Spanith quarters. The fate of the Monarch 
increafed the precipitate flight of his followers ; 
the plains being covered with upwards of thirty 
thoufand men, were purfued by the ferocious 
Spaniards towards every quarter, who, with de- 
liberate and unrelenting barbarity, continued to 
flaughter the wretched fugitives till the clofe of 
the day, that never had once offered at any re- 
fiftance. Pizarra had contrived this daring and 
perfidious plan on purpofe to get hold of the 


Inca, notwithftanding: his affumed charaéter of - 


an ambaffador from a powerful monarch to court 
an alliance with that’ prince, and in violation of 
all. the repeated offers of his own friendfhip: 
The noble Inca thus found himfelf betrayed and 
fhut up in the Spanith quarters, though fearce 
aware at firft of the vaft carnage and deftrudction 
of his people; but foon conceiving the deftruc- 

sane : G tive 


ee iE Bl ey 











5 

F 

i oi 
ne 

iy 

le \ 
hy i 
Peta, 

\ 4 cf 











PA aa RE, I Rr a a aN ce i, SAP oN at 8 


86 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


and feature, is the Antichrift; and every dealer 
in flaves, and thofe that hold them in flavery, 
whatever elfe they may'call themfelves, or what- 
ever elfe they may profefs. And likewife, thofe 
nations whofe governments fupport that evil and 


wicked traffic of flavery, however remote the fi- 


.tuation where it is carried on may be, are, in 
that refpeét, as much Antichriftian as any thing 
in the world can be. No man will ever rob 
another unlefs he be a villain: nor will any na- 
tion or people ever enflave and opprefs others, 
unlefs themfelves. be bafe and wicked men, and 
who act and do contrary and againft every duty 

in Chriftianity. ~ i os 
The learned and ingenious author of Britannia 
Libera, as chiefly alluding to Great-Britain alone, 
gives fome account of that great evil and wick- 
ednefs carried on by the Chriftian nations, re- 
{pecting the direful effects of the great devatta- 
tions committed in foreign parts, whereby it 
would appear that the ancient and native inha- 
bitants have been drenched in blood and op- 
preflion by their mercilefs vifitors (which have 
formed colonies and fettlements among them) the 
avaricious depredators, plunderers and deftroyers 
of nations. As fome eftimate of it, “ to deftroy 
‘* eleven million,.and diftrefs many more in Ame- 
** rica, to ftarve and opprefs twelve million in 
** Afia, and the great number deftroyed, is not 
** the way to promote the dignity, ftrength and 
** fafety of empire, but to draw down the Di- 
** vine vengeance on the offenders; for depriving 
** fo many of their fellow-creatures of life, or the 
** commen bleffings of the earth: whereas by 
** obferving the humane principles of preferva- 
** tion with felicitation, the proper principles of 
co foi, geet 


ON’ THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 83 
“ fucceffion of twelve monarchs, not’ one had 
** deviated from this beneficent character.” Their 
fenfibility of fuch noblenefs of character would 
give them the moft poignant diflike to their new 
terrible invaders that had defolated and laid 
wafte their country, The charaéter of their mo- 
narchs would feeem to vie with as great virtues 
as any King in Europe can boaft of. Had the 
Peruvians been vifited by men of honefty, know- 
ledge, and enlightened underftanding, to teach 
them, by patient inftru@tiom and the bleffing of 
God, they might have been induced to embrace 
the doétrines and faith of Chriftianity, and to 
abandon their errors of fuperftition and idolatry, 
Had Chriftians, that deferve the name thereof, 
been fent among them, the many ufeful things 
that they would have taught them, together with 
their own pious example, would have. captivated’ 
their hearts; and the knowledge of the truth 
would have made it a very defirous thing for the 
Americans to have thofe that taught them to fet- 
tle among them. Had that been the cafe the 
Americans, in various parts, would have been’ 
as eager to have the Europeans to come there as’ 
they would have been to go, fo that’ the Euro- 
peans nii¢ht have found ettlements enough, ina 
friendly ‘alliance’ with the inhabitants, without’ 
deftroying ‘and enflaving them... And had that! 
been the cafe, it might be fuppofed, that Europe’ 


and America, Jong: before now, would both,’ 


with a growing luxuriancy, have been flourithing: 
with affluence and peace, ana their long extended’ 
and’ fruitful branches, loaden with benefits to’ 
each other, reaching over the ocean, might have’ 
been more extenfive, and greater advantages’ 
hays been expected, for the good of ‘both than’ 

G2 what 





2 
lide » sees 
ah te “4 EES Ne. ee 


ee ees aes 
















as Seah Src soe a Ra ec OEE: AE NII LE OG TIE Sees ee in Bett rire ts a _ 
os mae hs eens 4 TES Saye Sik SS fe ne a ena st 
erst is Zp Sas = pyc ao = 


i 
7 
vas 
Ab 
rt 
| + 
bit 
aati 
Gwe’. 
aly 
ase 
if 
Wa ahs 
ca 
‘\ 
es tore 
ul fe 
& 
ti 
a 
i 
4 ue 
| if. 
. eee 
a 








88 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


burden to the reft of the community: whereas 
if there were no funds, thofe who have money 
would be obliged to occupy it in fome improve- 
ments themfelves, or Iend it to other manufac- 
turers or merchants, and by that means ufeful 
employments, ingenuity and commerce would 
flourifh. But all ftock-jobbing, lotteries, and 


_ufelefs bufinefs, has a tendency to flavery and 


Oppreflion; for as the greater any idle part of 
the community is, there. muft be the greater 
dabour and hardfhips refting upon the indvftrious 
part who fupport the reft; as all men are al- 
Jotted in fome degree to eat their bread with the 
fweat of their brow; but it is evil with any people 
when the rich grind the face of the poor. ‘\otte- 


‘ries muft be ncarly as bad a way. ot getting mo- 
‘ney for the good of a nation, as it-is for an in- 


dividual when he is poor, and obliged to pawn 
chis goods to increafe his poverty, already poor. 
‘On the reverfe, if a nation was to keep a bank 
to Jend'money to merchants and others, that na- 


-tion might flourifh, and its fupport to thofe in 


need might be attended with advantage to the 
whole ; but that nation which is obliged to bor- 


‘row money from others, muft be in a poor and 


wretched fituation, and the inhabitants, who have 
to bear the load of its taxes, muft be greatly 


‘burdened, and perhaps many of thofe employed 
‘in its fervice (as foldiers and others) poorly paid. 
It was otherwile with the people of Ifrael of old; 
‘it was the promife and bleffing of God to them, 
Chat they foould lend unto many nations, but should 


not borrow. a 
But when a nation or people do wickedly, and 
commit cruelties and devaflations upon others, 


-and enflave them, it cannot be expected that they 


fhould 


ae ee ee co ~ 








“ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 88 


With whom the’ kings of the earth have lived 
‘* délicioufly ; and the inhabitants ot the earth 
‘have been made drunk with the) wine of 
** her ‘abominat:ons ; and the merchants of the 
** earth are waxed rich through the abundance 
‘“ of her delicacies, by their traffic in various 
** things, and in flaves and fouls of men!” 
It was not enough for the malignant deftroyer of 
the world to fet up his hydra- “headed kingdom 


of evil and wickednefs among. the kingdom of 


men; but alfo to caufe an image to be made 
unto him, by fomething imported in the only 
true religion that ever was given to men; and 
that image of iniquity ts deferibed as arifing up 


out of the earth, having two horns like a lamb, : 
which, by its votaries and adherents, has been 


long eftablithed and fupported. One of its ums 
bragious horns of apoftacy and delufion is found- 
ed, in a more particular refpe&t, on a grand per- 
verGon of the Old Teftament difpenfations, which 
has extended itfelf over all the Mahometan na- 
tions in the Eaft; and the other horn of apo- 
flacy, bearing an ‘aliufion and profeftional refpect 
to that of the new, has extended itfelf over all 
the Chriftian nations in the Weft. That erand 
umbragious fhadow and image of evil and wick- 
ednefs, has fpread its malignant influence over 
all the nations of the earth, and has, by irs power 
of delufion, given countenance and fupport to all 
the power of evil and wickednefs done among 
men; and all the adherents and fupporters of 
that dab Gow, aud all the carriers on of wicked- 
nefs, are fitly called Antichrift. But all the na- 
tions have drunk of the wine of that iniquity, 
and become drunk with the wine of the wrath, 
of her fornication,-whofe name, by every mark 


“is G 3 and 














Joe: aac SOR DIET POEM: BRP e LO 
mee 


4 





, % 

ae 4 
mek. 
& eats 
Fal ir ef 
fol 
“hy ea + 
“e ai 
2 ‘ i 
a yoge 

{ 





go THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 

power and intereft.an their favour; that what- 
ever crimes any of them commit they are feldom - 
broug:t toa juft. punifhment. Unlefs that fome- 
thing of this kind had been the cafe, ’tis impof 


fible;to conceive how fuch an enormous evil as 


‘the flave-trade could have been eftablifhed and 
carried op under any Chriftian government: and 
from. hence that. motly fy tem of government, — 


which hath. fo »fprung up and eftablithed. itfelf, 


may be accounted for, and as being an evident | 
and univer{al depravity of one of the fineit con- 
Atitutions in the, world; and it may be feared if 
thefe unconftitutional laws, reac ing from Great- 
Britain to her colonies, be long sectibvnmacoil 
and upported, to the carrying on that horrible 
and wicked traffic of flavery, muft at laft mark 


out the whole of the Britifh conftitution with ruin 


and, defiruGion ; and that the moft generous and 
tenacious. people in the world for liberty, may 


-alfo at laf{ be reduced to flaves. And an Ethio- 


“pian may, venture to afert, that fo long as fla- 
very is continued in any fee the Britith do- 


minions, that more than one-half of the legifla- 


ture are the virtual fupposters: and encouragers 
of a traffic which ought to be abolithed, as it 
cannot be carried on but by fome of the moft 
abandoned and profligate men upon earth. 
However, the partizans of iuch a-clafs of men 


are generally too many and numerous, whofe. 


-wiciated principles from time to time have led the 
whole nation into debt, error and difgrace; and 
by their magnetic influence there is a general 
fup port given to defpotifm, oppreffion and cru- 
ity. For many have acquired great: riches .by - 
fome infidious traffic or illegal gain ;.and as thefe 


mecame often leading men in governments, vaft 


multitudes 


. % ght = 
ay tt cis ae os et ap pei a Bees ne }- q ¥ Se 
rae aOR ec ys wba ety 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY, 87, 


‘all rulers, their empire might have received all 


‘© reafonable benefit,. with the encreafe of future - 


“ glory.” But fhould it be afked, what advan- 
tages Great-Britain has gained by all its extenfive 
territories abroad, the devaftations committed; 
and the abominable flavery and oppreffion car- 
Tied on in its colonies? It may be anfwered ac 
cording to the old proverb, . 

It feldom is the grand-child’s lot, 

To foare of wealth unjuftly gat. 
This feems to be veritied too much in their pre- 
fent fituation: for however wide they have ex- 
tended their territories abroad, they have funk 
into a world of debt at home, which muft ever 
remain an impending burden upon the inhabi- 
tants. And it is not likely, by any plan as yet 
adopted, to be ever. paid, or any part of it, 
without a long continued heavy annual load of 


taxes. Perhaps, great as it is {ome other plan, . 


more equitable for the good of the whole com- 
munity, if it was wanted to. be done, and with- 
out any additional taxes, might be fo made ufe 
of to pay it all off in twenty or thirty years time, 
and in fuch manner as whatever emergencies 
might happen, as never to need to borrow any 
money at intereft, The national debt cafts a 
fluggith deadnefs over the whole realm, greatly 
{tops ingenuity and improvements, promotes idle- 
nefs and wickednefs, clogs all the wheels of com- 
merce, and drains the money out of the nation, 
If a foreigner buys ftock, in the courfe of years 
that the intereft amounts tq the principal, he gets 
it all back ; and in.an equitable time the fame 
fum ever after, and in courfe muft take that 


money to foreign parts. And thofe who hold — 


fiock at home, area kind of idle drones, as a 
burden 


> 
Pree ee 
PRES eS TE 
OBIT 





eo — 
eemysianoer es sen ht yee 
Sate 


Be TeOPETy 


ieee Se 


ee: 
i: 








a. 


‘ 





hp 
V4 
(i, . 


BR eit geste 


92 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


prefent forms of government, as well as much. 
abufe of that whichis right. 

The Spaniards began their fettlements in the 
Weft Indies and America, by depredations of 
rapine, injuftice, treachery and murder; and 
they have continued in the barbarous practice of 
devaftation, cruelty, and oppreffion ever fince : 
and their principles and maxims in planting co- 
lonies- have been adopted, in fome meafure, by 
every other nation in Europe. This guiltful me- 
thod of colonization muft undoubtedly and im- 
perceptibly have hardened men’s hearts, and led 
them on from one degree of barbarity and cruelty 
to another.: for when they had deftroyed, wafted 
and defolated the native inhabitants, and when 
many of their own people, enriched with plun- 
der, had retired, or returned home to enjoy their 
ill-gotten’ wealth; other réfources for men to, la- 
bour ‘and cultivate the ground, and fuch other 
laborious employments were wanted. Vat ter- 
ritories and large poffeffions, without getting in- 
habitants to labour for them, were of-no'ule. A 
general part of what remained of the wretched 
fugitives, who had the beft native right to thofe 
poffeffions, were obliged'to make their efcape to 
places more remote, and fuch as could not, were 
obliged ‘to fubmit to the hard labour and bond- 
age of their invaders, but as they had not been 
ufed to fuch harth treatment and laborious em- 
ployment as‘ they were then fubjected to, they 
were foon wafted'away and became few. Their 
proud invaders found the advantage of having 
their labour done for nothinz, and it became 
their genera} practice to pick up the unfortunate 
ftrangers that fell in their way, when they thought 
they ‘could make ufe of them: in “their ‘fervice. 
wet That 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 89 


~fhould be attended with the bleffings of God, 
neither to efchew evil. They often become in- 
fatuated to do evil unawares; and thofe em- 
ployed under their fervice fometimes lead them 
‘into debt, error and wickednefs, in order to en- 
rich themfeives by their plunder, in committing 
the moft barbarous cruelties, under pretences of 
-war, wherein they were the firft agereffors, and 
which is generally the cafe in all unnatural and 
deftructive difputes of war. In this bufinefs mo- 
ney is wanted, the national debt becomes in- 
creafed, and new loans and other fums muft be 
added to the funds. The plunderers abroad fend 
‘home their cath as faft as they can, and by one 
‘means and another the fums wanted to borrow, 
are foon made up. At laft when the wars fub- 
fide, or other bufinefs calls them home, laden 
with the fpoils of the Eaft or elfewhere, they 
have then the grand part of their bufinefs to ne- 
gociate, in buying up bank ftock, and lodging 
their plunder and ill-got wealth in the Britith or 
other funds. Thus the nation is loaded with 
‘more debt, and with an annual addition of more 
-intereft to pay, to the further advantage of thofe 
who often occafioned it by their villainy; who, 
if they had their deferts, like the Popifh inqui- 
fitors, are almoft the only people in the world 
who deferve to be hung on the rack. ae 

But fo it happens in general, that men of ac- 


tivity and affluence, by whatever way they are - 


poffeffed of riches, or have acquired a greatnefs 
of fuch property, they are always preferred to 
take the lead in matters of government, fo that 
the greateft depredators, warriors, contracting 
companies of merchants, and rich flave-holders, 
always endeavour to puth themfelves on to get 

power 


a eee Ve 


ie OR 

















ae THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
The Royal African Company (as ‘is is called, 
ought rather to be reverfed as unworthy of the 
ruthe) Was incorporated: r4th Charles II. ‘and im- 
powered to. trade fronr Salle in South Barbary to 
the Cape of Good Hope, and to ere¢ct forts and 
faétories on thé weftern coaft of Africa for that 
purpofe. But this trade was laid’ open by an act 
of parliament, Anno 1697, and every’ private 
meréhant permitted: to trade thither, upon pay- 
ing the fum of ‘ten pounds towards’ maintaining 
the forts and gatrifons. ‘This Company, for fel 
curine® their commerce, erected’ feveral factories 
ow the coaft; the moft remarkable are thefe, 
viZé on the North part of Guinea, James Fort, 
wpon an ifland in the’ River Gambia, Sierra Le 
ad, arid Sherbro; and on the South part of 
Guinea, viz. on the: Gold Coaft, Dick’s Cove, 
Succunda, Commeéenda, Cape Coat Cafile, Fort 
Royal, Quiee Anne ’s Point, Charles Fort, Anna- 
mabo, Winebah, Shidoe, Acra, &c. In all thefe. 
places: it’ is thei grand Butinels to traffic in the: 
iranian’ fpecies ; and: dreadful and fhocking as it 
ist6 think, it ‘has even been eftablifhed by royal 
authority, ‘afd’ is fill fupported and carried on" 
uncer a Chriftian government; and’ this fale 
evidently appear thereby, that the learned, 
civilized, did éven the enlightened wearsoiis' are 
become’ as’ vag hit barbarous and brutith as the unt 
iearned. 
- To give ay juft coneeption of the. barbarous’ - 
traffic catried’ on at thofe faétories, it would be® 
out of. my! power to deferibe the miferable fitua- 
tion. of the poor exiled Africans, which by the’ 
craft of wicked men daily become their prey, 
though Ihave feen enough of their mifery as’ 
wellas read; no defcription can give an adequate — 
idea 





ON THE EVIL-OF SLAVERY. 92 - 


multitudes by fea and land purfue the ‘fame 
courfe, and fupport the fame meafures; like ad- 
venturers in the lottery, each grafping for the 
higheft prize ; or as much enamoured with any 
infamous way of getting riches, as the Spaniards 
were with. the Peruvian vefiels of gold. And 
when ambitious and wicked men are bent upon 
avarice and covetoufnefs, it leads them on to 
commit terrible cruelties, and their hearts be- 
come hardened in wickednefs ; fo that even their 
enormous-crimes fink in their..own. eftimation, 
and foften into trivial matters, The houfe- 
breakers and highwaymen, petty depredators, 
think nothing of any mifchief or cruelty that they 
can do, fo as they can gain their end.and come off 
fafe ; but their villainy and crimes appear to 
-Other men as they ought to do, and if they can 
be detedted, and taken hold of, they will meet 
with fuch punifhment as_ they juftly deferve for 
their crimes. Butit is otherwife with the Colo- 
nians, the great depredators, pirates, kidnappers, 
robbers, oppreffors and enflavers,of men. The 
laws as reaching from Great-Britain to the Weft- 
Indies, do not detect them, but proteét the opu- 
lent flave-holders ; though their opulence and 
protection by any law, or,any government what- 
foever, cannot make them lefs criminal than vio- 
lators of the common rights and liberties of men. 
They do not take away a man’s property, like 
other robbers ; but they take a man himfelf, and 


fubject him to their fervice and bondage, which 
iS a greater robbery, and a greater crime, than 


taking away any property from men whatfoever, 
And, therefore, with refpect to them, there is 
yery much wanted for regulating the natural 
rights of mankind, and very much wrong in the 

* prefent 


1) 
| 








a SPE Ine «+ 


96, THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


bemoaning themfelves with grief and lamentation 
at: the profpect. of their wretched fate. And 
when fold and delivered up to their inhuman 
purchafers, a more heart-piercing fcene cannot 
well take place. The laft embrace of the be- 
loved hufband and wife may be feen, taking their 
dear offspring in their arms, and with the moft 
parental fondnefs, bathing their cheeks with a 
final parting endearment. . But on this occafion 
they are not permitted to continue ‘long, they arc 
foon torn away by their unfeeling matters, en- 


_‘tirely deftitute of a hope of ever feeing each 


otheriagain; and no confolation is afforded to 
them in this forrowful and truly pitiable fitua- 
tien. Should any of them ftill-linger, and cling 
together alittle longer, and not part as readily 
as their owners would have them, the flogzer is 
catled on, and they are foon drove away with 
the bloody commiferation of the cutting fangs, 
of the whip lafhing -their naked bodies. This. 
laft exercife of the bloody whip, with many 
other cruel punifhments, generally becomes an 
appendage of their miferable fate, until their 


- wretched lives be wore out with hunger, naked- 


nefs, hard labour, dejection and defpair.» Alas! 
alas ! poor unhappy mortal! to experience. fuch. 
treatment from men that take upon themfelves 
the facred name of. Chriftians ! 

_ In fuch a vaft extended, hideous and predomi- 
nant flavery, as’ the Europeans carry on in their 
Colonies, fome indeed may fall into better hands, 
and meet with fome commiferation and better 
treatment than others, and a few may become 
free, and get shemielvesiibersted fron) that cruel 
and galling yoke of bondage; but what are thefe 
to the whole, even hundreds of thoufands, held 

_ and 














~ 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 93) 


That bafe traffic of kidnapping and ftealing men 
was begun by the Portuguefe on the coaft of. 
Africa, and as they found the benefit of it for 
their own wicked purpofes, they foon went on 
to commit greater depredations. The Spaniards: 
followed tie infamous example, and the African 
flave-trade was thought moft advantageous for 
them, to enable themfelves to live in eafe and 


affluence bythe cruel fubje&tion and flavery of 


others. The French and Englith, and fome 
other nations in Europe, as they founded fettle- 
ments and colonies in. the Weft Indies. or in 
America, -went.on im the fame manner, and 
joined hand in hand with the Portuguefe and 
Spaniards, to rob and pillage Africa, as well as 
to wafte and defolate the inhabitants of the weft- 
ern continent. But the European depredators 
and pirates have not only robbed and pillaged the 
people of Africa themlelves; but, by their infti- 
gation, they have infefted the inhabitants with 
fome of the vileft combinations of fraudulent 


‘and treacherous villains, even among their own 


people; and have fet up their forts.and factories 


asa refervoir of public and abandoned thieves, - 


and as 2 den of de{peradoes, where they may en- 
fnare, entrap and catch men. So that,Africa has 
been robbed of its inhabitants; its free-born fons 
and daughters have been ftole, and kidnapped, 


and violently taken away, and carried into cap-' 


tivity and cruel bondage. And it. may be faid, 
in refpect to that diabolical traffic which is fill: 
carri¢d on by the European depredators, that 
Africa has fuffered as much and more than an 
other quarter of the globe. O merciful God! 
when will the wickednefs of man have an end? 


The. 








OO ee a tne en ee ee 





98 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


oppreffions loaded upon: the wretched furvivors 


are fuch that they are continually wearing out, 
and a new annual fupply wanted; that the vatt 


carnage, and the pret multitude of human fouls 
that are actually 


eprived of life by carrying on 
that iniquitous bufinefs, may be fuppofed to be . 
even more than one hundred thoufand that perifh 
annually ; or {uppofing that to be greatly leds 


than itis, ftill it is fo great. that the very idea is 
dhocking to conceive, at the thought of it fenfi- 
bility. would blufh, and feeling nature abfolutely 


turn pale. 

“ Gracious, ati ae wicked, how beyond all 
‘* example impious, muft be that fervitude which 
«cannot be carried on without the continual 
«murder of fo many innocent perfons, What 


 punifhment is not to be expected from. fuch 
*€ monftrous and unparalleled barbarity? For if 
- the blood of one man unjuftly fhed ‘cries with 
© fo loud_a voice for the Divine vengeance, how 
_© fhall the cries and groans of an hundred thou- 


“© fand men annually murdered afcend the celef- 


gal manfions, and bring. down that punifhment 
-* fuch .enormities deletes ?” As this enormous 


iniquity is not conjecture, but an obvious fact, 


“occafioned by that dreadful and wicked bufinefs 
“of flavery, were the inhabitants of Great-Britain 


to hear tell of any other nation that murdered 
one. hundied thoufand innocent people annually, 


“they would think them an exceeding inhuman, 
“barbarous, and wicked people indeed, and that 
“they would be furely punifhed by fomne fienal 


judgment of Almighty God. But furely law and — 


“liberty, juftice and equity, which are the pro- 
‘per foundations of the Britifh government, and. 
aimanity the mott amiable characteriftic of the 


people, 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. gf 


idea of the horror of? their feelings, and the’ 


dreadful calamities they undergo. - The treache+: 
rous, perfidious and cruel methods made ufe of 
im procuring them, are horrible: and fhocking.: 
The bringing them: to the fhips and factories, and 
fubjeGing them to: brutal examinations ftripped! 
naked and markings, is barbarous and bafés The 
ftowing them in the holds of the fhips like goods: 
of Bunden; with clofenefs and ftench, is: deplora- 
ble; and, what makes addition to:this' deplorable 


fituation, they are often tréated inthe moft bar-. 


barous and inhuman manner by the unfeeling: 
monfters of Captains. . And wliem they arrive ab 
the deftined port im the colonies, they are agauw 
ftripped naked for the brutal examination of 
‘their purchafers to view them, which, to many, 
muft add fhame and grief to their other wae, as: 
may be evidently. feen with forrow, melancholy 


and defpair marked) upom their countenances.: 


Here again another fcene of griefand lamenta-) 


tion ariles ;—friends and near relations muft be 


parted never ecard again, nor knowing to. 
whence they gos -Here daughters are clinging: 


to their tbh Ta ihe mat liews to their daughtersy 
bedewing each others:naked breatts with tears 5) 
here fathers, mothers, and children, locked tr 


b 


each others .arms, are begging mever to be fem 


parated ; here the! hufband will we pleading for 
his wife, and: the wife praying: for: her children, 


and entreating, enaugh to melt the moft obdu«. 


rate: heart; not to be‘torni from them, and taken) 
away: Foe her? hufband ;: and: fome will be filk: 
weeping for their native tbore, and their dear: 
relations and friends; aud -othen éndeari ing con! 
nections which: they shave left bebimd ‘avid: have: 
been barbaroufly tore away {rony,. and: all:.ane: 

bemoaning 














oO THOUGHTS ‘AND SENTIMENTS 
“ loffes to ‘the’ ftates to which they feverally be= 
*“long, are fo many awful vifitations of God for 
“* this inhuman violation of his laws. A'nd ‘it ‘is 
‘““not perhaps unworthy of retnark, that as‘ the 
“€ fubjeé&ts of Great-Britain have two-thirds of this 
““impious commerce in their own hands; fo they 
“€ have fuffered in the fame proportioh, or more 
** feverely than: the reft.. How far thefe misfor- 
“* tunes may appear to be‘ acts of Providence, and 
“€ to create an alarm to thofe who have. been ac- 
“ cuftomed ‘to refer every effet to ‘its ‘apparent 
*“ caufe ; who have been habituated to ftop there, 
“and to overlook the finger: of God, becaufe it 
“is flightly covered under the veil of fecondary 
“* laws, we will not pretend ‘to determine ; but 
“this we will affert with confidence, that the 
“* Europeans have richly defetved' themy all: the 
“ fear of fympathy that~can' ‘hardly be reftrained 
“« on other melancholy occafions, feems to forget 
“to flow at the relation of thefe ; and that we 
‘f can never, with ‘any fhadow’ of juftice, with 
& profperity to the undertakers of thofe whofe 
“<'fuccefs muft be at the expence of the happinefs 
*¢ of millions of their fellow-creatures *.” ie 
For though this world is not the place of final 


_ setribution, yet there is an. evidence maintained’ 


in the coyrfe of Divine Providence, that verily 
there is a God that judgeth in the earth. ‘That: 


* See the excellent Mr. Clarkfon’s Effay on the’ Slavery 
and Commerce of the Human Species ; and, I muit add, the’ 
amiable ‘and indefatigable friend of mankind;: Granville* 
Sharp, Efg; from whofe writings I have borrowed fome of: 
the following obfervations. I'am alfo indebted to feveral 
others, whofe intrinfic vietues will equally fhine in the fame: 
amiable manner, while ever there is any virtue and humani- 
ty amongit men; and. when thofe. of; the enflavers of mem: 
will fink into abhorrence fer,evers. _- 
wees ee Se | Sate 








‘ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: 99 
“and perpetrated in all'the prevalent and intoler- 
- “able calamities of that ftate of bondage and exile. 
‘The emancipation of ‘a few, while evér ‘that evil 
‘and predominant bufinefs of flavery is continued, 
cannot fake’ that “horrible traffic one bit the lefs 
‘criminal. For, according to the methods of pro- 
“Curing flaves ‘in Africa, there muft be great rob- 
“beries and murders committed before any ‘eman- 
“cipation can take place, and before any lenitive 
‘favours can be fhewn to anv of them, even by 
‘the generous and humane. This mutt ‘evidence 
‘that the whole of that bafe traffic is an enormous 
‘evil and ‘wicked thing, which cries aloud for re- 
-drefs, ‘and that an immediate end and ftop fhould 
“be put to it. ae 
The worthy and jtdicious author of the Hifto- 
‘ical account of Guinea, aid. others, have given 
fome very ftriking eftimates of the‘excéeding evil 
‘occafioned by that wicked diabolical ‘traffic of the 
African flave-trade; wheréin ‘ft f{eetns, of late 
years, ‘the Englith have taken ‘the lead, or the 
‘greateft part of it, in carrying it on. They haye 
computed, ‘that ‘the fhips from Liverpool, ‘gift 
‘tol and London have exported froti the coaft of 
Africa upwards of one hundred thoufand flaves 
annually ; and that among other cyij]s attending 
‘this barbarous inhuman traffic, it-is alfo compu-~ 
ted that the numbers which die killed by the 
treacherous and barbarous methods of procuring. 
_ them, together with thofe that peérith in the voy- 
age, and die in the feafoning, amount to at leaft 
an hundred thoufand, which perifh in every yearly 
attempt to fupply the colonies, before any of the 
wretched furvivers, reduced to about fixty thou- 
fand, annually required as an additional ftock can 
be made ufcful, But as the great feverities and 
Hi oppreffions 


he 
} 
3 














¢ 


102 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


deftructive wars, earthquakes and dreadful thun- 
ders, ftorms and hurricanes, blaftings and de- 
ftructive infects, inclement and unfruitful featons, 
national debt and oppreffions, poverty and dif- . 
treffes of individuals, &c. For bis own iniquity 


foall take the wicked bimfelf; and who can tell 


what dreadful calamities may yet befal to a people 
refponfible for fo great a fhare of iniquity as in 
that part which they carry on of the African 
flave-trade alone. ‘‘ And it is not known how 
*‘ foon a juft national retribution of vengeance 
“¢ may burft forth againft it; how foon the Al- 
“‘ mighty may think: fit to recompence the Bri- 
‘¢ tith nation, according to: the work, of their 
‘‘ hands, for the horrible oppreffion of the poor 
“* Africans. | 

‘¢ For national wickednefs from the beginning 


“< of the world has generally been vifited with 


‘€ national punifhments; and furely no national 


<* wickédnefs can be more heinous in the fight of 
*< God than a public toleration of flavery, and 
“© fooner or later thefe kingdom will be vifited 
“with fome fignal mark of his difpleafure, for 
** the notarious oppreffion of the poor Africans, 
“that are haraffed and continually wearing out 
with a maft fhameful involuntary fervitude in 
“* the Britifh colonies, and by a public toleration 
*< under the fanétion of laws, to which the: mo- 
“ narchs of England from time to time, by ad- 
vice of their privy-counfellors, have given the 
“royal affent, and thereby rendered themfelves 
‘* parties in the oppreffion, and it may be feared 
partakers in their guilt.”—* And every man 
*‘ has ample reafon to fear. that God will make 
*‘ of this nation, in proportion to the magnitude 
** of its guilt'in the flave-dealing, a tremendous 

“* example 


n 


nn 


nm 


ce 


«Cc 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 9g 


people, muft be entirely fled from their land, if: 


they can think a lefs punifhment due to them- 
felves, for fupporting and carrying on fuch enor- 


mous wickednefs, if. they.do not fpeedily relin-» 


quifh and give it up. The very nature of that 
wickednefs of enflaving.of men is fuch, that were 
the traffic, which European. nations carry on in 


it,.a thoufand times lefs than it is, it would be: 


what no righteous nation would admit of for the 
fake of any gain whatfoever. Wherefore as it is, 
what ought to be done?. If there is any righteouf- 


nefs, any wifdom, any juftice, or any humanity. 


to be found, ought, not the whole of it, and all 


the branches of fuch: exceeding evil, and wicked) 
traffic, and all the iniquity of it to be relinquifh-. 
ed, and root and branches to be fpeedily given. 


up and put an end to? ce | 

“‘ For while fuch monftrous iniquity, fuch de- 
“liberate barbarity and cruelty is carried on, 
‘* whether it be confidered as the crime of indi- 


*‘ viduals, or as patronized and encouraged by. 


“‘ the laws of the land, it ‘holds forth an equal 
‘degree of enormity. And acrime founded in 
“fuch a dreadful pre-eminence in wickednefs, 
“* both of individuals and the nation, muft fome 
“* time draw down upon them the heavieft jude- 
“‘ ments of Almighty God.”—** On this occafion 
“‘there feems already to be an interference of 


** Divine Providence, though the obdurate and - 


“€ impenitent part of mankind may not regard it. 
“« The violent and fupernatural agitations of all 
“‘ the elements, which for a feries of years have 
** prevailed in thofe‘European fettlements where 
‘* the unfortunate Africans are retained in a ftate 
** of flavery, and which have. brought: unfpeak- 
** able calamities to the inhabitants, and public 

pi EE ee “© lofies 



























“Ne 


£O4 THOUGHTS AND: SENTIMENTS: 
clergy. of all denominations, whom we would con=. 
fider. as. the devout, meffengers of righteoufnels,, 
peace,, and good-will to.all men, if we find any. 
of them ranked with infidels. and barbarians, we-~- 
muft confider them as particularly refponfible,: 
and, in fome meafure, guilty, of the crimes of’ 
other wicked:men in the higheit degree, For it- 
is their duty to. warn every man, and to teach. 
every:man -to know.their errors; and if they. do. 
not, the crimes of thofe. under their particular. 
charge muft reft upon themfelves, and upon. 
fome.of them,, in fuch a cafe as this, that of the: 
whole. nation. in general; and thofe (whatever, 
their refpective fituation, may, be) who forbid: 
ovhers. to. affift them, muft. not be very fenfible. 
of their own duty, and the great extenfivenefs: 
and,importance of their own charge. And as it) 
i their great:duty to teach men righteoufnefs and; 
picty.; this ought to be confidered as. fufficiently, 
obvious unto.them, and to all men, that nothing. 
can be more contrary unto it, than the ewil and) 
very nature of enflaving men, and making mer- 
chandize.of them like the brute creation. ‘* For» 
“<itis evident that no. cuftom eftablifhed among: 
*S men was. ever more impious; fince it: is con-, 
‘trary to reafon, juftice, nature, the principles. 
“<of law and government, and the whole doc- 
trine, in short, of natural religion, and the re-. 
““vealed voice of God. And, therefore, that it 
is both evident and expedient, that there is an 
pabfalute neceffity to abolifh the flave trade, and. 
““ the Weft-India flavery ; and that to be in power, 
“cand to negleét even a day in endeavouring to 
** put a ftop to fuch monftrous iniquity and aban- 
“ doned wickednefs (as the tenure of every man’s 
“life, as well.as the time of his being in office. 
a aoe 


— Wy AR ene Reet NS Sake NO 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY: -Io1 


nations may continue long, with avconfiderable 
-degree of worldly profperity, and without feem- 


ing to be diftinguifhed by remarkable calamities. 
when their wickednefs is become very great and 
prevalent; yet it is noway.inconfiftent to affert, 
(and what facred hiftory warrant us to conclude) 


that their judgment flumbereth not. Had one 
been among the Canaanites a few years before the 


Ifraelites entered their country, or in Babylon.a 


little before Cyrus encamped againft it, he would - 


have beheld a people ina ftate of great worldly 
profperity, and in much fecurity, notwithftand- 
ing that the judgments of God were ready to 
feize upon them. © Great and:deftructive wars are 
kindled up from time to time, whereby multi- 
tudes of mankind are fwept away from the face 


‘of the earth, and the wealth of nations are ex- 


haufted. Famine, peftilence and earthquakes 
have often fpread terror, defolation and mifery 
among the inhabitants of the world. Nor are 
there wanting inftances of remarkable national 
diftreffes as a judgment for their wickednefs, by 
a variety of other caufes. Though men cannot 
eafily be prevailed with to regard thefe as the 
operation of the hand of God, the fcriptures, 
which contain the rules and hiftory of Divine Pro- 
vidence, reprefent thefe as inflicted for the fins of 


‘mations, and not merely as cafual things, for 


which no account can be given. And therefore 
fome of thefe caufes which may feem natural, 
and which have begun to make their appearance, 
and the annual deftructions thereof, which are 
conftaztly heard of in fome part or other, may 
be confidered as tokens of *God’s judgments 
againft the Britifh empire, and a variety of them 
might be named; fuch as lofs of territory and 

BUR ee deftructive 








Schnee 








Se 





106 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


temporal dignity. From all fuch enemies, good 
Lord, deliver them! for it is even better to lofe a 
temporal kingdom, than only to endanger the 
happinefs and enjoyment of an eternal one. 

. Nothing elfe can be conceived, but that the 
power of infernal wickednefs. has fo reigned and 


_pervaded over the enlightened nations, as to in- 


fatuate and lead on the reat men, and the kings 
of Europe, to promote and eftablifh fuch a horri- 
ble traffic of wickednefs as the African flave 
trade and the Weft-India flavery, and thereby to 
bring themfelves under the guilty refponfibility of 
fuch awful i iniquity. The kings and governors of 
the nations in general have power to prevent their 
fubjecéts and people from enflaving and oppreffing 
others, if they will; but if they do not endeavour 
to do it; even if they could not effect that good 
purpofe, they muft them be refponfible for their 
erimes; how much more, if they make no endea- 
vours towards it, even when they can, and where 
no oppofition, however plaufible their pretences 
might be, would dare to oppofe: them. Where- 
fore, if kings or nations, ‘or-any men that dealeth 
unjuftly with their fellow-creatures, to enfnare 
them, to enflave them, and: to) opprefs them, or 
fuffer others to.do fo, when’ they have it in their 
power to'prevent it, and°yet they:do not, can it 
ever be thought that God ‘will: be ‘well pleafed 
with them? For-can thofe which ‘have no mercy 
on their *fellow-creatures, expect tor find imercy 
from the: igracious Father of Men? Or will it not 
rather'be faid unto them, as it isydeclared, that he 
who leadethiinto captivity, hall be carried captive, 
and be bourid:in the cords of bis own iniquity: Thaugh. 
band join in hand the wicked foalb not go unpuuifhed; 
far i = wickedness ts the defizuction of any st Ga ’ 

¥ And 


* 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. Io03 ig 


‘‘ example of retribution to deter other nations 
** from offending his eternal juftice, if a fincere : i‘ 
““and fpeedy repentance does not avert it.”—) a 
** For fuch notorious crimes the Almighty, even I 
** the Lord, hath fworn, /urely [ will never forget 

“* any of thefe works.” See Amos viii. But the 

judgements of God are often fufpended and miti- 

gated for the fake of the righteous; and nations 

are’ preferved from deftruction in favour to them 

who remain faithful in times of general defection. | 
Ifaiah i. g. ‘* Except the Lord of Hofts bad left us a 4 
** very fmall remnant, we should have been as So-' | 
“* dom,’ and we ould. have been like unto Go-" ; 
“© morab. ; 

But while ever fuch a horrible bufinef as the 
flavery and oppreffion of the Africans is carried® fe 
on, there is not one man in all Great-Britain and: i 
her colonies, that knoweth any thing of it, can ite 
be innocent and fafe, unlefs he fpeedily rifeth: | 
up with abhorrence of it in his own judgment, 
and, to avert evil, declare himfelf againft it, and’ 
all fuch’ notorious wickednefs,. But thould the 
contrary be adhered ‘to, as it has been in the moft 
fhameful manner, by men of eminence and pow- (s 
er; according ito their eminence in ftation, the i 
nobles and fenators, and every man in office and 
authority, muft incur a double load of guilt, and 
not only that burden of guilt in the oppreffion 
of the African. ftrangers, but alfo in that of an 
impending danger and ruin to their country ; 
and: fuch a double load of iniquity muft reft upon 
thofe guilty heads who withhold their teftimony 
againft the crying fin of tolerating flavery. The 
inhabitants in general who can approve of fuch 
inhuman barbarities, muft themfelves be a {pecies ’ 
of unjuft. barbarians and inhuman men. But the’ 

" clergy 

















108 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


infamous commerce of iniquity; and by the infi- 
dious inftigation of thofe whofe private emolu- 
ment depends on it, the various profligate adven- 


- turers, from time to time, have acquired the fanc- 


/ 


tion of laws to fupport them, and have obtained 
the patronage of kings in their favour to encour-. 
age them, whereby that commerce of the moft 
notorious injuftice, and open violation of the laws 
of God, hath been carried on exceedingly to the 
fhame of all the Chriftian nations, and greatly to 
the difgrace of all the monarchs of Europe. The 
fact fpeaks itfelf: dnd deftruction fhall be to the 
workers of iniquity. The bold and oftenfive en- 
flavers of men, who fubject their fellow-creatures. 
to the rank of a brute, and the immolate value of 
a beaft, are themfelves the moft abandoned flaves. 
of infernal wickednefs, the moft obnoxious rufi- 
ans among men, the enemies of their country, 
and the.difgrace of kings. Their iniquity is wrote 
in the light as with a {un-beam, and engraven on 
thevhardeft rock as with the point of a diamond, 
that cannot be eafily wiped away: But the wicked 


fhall fall by. their own wickedne/s. And, neverthe- 


lefs, by the infidious inftigations of thofe who. 
have forfaken the amiable virtues of men, and 
have acquired the cruel ferocity of tygers and 
wild beafts, they have not only polluted them- 
felves with their iniquity, but their bafe treachery 
has brought fhame and guilt upon fome of the 
moit exalted and moit amiable characters in the 
world. And, therefore, that no evil may happen 
unto thofe wha have been fo fhamefully beguiled 
and betrayed by the vile inftigations of wicked, 
profligate, inhuman men, and that no.fhame and 
suilt may reft upon him, who ftandeth in. the 
greateft eminence of refponfibility, I would ever 
. defire 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 10g 


* and power is’ very uncertain) muft necefiarily 
s* endanger a man’s own eternal welfare, be he 
‘* ever fo great in temporal dignity.” 

The higher that any man is exalted in power 
and dignity, his danger is the more eminent, 
though he may not live. to fee the evil that may 
eventually be contributed to his country, becaufe 
of his difobedience to the law and commandments 
of God. All men in authority, and kings in ge- 
neral, who are exalted to the moft confpicuous 
offices of fuperiority, while they take upon them- 


felves to be the adminiftrators of righteoufnefs ° 


and juftice to others, they become equally refpon- 
fible for admitting or fuffering others under their 
authority to do wrong. Wherefore the higheft 
offices of authority among men, are not fo defira- 
ble as fome may be apt to conceive; it was fo 
confidered by the virtuous queen Anne, when fhe 
was called to the royal dignity, as fhe declared ta 
the council of the nation, that it was a heavy 
weight and burden brought upon her. For kings 
are the minifters of God, to do juftice, and not to 
bear the fword in vain, but to reyenge wrath upon 
them that do eyil, But if they do not in fuch a 
cafe as this, the cruel oppreffions of thdoufands, 
and-the blood of the murdered Africans who are 
flain by the fword of cruel avarice, muft reft upon 
their own guilty heads in as: eventually and plain 
a fenfe as it was David that murdered Uriah; and 
therefore they ought to let no companies of infi- 
dious merchants, or any guileful infinuations of 
wicked men, prevail upon them to eftablith 
laws of iniquity, and to carry on a trade of op- 
preffion and injuftice; but they ought to confider 
{uch as the worft of foes and rebels, and greater 
enemies than any that can rife up againft their 

f temporal 





if 
tz 
es 
ikaee 
&" 
i 
a 
| 
eA 
j 





LI@ THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


on to greater improvements in civilization and. 
felicitation, and next to abolifh that other diabo- 
lical invention of the bloody and cruel African. 
flave-trade, and the Weft-Indian flavery. 
_ But whereas the people of Great-Britain having 
now. acquired. a greater fhare in that iniquitous 
commerce than all the reft together, they are the — 
firft that ought to fet an example, left they have | 
to.repent for their wickednefs when: it becomes 
too late; left fome impending calamity fhould 
{peedily burft, forth againft them, and left a juft 
retribution for their enormous crimes, and a con- 
tinuance in committing fimilar deeds of barba- 
ity, and. injuftice, fhould involve them in ruin. 
For; we may be. affured that God will certainly 
avenge .himfelf.of;fuch heinous tranfgreffors of 
his/law, and of all thofe planters and merchants, 
and of all others, who are the authors of the Afri- 
cans graves, feverities, and cruel. punifhments, 
and.no plea of any abfolute neceffity;can poffibly 
excufe them... And_.as the inhabitants of Great- 
Britain, and the inhabitants of the colonies, feem. 
almoft equally guilty of the oppreffion, there is 
great reafom for both to dread the fevere ven- 
geance of Almighty God upon.them, and upon 
all fuch notorious workers of wickednefs; for it 
is evident that the. legiflature of .Great-Britain 
patronifes and encourages them, and fhares in the 
infamous. profits. of the flavery. of the Africans, 
It is therefore neceffary that the inhabitants of the 
Britifh nation fhould ferioufly confider thefe things 
| for their own good and fafety, as well as for our 
(i benefit and deliverance, and that they may be fen- 
' fible of. their own error and danger, left they pro- 
voke the vengeance of the Almighty againft them. 
A For what wickednefs was there ever rifen up fo 
pis ae : ; monftrous, 


/ 





aa” 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 107 


And fhould thefe nations, in the moft obnoxious 
and tenacious manner, ftill adhere to it as’ they 
have done, and continue to carry'on in their colo- 
nies fuch works and purpofes of' iniquity, in op- 
preffion and injuftice againft the Africans, no- 
thing elfe can be expeéted for them at laft, but to 
meet with the fierce wrath of Almighty God, ‘for 
fuch a combination of wickednefs, according to 
all the examples of his juft retribution, who can- 
not fuffer fuch deliberate, fuch monftrous ini- 
quity to go long unpunifhed. 

There is good reafon to fuppofe; that it was far 
from the intention of Ferdinand, king of Spain, 
to ule his new fubjects in America. in the brutal 
and barbarous manner that his people did; and 


happy for the credit of that nation, and the honor 


of mankind, even among the profligate adven- 
turers which were fent to conquer and defolate the 
new world, there were fome perfons that retained 
fome tincture of virtue and generofity, and fome 
men of the greateft reputation of both gentlemen 
and clergy, which did not only remonftrate, but 
proteft againft their meafures then’ carried on. 
And fince that iniquitous traffic of flavery has 
commenced and been carried ‘on; many gen- 
tlemen of the moft diftinguifhed reputation, of 
different nations, and particularly in England, 
have protefted and remonftrated againft it. But 
the guileful infinuations of avaricious wicked 
men, which prevailed formerly, have ftill been 
continued; and to anfwer the purpofes of their 
own covetoufnefs, the different nations have been 
fomented with jealoufy to one another, leaft ano- 
ther fhould have the advantage in any traffic; and 
while naturally emulous to promote their own am- 
bition, they have imbrewed their hands in that 
. infamous 


mh . 
¥ 


Th 


ee a 
SS as ta 


pM egae MAL, 


<a 


Pega 





¥i2 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
two together when they were thrown into the fea} 
Teft fome of them might fwim a little for che lafé 
_ gafp of air,-and, with the animation of their ap- 
- proaching exit, breath their fouls away to the 
gracious Father of fpirits. Sdme of the laft par- 
cel, when they faw the fate of their companions; 
made their efcape from tying by jumping over- 
board, and Gne was faved by means of a rope 
from fome in the fhip. The owners of the veffel, 
{ fuppofe, (inhuman connivers of robbery, flavery; 
murder and fraud) were rather a little defeated 
in this, by’bringirie their villainy to light ih a 
court of law; but the inhuman monfter of a cap- 
ee tain was kept out of the way of juftice from get 
i i) ting hold of him. Though ‘fuch perpetrators of 
Ha murder and fraud fhould havé been fought aftet 
it | from the Britith Dan in the Eaft-Indies, to her 
ha Beerfhébah in the Weft.” © oe 





Ne _ But our lives are accounted of no value, we aré 

, | hunted after as the prey in the defart, and doomed 
1 Se to deftruétion as the béafts that perifh. And fot 
i.e _ this; fhould we appeal to the inhabitants of Fu- 
is .fope, would they, dare to fay that they havé not 
{ . wronged us, and grievoufly injured us, and that 
ip the blood. of millions do not cry out againft 
i them? And if we appeal to the inhabitants of 


ae Great-Britain, can they juitify the deeds of theif 
ane : conduct towards us? And is it not ftrange to | 
think, that they who ought to be confidered as 
the moft learned and civilized people in the world, 
that they fhould carry ona traffic of the moft bar- 
barous cruelty and injuftice, and that many, even 
i among them, are become fo diffolute, as to think 
i flavery, robbery and murder no crimes? But we 
. will anfwer to this, that no man can, with impu- 
i) nity, fteal, kidnap, buy of fell another man, 
| 3 without 








ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. F696 
‘defire to pray; let all the prayers of the wife and 
pious be heard for the king, and for his wifé 
‘counfellors, and the great men that ftand beforé 
him; for kings and great men ftand in “thé 
moft perilous fituation of having the crimes of 
‘others imputed to thems wherefore Kings havé 
need of all your prayers, that the countel of the 
wicked may not prevail againft them, for thefe 
are the worft foes, and moft terrible enemies, both 
to yourfelves and to your fovereign. Rigbreouf~ 
nels exalteth a nation, but fin is a repreach to any 
‘people. | ' — 

In this advanced zra, when thé kings of Eu- 
‘rope are become more confpicuous for their manly 
virtues, than any before them have been, it is to 
be hoped that they will not any longer fuffer 
themfelves to be impofed upon, and be begtiled, 
and brought into guile and fhame, by any inifti- 


_ gations of the cunning craftinefs and evil policy 


of the avaricious, and the vile profligate énfla: 
vers of men. And as their wifdom and under: 
ftanding is great, and exalted as their high dip 
nity, it is alfo to be hoped that they will exert 
themfelves, in the caufe of righteoufnefs and juf- 
tice, and be like the wifeft and the ereateft mo: 
narchs of old, to hearken to the counfel of the 
wife men that know the times, and to the fighte. 
ous laws of God, and to deliver thé oppreffed, 
and to put an end to the iniquitous commerce 
and flavery of men. And as we hear tell of the 
kings of Europe having almofit abolifhed, the in- 
fernal invention of the bloody tribunal of the int 
quifition, and the Emperor and’ others making 
fome grand reformations for the happinefs anc 
good of their fubjects ; it is to be hoped alfo that 
thefe exalted and liberal principles will lead them 
s Qn 








coh eg pti, ec a ej 


‘Ir4 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


the Africans are, by various pirates, kidnappers, 

and flave-holders, and their wives, and their fons 

and daughters were to be robbed from thém, or 

themfelves: violently taken away to-a perpetual 

and intolerable. flavery ; -or whether: they would 

not think thofe robbers, who only took away 

their property, lefs injurious to them than the 

other. If they determine it fo, as reafon muft 

tell every man, that himfelf is of more value than 

his property; then the executors of «the laws | 
of civilization ought to tremble at the incon- 

fiftency of pafling judgment upon thofe whofe 

crimes, in many cafes, are lefs than what the 

whole legiflature muft be guilty of, when thofe © 
of afar greater is encouraged and fupported by 
it wherever flavery is tolerated by law, and, con- 
fequently, that flavery can no where be tolerated 
with any confiftency to civilization and the laws 
of juftice among men; but if it can maintain its 
ground, to have any place at all, it muft be 
among a fociety of barbarians and thieves, and 
where the laws of their fociety is, for every one 
to catch what he can. Vhen, when theft and 
robbery becomes no crimes, the man-ftealer’and 
the. conniving flave-holder might. poffibly -get 
free. ; ‘Car 

But the feveral nations of Europe that have 
joined in that iniquitous traffic of buying, felling 
and enflaving men, mutt in courfe have left their 
own laws of civilization to adopt thofe of barba+ 
rians and robbers, and that they may fay to one 








AE _ another, When thou faweft a thief, then thou con- 
Ay -  — fenteft with him, and haft been partaker with all the 
a f $ _ workers of iniquity. But whereas every man, as a 
byte (3 _ ational creature, is refponfible for his aétions, 
a Ee and he becomes not only guilty in doing evil 
wa himfelf, 
ue 
bi) it 
Hi 
pe vee 
se 
NX Poe ne aS 


Ry wes 

NY HF geet elecaiiRiier: of aa eee ee 
AE ees vane 

3 3 





SR FR ee ER Sots BN ee 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERYs: ELE 
monftrous, and more likely to bring.a ‘heavy rod 
of deftru€tion upon a nation, than. the deeds com- 
mitted by the Weft-Indian flavery, and the Afri- 
can flave trade. And even in that_part of it car- 
tied on by the Liverpool and Briftol merchants, 
the many fhocking and inhuman. inftances of 
their barbarity and cruelty are fuch, that every one 
that heareth thereof has reafon to tremble, .and 
ery out, Should not the land tremble for this, and 
every one mourn that dwelleth therein ? 

The vaft carnage and murders committed by 
the Britifh inftigators of flavery, is ,attended 
with a very fhocking, peculiar, and almoft un- 
heard of conception, according. to. the notion of 
the perpetrators of-it; they either confider them 
as their own property, that they may do with 


as they pleafe, in life or death; or that. the 


taking away the life of a black man is of no more 
account than taking away the life of a beaft.. A 
very melancholy inftance of this happened about 
the year 1780, as recorded in the courts of law; 
a matter of aveffel bound to the Weltern Colo- 
nies, felected 132 of the moft fickly of the black 
flaves, and ordered them to be thrown overboard 
into the fea, in order to recover their value from 
the infurers, as he had perceived that he. was too 
Jate to get a good market for them in the Weft- 
Indies. On the: trial, by the counfel for -the 


ewners of the veffel againft the underwriters,’ 


their argument was, that the flaves were to be 
confidered the fame as horfes ; and their plea for 
throwing them into the fea, was nothing better 
than that it might be more neceffary to throw 
them overboard to lighten their veffel than goods 
of greater value, or fomething to that effect. 
Thefe poor creatures, it feems, were tied two and 

two 


op SR alas 








ae 





en - ter ore ee, alee eee ae Te eee eee a eee ee ee oy eee . - Fa EF Tt Me LT 


116 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


Jain a man to bis own wounding, and a young man 
to bis burt. But thofe mighty men of renown in 
the days of old, becaufe of their apoftacy from 
God, and rebellion and wickednefs to men, were 
at laft all fwallowed up by an nniverfal deluge 
for their iniquity and crimes. 

But again let me obferve, that whatever civi- 
lization the inhabitants of Great-Britain may en- 
joy among themfelves, they have feldom main- 
‘tained their own innocence inthat great duty as 
a Chriftian nation towards others; and I may 
fay, with refpeét to their African neighbours, or 
to any other wherefover they may go by the way 
of commerce, they have not regarded them at all. 
And when they faw others robbing the Africans, 
and carrying them into captivity and flavery, 
they have neither helped them, nor oppofed their 
oppreffors in the leaft. But inftead thereof they 
have joined in combination againft them with 
the reft of other profligate nations and people, 
to buy, enflave and make merchandize of them, 
becaufe they found them helplefs and fit to fuit 


their own purpofe, and are become the head _ 


‘carriers on of that iniquitous traffic. But the 
greater that any reformation and civilization is 
obtained by any nation, it they do not maintain 
righteoufnefs, but carry on any courfe of wick- 
-ednefs and oppreffion, it makes them appear only 
the more inconfiftent, and their tyranny and op- 
preffion the more confpicuous. Wherefore be-~ 
‘caufe of the great wickednefs, cruelty and injuf- 
tice done to the Africans, thofe who are greateft 
in the tranfgreffion give an evident and undu- 
“bious warrant to all other nations beholding their 
‘tyranny and injuftice to others, if thofe nations 
have any regard to their own innocence and vir- 

| | ‘tue, 


\ 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 113 


without being guilty of the moft atrocious vil- 
lainy. And we will aver, that every flave-holder 
that claims-any property in flives, or holds them 
in an involuntary fervitude, are the moft obnoxious 
and diffolute robbers among men; and that they 
have no more right, nor any better title to any 
one of them, than the moft profligate and noto- 
rious robbers and thieves in the world, has to the 
goods which they have robved and ftole from 
the right owners and lawful poff ffor thereof. 
But fhould the flave-holders fay that they buy 
them; their title and claim is no better then 
that of the moft notorious conniver, who buys 
goods from other robbers, knowing them to be 
ftole, and accordingly gives an inferior price for 
them. According to the laws of England, when 
fuch cennivers are difcovered, and the property 
of others unlawfully found in their poffeffion ; 
the right owners thereof can oblige the connivers’ 
to reftore back their property, and to punifh: 
them for their trefpafs. But the flave-holders, 
univerfally, are thofe connivers, they do not only 
rob men of fome of their property, but they keep 
men from every property belonging to them, and 
compel them to their involuntary fervice and 
drudgery ; and thofe whom they buy from other 
robbers, and keep in their poffeffion, are greatly 
injured by them when compared ta any fpecies 
of goods whatfoever; and accordingly they give 
but a very inferior price for men, ‘as all their vaft 
eftates in the Weft-Indics is not iufficient to buy 
one of them, if the rightful poffeflur was to fel 
himfelf to them in the manner that they claim 
poffeifion of him. Therefore let the inhabitants 
of any civilized nation determine, whether, if 
they were to be treated in the fame manner “ 

I the 














118 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


Put left any of thefe things fhould happen to 
the generous and refpe&tuful Britons, who are 
not altogether loft to virtue and confideration ; 
Jet me fay unto you, in the language of a wife 
and eminent Queen, as the did when her peopie 
were fold as a prey to their enemies: That it is 
not all your enemies (for they can be reckoned 
nothing elfe), the covetous inftigators and car- 
riers on of flavery and wickednels, that can in 
any way countervail the damage to yourfelves, 
to your king, and to your country; nor will all 
the infamous profits of the poor Africans avail 
you any thing if it brings down the avenging 
hand ot God upon you. ‘We are not faying that 


- we have not finned, and that we-are not deferv- 


ing of the righteous judgments of God againft 
us. But the enemies that have rifen up againft 
us are cruel, oppreflive and unjuft ; and | their 
haughtinefs of infolence, wickednefs and iniquity 
iselike to that of Haman the fon of Hammedatha; 
and who dare fuppofe, or even prefume to think, 
that the inhuman ruffians and enfnarers of men, 
the vile negociators and m‘rchandizers of the 
human fpecies, and the oftenfive combinations of 
flave-holders in the Weft have done no evil? 
And fhould we be,paffive, as the fuffering mar- 
tyrs dying in the flames, whofe blood crieth for 
vengeance on their perfecutors and murderers ; 
fo the iniquity of our oppreffors, enflavers and 
murderers rife up againft them. For we have 
been hunted after as the wild beafts of the earth, 
and fold to the enemies of mankind astheir prey ; 
and fhould any of us have endeavoured to get 
away trom them, as a man would naturally fly 
from an enemy that way-laid him ; we have been 
purfued after, and, by haughty "mandates Sah 

aws 


° ON THE EVIL°OF SLAVERY. ITS: 


himfelf, but im letting others rob and opprefs 
their fellow-creatures with impunity, or in not 
delivering the oppreffed when he has it in his 
power to “help them. And likewife that nation 
which may be fuppofed to. maintain a very 
confiderable degree of civilization, juftice and 
equity within its own jurifdiction, is not in 
that cafe innocent, while it) beholds another 
nation or people carrying on perfecution, op- 
preffion and flavery, unlefs it remonftrates a- 
gainft that wickednefs of the other nation, and 
makes ufe of every effort in its power to help 
the oppreffed, and to refcue the in»ocent. For 
fo it ought to be the univerfal rule of duty to all 
men that fear God and keep his commandments, 
to do good to all men wherever they can; and , 
when they find: any wronged and injured by 4 
others, they fhould endeavour to deliver the en- : 
fnared whatever their grievances may be; and 
fhould this fometimes [ead them into war they 
might expeé the protection and bleffing of hea- 
ven. How far other motives may appear eligible 
for men to oppofe one another with hoftile force, 
it is not my bufinefs to enquire. But, 1 thould 
fuppofe the hardy veterans who engage merely 
about the purpofes of envying ‘one another con- 
cerning any different advantages of commerce, 
or for enlarging their territories and dominions, 
or for the end of getting riches by their con- 
queft ; that if they ‘fall in the combat, they niuft 
generally die, as the fool dieth, vaunting-in vain 
glory ; and many of them be like to thofe who 
go out in darknefs, never: to’ fee light; and 
thould they come aie alive, what wnmanloes 
their honour and fame-amount to; but only to 
-be like that antediluvian conqueror, who bad 
Ia  flain 





Thee 


Fs 


Waaees ee ee 


ESET IAG SE =H EPA ES 













I20 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
robbed the widow, the orphans, the poor and 


_ the needy of their right, and whofe children are 


rioting on the fpoils of thofe who are begging at 
their doors for bread. And fhould they fay, that 
their fathers were thieves and connivers with en= 
fnarers of men: and that they have been brought 
up tothe iniquitous praétice of flavery and ops . 
preffion of their fellow-creatures, and they can- 
not live without carrying it.on, and making their 
sain. by the unlawful merchandize and cruel fla- 
very of men, what is that to us, and where will 
it juftify them? And fome will be faying, that the - 
Black people, who are free in the Weft-Indies, 

are more miferable than the flaves ;—and well 
they may ; for while they can get their work and 


drudgery done for nothing, it is not likely that 
they will employ thofe whom they muft pay for 


their labour. But whatever neceffity the enfla- 
vers of men may plead for their iniquitous prac- 
tice of flavery, and the various advantages which 
they get. by it, can only evidence their own in- 
juftice and difhonefty. A man that is truly ho- 
neft, fears nothing fo much as the very impu- 


tation of injuftice; but thofe men who dare not 


face the confequence of aéting uprightly in every 
cafe are detefiable cowards, unworthy the name 
of men; for it is manifeft that {uch men are more 
afraid of temporal inconveniencies than they are 
of God: And I fay unto you, my friends, be not 
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have 
no more that they can do; but I will forwarn you 


whom you foall fear: Fear him, who, after he bath 
killed, bath power to caft into bell. Luke xii. 4, By 


~ But why thould a total abolition, and an uni- 
verfal emancipation of flaves, and the enfranchife- 
ment of all the Black People employed in the cul- 
badd ture 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. ge Gg 


tue, and wifh to maintain righteoufnefs, and to 
remain clear of the oppreffion and blood of all 


men ; it is their duty to chaftize and fupprefs fuch. 


unjuft and tyrannical oppreffors and enflavers of 
men. And fhould none of thefe be found among 
the enlightened and civilized nations, who main- 
tain their own innocence and righteoufnefs, with 
regard to their duty unto -all men; and that 
there may be none to chaftize the tyrannical 
oppreffors of others; then it may be feared, as 
it has often been, that fierce nations of various 
infects, and other annoyances, may be fent asa 
judgment to punifh the wicked nations of men. 
For by fome way or other every criminal nation, 
and all their confederates, who fin and rebel 
againft God, and againft his laws of nature and 
nations, will each meet with fome awful retribu- 
tion at laft, unlefs they repent of their iniquity. 
And the greater advantages of light, learning, 
knowledge and civilization that any people en- 
joy, if they do not maintain righteoufnefs, but do 
wickedly, they will meet with the more fevere 
rebuke when the vifitations of God’s judgment 
cometh upon them. And the prophecy which 
was given to Mofes, is ftill as much in force 
againft the enlightened nations now for their 
wickednefs, in going after the abominations of 
heathens and barbarians, for none elfe would at- 
tempt toenflave and make merchandize of men, 
as it was when denounced againft the Ifraelitith 
nation of old, when they departed, or fhould 
depart, from ‘the laws and ftatutes of the Moft 
High. The Lord fhall bring a nation againft thee, 
from far, from the ends of the earth, as fwift as 
the eagle flieth, a nation whofe tongue thou Soalt not 
underfiand, &c, See Deut. xxviii, 

vie But 





sh 
Fk 
x 
be 
” 
5, 
; 
} 




















122 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


fings of liberty fhould be extended likewife, and 
that it fhould diffufe its influences firft to fertilize 
the mind, and then the ‘effects of its benignity 
would extend, and arife with exuberant bleffings 
and advantages from all its operations. Was this 
to be the cafe, every thing would increafe and 
profper at home and abroad, and ten thoufand 
times greater and greater advantages would arife 
to the ftate, and more permanent and folid bene- 
fit to individuals from the fervice of freemen, 
than ever they can reap, or in any poffible way 
enjoy, by the labour of flaves. a 

‘But why this diabolical traffic of flavery has 
not been abolifhed before now, anc why it was 
introduced at all, as I have already enquired, 
mtft be greatly imputed to that powerful and 
pervading agency of infernal wickednefs, which 
reigneth and prevaileth over the nations, and to 
that umbrageous image of iniquity eftablithed 
thereby ; for had there been any truth and right- 
eoufnefs in that grand horn of delufion in the eaft, 
which may feem admirable to fome, and be look- 
ed upon by its votaries as the fine burnished gold, 
and bright as the fineft polithed filver, then would 
not flavery, cruelty and oppreffion have been abo- 
lifhed wherever its influence came ? And had the 
grand apoftacy of its fellow horn, with all its h- 
neaments been any better, and endowed with any 
real virtue and goodnefs, whom its devotees may 
beholdoas the fineft polifhed diamond, and glif- 
tening as the: fineft gems; then would not 
flavery and barbarity have been prohibited and 
forbidden wherever the beams of any Chriftianity 
arofe? Then might: we have expected to hear 
tidings of good, even from thofe who are gone to 


-yepofe in the fabulous paradife of Mahamet? 


They 


Se 





ON. THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. I19Q 


laws of iniquity, overtaken, and murdered and 
flain, and the blood of millions cries out againft 
them. And together with thefe that have been 
cruelly {poiled and flain, the very grievous af- 
flitions that we have Jong fuffered under, has 
been long crying for vengeance on our op- 
preffors ; and the great diftrefs and wretchednefs 
of human woe and mifery, which we are yet 
lying under, is ftill rifing up before that High 
and Sovereign Hand of Juftice, where men, by 
all their oppreffion and cruelty, can no way pre- 
vent; their evil treatment of others may ferve to 
increafe the blow, but not to evade the ftroke of 
His power, nor withhold the bringing down that 
arm of vengeance on themfelves, and upon all 
their connivers and confederators, and the par- 
ticular inftigators of fuch wilful murders and 
inhuman barbarity. The life of a black man is 
of as much regard in the fight of God, as the life 
of any other man; though we have been fold as 
a carnage to the market, and asa prey to profli- 
gate wicked men, to torture and lafh us as they 
pleafe, and as their caprice may think fit, to mur- 
der us at difcretion, : 

And fhould any of the beft of them plead, as 
they generally will do, and tell of their humanity 
and charity to thofe whom they have captured 
and enflaved, their tribute of thanks is but fmall ; 
for what is it, but a little reftored to the wretched 
and miferable whom they have robbed of their 
all; and only to be dealt with, like the fpoils of 
thofe taken in the field of battle, where the 
wretched fugitives muft fubmit to what they: 
pleafe.. For as we have been robbed of our na- 
tural right as men, and treated as beafts, thofe 


who have injured us, are like to them who have 
robbed 








‘ 
ess Sa = ae i an eae SF ates 
¢ SERRE SOE ah DOGZEN SAT OR = By Se 
merit ie oars = Laas et Se aes. 


nicer aes 








I24 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


of his dominion and power ruleth over all. But 
in the day that we fhall be fpoken for, if we find 
you a wall, we would build upon you a palace of 
filver ; and if you find usa door, inclofe us with 
boards of cedar, for we long, and would to Go 

that we longed more, to enter into your fortrefs, 
and follow you to your happy retreat. Then 
might we, like you, ftand undaunted before our 
foes, and with more than heroic fullennefs at all 
their cruel tortures, highly difdain their rage, 
and boldly dare them todo their worft. For you, 
O ye friends of the Moft High, when you die, 
when ye are perfecuted and flain, when you fall 
inthe combat, when you die in the battle, it is 
you! only you, that come off conquerors, and 
more than conquerors through him that loved 
you! And fhould it yet be, as it has often been, 
that your foes might purfue you with their ufual 
arrogance and perfecuting rage, and caufe you to 


die cruelly veiled in a curtain of blood, lo! your . 


ftains are all wafhed away, and your wounds and 
{cars will foon be healed, and yourfelves will be 
then invefted with a robe of honor that will thine 
in whitenefs for ever new, and your blood that 
was fhed by the terrific rage of your foes, will 
teftify againft them, and rife up in grandeur to 


you, as an enfringement of gold floating in glory, 


and as his robe of honor which flames in eternal 
crimfon through the heavens. But we envy na 


man, but with them to do good, and not evil; » 


and we want the prayers of the good, and where- 
ever they can to help us; and the blefling of God be 
with all the promoters of righteoufnefs and peace, 
But wherefore, O beloved, fhould your watch- 
men fit ftill, when they hear tell that the enemy 
is invading all the out-pofts and camp of the Bri- 
a at | tith 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. £f2f 


ture of the Colonies, taking place as it ought to 
do, and without any hefitation, or delay for a 
moment, even though it might have fome feem+ 
ing appearance of lofs either to government or to 
individuals, be feared at all?, Their labour, as 
freemen, would be as ufeful in the fugar colonies i 
as any other clafs of men that could be found; le 
and fhould it even take place in fuch a manner oe it 
that fome individuals, at firft, would fuffer lofs 
as a juft reward for their wickednefs in flave- 
dealing, what is that to the happinefs and good 
of doing juftice to others ; and, | muft fay, to the 
great danger, otherwife, that muft eventually 
hang over the whole community ? It is certain, 
that the produce of the labour of flaves, together 
with all the advantages of the Weft-India traffic, 
bring in an immenfe revenue to government ; but 
let that amount be what it will, there might be ee 
as much or more expected from the labour of an a 
equal increafe of free people, and without the im. 
plication of any guilt attending it, and which, 
otherwife, muft bea greater burden to bear, and 
more ruinous confequences to be feared from it, 
than if the whole national debt was to finkat once, be 
and to reft upon the heads of all that might fuffer atl 
by it. Whereas, if a generous encouragement a 
were to be given to a free people, peaceable 
among themfelves, intelligent and induftrious, 
who by art and labour would improve the moft 
barren fituations, and make the moft of that 
which is fruitful; the free and voluntary labour 
of many, would foon yield to any government, 
Many greater advantages than any thing that fla- 
very can produce. . And this fhould be expected, 
wherever a Chriftian government is extended, 
and the true religion is embraced, that the blef- 

i fings 





Py as 
erage SEAS 






ikce SR Ee ee fh Poe ages 








t 


126 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


God and the Saviour of men, and of all that de- 
light in his ways of righteoufnefs, and of all the 


—Jovers of their country, and the friends of: man- 


kind, and of every real’patriot in the land, and 
‘of every man and woman that dwelleth therein, — 
and of all thofe that have any pretence to cha- 
rity, generofity, fenfibility and humanity, and 
:whoever has any regard to innocence and virtue, 
‘to plead that flavery, with all its great and hei- 
‘nous magnitude of iniquity, might be abolithed 
throughout all:the Britifh dominions; and from 
henceforth to hinder and prohibit the:carrying on 
‘ofthat: barbarous; brutith and inhuman traffic 
‘of the flavery and commerce: of the human fpe- 
-Cies, wherever the power ‘and -influence of the 
\Britifh empire extends. And in doing this, and 
-always in doing righteoufly, let the glory and no- 
nour of it be alone afcribed untoGod Moft High, 
‘for his great mercy and. goodnefs to you; and 
sthat his bleffings and unbounded beneficence may 
ifhine forth upon you, and upon all the promoters 
-of it: and that it may with great: honours and 
‘advantages of peace and profperity be ever reft- 
‘ing upon the noble Britons, and upon their moft 
-worthy, moft eminent and auguft Sovereign, and 


* aapon all his-government and the people under it’; 


vand| that the ftreams thereof may run down in 
‘tighteoufnefs even to.us, poor deplorable Africans. 

And we that are particularly concerned would 
‘humbly join with all the reft of our brethren and 
‘countrymen in complexion, who have been grie- 
‘voufly injured, and who’ jointly and feparately, 
“in all the language of grief and woe, are hum- 
bly imploring and earneftly entreating the moft 
refpectful and generous people of Great- Britain, 
that they would confider us, and have mercy and 
compaffion 





-ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. i223 


Then might we have-looked for it from thofe, 
who are now reclined to flumber in affimulation: 
with the old dotards of Rome,..or to thofe who 
are fallen afleep and become enamoured with the 
f{cxrlet couch of the abominable enchantrefs dyed 
in blood? And as.well then might we not expeét; 


tendernefs and compaffion from thofe whom the, . 


goddefs of avarice has fo allured with her charms, 
that her heart-fick lovers are-become reverfed to: 
the feelings of human woe; and. with the, great 
harry and buftle of the ruffet flaves employed in 
all the drudgeries of the weftern ifles, and mari- 
time fhore, in the cruel and involuntary fervice 
of her voluptaoufnefs, having fo dazzled their 
eyes, and bereaved them of all fenfibility, that 
their hearts are become callous as the nether mill- 
fione, fierce as the tygers, and devoid of the na- 
tural feelings of men? From all fuch enchant- 
ments we would turn away, and fly from them as 
from the ravenous beafts of prey, as from the 
weeping crocodiles.and the devouring reptiles, 
and as from the hoary monfters of the deep. 

But we would look unto you, O ye multitude 
in the defart! againft whom there is no enchant- 
ment, neither any. divination whatever, that can 
prevail againft you! for in your mouth there is 
no error or guile to be found, nor any fault be- 
fore the throne of God. And what! though. 
your dwellings .be in all lands, and-ye have no, 
nation or kingdom on earth that ye can call 
your own, and your camp be furrounded with 
many enemies, yet you have a place of defence, 
an invincible fortrefs, the munitions of rocks for 
your. refuge, and the fhield of your anointed is 
Almighty ; and behold his buckler is ftrong, and 
his fceptre is exalted on high, and the ae 

tf) 











128 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


- to the voice of our diftrefs; for he hears the cries 
- and groans of the oppreffed, and profeffes that 


if they cry at all unto him, he will hearken unto 
them, and deliver them. For the oppreffion of the 
poor, for the fighing of the needy, now will I arife 
faith Febovah, and will fet bim im fafety from bim 
that puffeth at him, or that would enfnare him. 
(Pfa. xii. 5.) And I know that Fehovah will main- 
tain the caufe of the affliéted, and the right of the 
poor. (Pfa.cxl. 12.) Wherefore it is our duty to 
look up toa greater deliverer than that of. the 
Britifh nation, or of any nation upon earth; for 
unlefs God gives them repentance, and peace to- 
wards him, we can expect no peace or deliver- 
ance from them. But ftill we fhail have caufe 
to truft, that God who made of one blood all the 
nations and children of men, and who gave to 
all equally a natural right to liberty; that he 
who ruleth over all the kingdoms of the earth 
with equal providential juftice, fhall then make 
enlargement. and deliverance to arife to the grie- 
voufly injured, and heavy oppreffed Africans 
from another place. , 

And as we look for our help and fure deliver- 
ance to come from God Moit High, fhould it 
not come in an apparent way from Great-Britain, 
whom we confider as the Queen of nations, let her 
not think to efcape more than others, if fhe con- 
tinues to carry on oppreffion and injuftice, and 


- fuch pre-eminent wickednefs againft us: for we 


dian ae ean as hanes a gli 


are only feeking that juftice may be done to us, 
and what every righteous nation ought to do; 
and if it be not done, it will be adding iniquity 
to iniquity againft themfelves. But let us not fup- 
pofe that the inhabitants of the Britith nation will 
adhere to the ways‘of the profligate: For /uch is 

the 


Seton al 
te Lisa 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 125 


tifh empire, where many of your dwellings are? 
Are they all fallen afleep, and lying down to flum- 
ber in affimilation with the workers of iniquity ? 
Should not thofe who are awake, arife, and give 
the alarm, that others may arife and awake alfo ? 
And fhould not they who feareth the name of the 
Lord, and worthip in his holy temples, Let judg- 
ment to run down as waters, and righteoufne/s asa 
mighty fiream? But why think ye prayers in 
churches and chapels only will do ye good, if 
your charity: do not extend to pity and regard 
your fellow creatures perifhing through igno- 
rance, under the heavy yoke of :fubjettion and 
bondage, to the cruel and avaricious oppreffion of 
brutifh profligate men ; and when both the injur- 
ed, and their oppreffors, dwell in fuch a vicinity 
as equally to claim your regard? The injurers, 
oppreffors, enflavers; and murderers of others, 
eventually bring a curfe upon themfelves, as far 
as they deftroy, injure, and cruelly and bafely 
treat thofe under their fubjection and unlawful 
bondage. And where fuch a dreadful pre-emi- 
nence of iniquity abounds, as the admiffion of 
laws for tolerating flavery and wickednefs, and 
the worft of robberies, not only of men’s, proper- 
ties, but themfelves; and the many inhuman 
murders and cruelties occafioned by it: If it 


meets with your approbation, it is your-fin, and 


you ‘are then as a conniver and confederator with 
thofe workers of wickednefs; and if you give it 
fanétion by your paffive obedience, it manifefts 
that you are gone over to thofe brutifh enemies 
of mankind, and can in no way be a true lover of 


‘your king and country. 


Wherefore it ought to be the univerfal endea« 


-vour, and the ardent wifh, of all the lovers of 


God 


St ne a 





i 
# 
Ps 
bg 
ihe 
4 
ey 
5 
ue 
iF 
: 








maipeseiie wert aa a ND Se eee re a eee RTE TENT OM oh BORD Ne ae UP Sch e Oe ee ey MeL Se IP ea Cr 

















£30 THOUGHTS AND, SENTIMENTS 


you wifdom and. underftanding to devife what 
ought to be done. ~ 

_ Secondly, I would propofe that.a_ total aboli-, 
tion of flavery fhould be made and. proclaimed . 
and that an univerfal emancipation of flaves, 
fhould begin from the date thereof, and: be car-. 
ried on in the following manner: That,a pro- 
clamation. fhould be caufed to be made, fetting 
forth the Antichriftian unlawfulnefs of the fla-, 
very and commerce of the human fpecies ; and 
that it fhould be fent to all the courts and na- 
tions in Europe, to require their advice and af- 
fiftance, and as they may find it unlawful to carry 
iton,; let them whofoever. will join to prohibit. 
it. And if fuck a proclamation be found ad- 
vifable to the Britifh legiflature, let them pub- 
lifh it, and caufe it to ‘be publifhed, through-. 
out ali the Britifh empire, to hinder and pro-, 


hibit all men under their government to traffic, 


either in buying or felling. men; and, to pre- 
vent it, a penalty might be made againtt it of 
one thoufand pounds, for any man either to buy 
or fell another man. And that it fhould require, 
all flave-holders, upon the immediate informa- 
tion thereof, to mitigate the labour of their flaves 
to that of a lawful fervitude, without tortures 
or oppreffion ; and that they fhould not hinder, 

but caufe and procure fome fuitable means of in- 
ftruétion for them in the knowledge of the Chrif- 
tian religion. And agreeable to the late royal 
Proclamation, for. the Encouragement of Piety and 
Virtue, and for the preventing and punifbing of Vice, 
Profanene/s and Immorality ; that by no means, un- 
der any pretence whatfoever, either for them- 
felves or their mafters, the flaves under their, 
fubjection fhould not be fuffered to work on the. 
Sabbath days, unlefs it be fuch works as neceflity, 


ite and 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 1297 


compaffion on us, and to take away that evil 
that your enemies, as well as our oppreffors, are 
doing towards us, and caufe them to defit from 
their evil treatment of the poor and 'defpifed Afri- 
cans, before it be too late; and to’ reftore that 
juftice and liberty which is our: natural right, 
that we have been unlawfully deprived and cruelly 
wronged of, and to deliver us from that capti+ 
vity and bondage which we now fuffer under; 
in our prefent languifhing ftate of. exile and-mi= 
fery. And we humbly pray that God may put 
it into the minds of the noble Britons, that they 
may have the honor and advantage of doing fo 
great good to many, and to extend their power 
and influence to do good afar ;’and that. great 
good in abundance may come down‘upon.them- 
felves, and upon all their government and the 
people under: it, in every place belonging to the 
Britifh empire. But if the people and the le~ 
giflature of Great-Britain altogether hold theie 
peace at fuch a time as this, and even laugh at 
eur calamity as heretofore they have been wont 
to do, by making merchandize of us to ‘enrich 
themfelves with our mifery and diftrefs ; we-fit 
like the mourning Mordecai’s’ at« their! gates 
cloathed in fackcloth; and, in this advanced‘era,. 
we hope God in his Providence will rife up. a. 
deliverance for us fome other way ;) atid we have 
great reafon to hope that the timerof our deli- 
verance is faft: drawing nigh, and when’ the 
- great Babylon of iniquity will fall. > 18 
, And whereas.we confider our cafe before God 
of the whole univerfe, the Gracious Father and 
Saviour of men; we will look unto him for help 
and deliverance. The cry of our afflidtion is als 
ready gone up before him, and he will hearken 
to 




















132 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


make enquiry concerning. fome. of their-friends 
and relations in Africa: and if. they found any. 
intelligent perfons amongft them, to give them 
as good education as they could, and find out a 
way of recourfe to their friends; that as foon 
as they had made any progrefs in ufeful learning 
and the knowledge of the Chriftian religion, 
they might be fent back to Africa, to be made 
ufeful there as foon,' and as many of them as. 
_ could be made fit for inftru@iing others... The 
reft would become ufeful refidentors in the colo- 
nies ; where there might be employment enough 
given to all free people, with fuitable wages ac- 
4 cording to their ufefulnefs, in the improvement 
_ of land; and the more. encouragement. that 
~ could be given to agriculture, and: every other 
branch of ufeful induftry, would thereby. en- 
creafe the number of the inhabitants; without 
which any country, however bleffed by nature, 
muft continue poor. rah oi 
And, thirdly, I would propofe, that a fleet of 
~fome thips of war fhould be immediately fent to 
the coaft of Africa, and particularly where the 
flave trade is carried on, with faithful men to di- 
reét that none fhould be brought from the coaft 
of Africa without their own confent and the ap- 
probation of their friends, and to intercept all 
merchant fhips that were bringing them away, 
‘ until fuch a ferutiny was made, whatever nation. 
they belonged to. And, | would fuppofe, if Great- 
Britain was to do any thing ofthis kind, that-it 
would meet with the general approbation and.af- 
fitance of other Chriftian nations; but whether 
~- it did or not, it could be very lawfully. done at all. 
the Britifh forts and fettlements on. the coaft of 
Africa; and particular remonftrances could be 
eal can given 


Se tee oe 


eS fe a a 


a a 


fie eel 








“ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. I29 


‘the way of an adulterous woman; fhe eateth, and 


wipeth her mouth; and faith, I have done no wick= 
edne/s. But rather let us fuppofe, That whereas 
iniquity hath abounded, may righteoufne/s much more 
abound, For the wickednefs that you have done 
is great, and wherever your traffic and colonies 
have been extended it is fhameful ; and the great 
injuftice and cruelty done to the poor Africans 
crieth to heaven againft you; and therefore that 
it may be forgiven unto you, it cries aloud for 
univerfal reformation and national repentance, 
But let it not fuffice that a gracious call from the 
throne is inviting you, To a religious obfervance of 
God’s holy laws, as fearing, left God’s wrath and 
indignation, foould be provoked againft you; but in 
your zeal for God’s holy law, becaufe of the 
fhameful tranfgreffion thereof, every man every 
woman hath reafon to mourn apart, and every 
one that dwelleth:in the land ought to mourn 
and figh for all the abominations done therein, 
and for the great wickednefs carried on thereby. 
And now that bleffings may come inftead of a 
curfe, and that many beneficent purpofes of good 
might fpeedily arife and flow from it, and be 
more readily promoted: I would hereby pre- 
fume to offer the following confiderations, as 


fome outlines of a general reformation which” 


ought to be eftablifhed and carried on. And 
firft, I would propofe, that there ought to be 
days of mourning and fafting appointed, to make 
enquiry into that great and pre-eminent evil for 
many years paft carried on againft the Heathen 
nations, and the horrible iniquity of making 
merchandize of us, and cruelly enflaving the 
poor Africans: and that you might feek grace 
and repentance, and find mercy and forgivenefs 
before God Omnipotent; and that-he may give 

K a. you 

gp 























tn ee 


134. THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


degrees they became to love learning, there would 
be nothing in. their power, but what they would 
with to render: their fervice in return for the 
means of impfoving their underftanding ; and 
the prefent Britith factories, and other fettlements, 
might be enlarged: to a very great extent. And; 
as |Great-Britain has been remarkable. for, ages 
paft, for encouraging arts and fciences, and may 
now be: put in competition with any nation in the 
known world, if they would take compafiion, on 
the inhabitants of the coaft of Guinea, and to 
make ufe of fuch means as would be needful to 
enlighten their minds in the knowledge of Chrif- 
tianity, their virtue, in this refpect, would have, 
its.own reward.. And as the Africans became re-; 
fined and eftablifhed in light and knowl-dge,. 
they would imitate their noble Britifh friends, to, 
improve their lands, and make ufe of that induf- 
try as the nature of their country might require, 
and to fupply thofe that would trade with them, 
with fuch produdiions as the nature of their eli- 
mate would produce; and, in'every refpect, the 
fair Britons would have.the preference with them 
to.a-very great extent ; and; in another refpedt, 
they woud become a, kind of firft ornament to: 
Great-Britain for her tender and compaffionate 
care of fuch.a fet of difirefled poor ignorant peo- 
ple. <And: were the, noble Britons, and. their 
auguft Sovereign, to.caufe prot dion and encour-; 
agement, to be given to thofe Africans, they might, 
expect ina fhort time, if needirequired it, to re-, 
ceive from thence great :fupplies.of men in a law- 
ful way, either. for induftry or defence; and of 


_ other things in abundance, from fo great a fource, 


where every thing is luxurious;and plenty, if not. 
laid wafte by. barbarity and grofs ignorance. 
| Due 


ig \ 





x 
i 
4 
¥ 
( 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 131 
and mercy may require. But that thofe days, as 


well as fome other hours felected for the purpofe, 


fhould be appropriated for the time of their in- 
ftruétion ; and that if any of their owners fhould 


not provide fuch fuitable inftructors for them, © 
that thofe flaves fhould be taken away from them | 


and given to others who would maintain and in- 
ftruct them for their labour. And that it fhould 
be made known to the flaves, that thofe who 
had been above feven years in the iflands or elfe- 
where, if they had obtained any competent de- 
gree of knowledge of the Chriftian religion, and 
the laws of civilization, and had behaved them- 
felves honeftly and decently, that they fhould im- 
mediately become free; and that their owners 
fhould give them reafonable wages and mainte- 
nance for their labour, and not caufe them to 
go away unlefs they could’ find fome fuitable 
employment elfewhere: And-accordingly, from 
the date of their arrival to feven years, as they 
arrive at fome fuitable progrefs in knowledge, 
and behaved themfelves honeftly, that they fhould 
be getting free in the courfe of that time, and at 
the end of feven years to let every honeft man 
and woman become’ free; for in the courfe of 


that time, they would have fufficiently paid their. 


owners by their labour, both for their firft pur- 
pofe, and for the expences attending their edu- 
cation, By being thus inftructed in the courfe 
of feven years, they would become tractable and’ 
obedient, ufeful labourers, dutiful fervants and 
good fubjeéts ; and Chriftian men might have the 


honor and happinefs to fee many of. ‘them vieing’ 


with themfelves to praife the God of their falva- 
tion. And it might be another neceflary duty’ 


for Chriftians, in the courfe of that time, to 


K 2 make 























136, THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


fhould it be fought after, like the intrepid Colum- 
bus, if they do not find kingdoms of wealth by 
the way, they may be certain of finding treafures 
of happinefs and peace in the end. But fhould 
there be any yet alive deferving the infamy and 
character of all the harfh things which.I1 have 
afcribed to the infidious carriers on of the flavery 
and commerce of the human fpecies, they will 
certainly object to any thing of this kind being 
propofed, or ever thought of, as doing fo great 
a good to the bafe Black Negroes. whom they 
make their. prey. To fuch.I muft fay again, 
that it would be but a juft commutation for what 
cannot be fully reftored, in order to make refto~ 
ration, as far as could be, for the injuries already 
done to them... And fome may fay, that if they 
have wages to pay to the labourers for manufac- 
turing the Weft-India produétions, . that . they 
would not be.able to fell them at fuch a price as 
would fuit the European market, unlefs all the 
different nations agreed to raife the price of their. 
commodities in proportion... Whatever. bad 
neighbours men may have to, deal with, let the 
upright fhew themfelves to be honeft men, and. 
_ that difficuly, which fome may. fear, would be 
but finall, as.there can be no reafon for men.to: 
do wrong becaule others do fo; but as to what 
is confumed in Great-Britain, they could raife the 
price in proportion, and it would be better to fip 
_ the Weft-India fweetnefs by paying-a little more 
money for it (if it fhould be found needful) than 
to drink the blood of iniquity at a cheaper rate. 
I know feveral ladies in England who refufe to 
drink fugar in their tea, becaufe of the cruel in-) 
juries done to the Black People employed in the 
culture of it at the Weft-Indies. But fhould it 


coft - 


Teer ae S 


ON THE’ EVIL OF SLAVERY. 1233 
given to all the reft, to warn them of the confe-’ 
quences of fuch an evil and enormous wicked 
traffic as is now carried on. The Dutch have fome’ 
crocodile fettlers at the Cape, that’ fhould be cal- 
led to a particular account for their murders and 
iuhuman barbarities. But all the prefent gover-' 
nors of the Britifh forts: and factories fhould be 
difmiffed, and faithful and good men appointed’ 
in their room; and thofe’ forts and factories,’ 
which at prefent are a den of thieves, might be 
turned into fhepherd’s tents, and have good fhep- 
herds fent: to call the flocks to feed befide them. 
Then would doors of hofpitality in abundance be’ 
opened in Africa to fupply the weary travellers, 
and that immenfe abundance which they are en- 
riched with, might be diffufed afar; but the cha- 
racter of the inhabitants on the weft coaft of Afri- 
ca, and the rich produce of their country, have 
been too long mifreprefented by avaricious plun- 
derers and merchants who deal in flaves; and if 
that country was not annually ravifhed and laid 
wafte, there might be a very confiderable and 
profitable trade carried on with the Africans. 
And, fhould ‘the noble: Britons, who have 
often fupported their own liberties with their lives 
and fortunes, extend their philanthropy to abo- 
lifh the flavery and oppreffion of the Africans,’ 
they might have fettlements and many kingdoms 
united in a friendly alliance with themfelves, 
which might be made greatly. to their own ad- 
vantage, as well as they might have the happinefs 
of being ufeful to promoting the profperity and 
felicity of others, who have been cruelly injured 
and wrongfully dealt with. . Were the Africans 
to be dealt with in a friendly manner, and kind 


infiru@iop to be adminiftered unto them, as by. 


K 3 eg degrees 








CET oe eae ea 


BE 


i TSE = EET 





138 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


ployed in this manner, would form an ufeful mi-' 
hitia, and the women would be kept froma ftate ™ 
of mifery and want, and from following:a life of 
diffolute wickednefs, Liberty and freedom, where 
people may ftarve for want, can do them but lit+ 
tle good.» We want many rules of civilization in 
Africa ; but, in many refpects, we may boaft of 
fome: more effential liberties than any of the civi- 
lized nations in Europe enjoy; for the poorett 
amongft us are névér itt diftrefs for want, unlefs 
fone’ general and univerfal calamity happen to 
us, Butif any nation or fociety of men were to 
obferve the laws of God, and to keep his com= 
mandments, and walk in the way of righteouf- 
néfs, ‘they would not nééd to fear the heat in ful- 
try hot climates, rior the freézing incleméency of 
the cold, and the ftorms and hurricanes would 
not hurt them at all;‘they might. foon fee blef- 
fings and plenty inabundancé fhowered down up- 
en’ their mountains and vallies; and if his bene- 
ficetice was fought after, who martials out the 
drops of the dew, and bids the: winds to blow, 
dnd to carry the loud’ on their wings to drop 
down their moifture and fatnefs‘on what fpot fo- 
éver he pleafeth, and who caufeth the genial rays 
of the fun t6 warm and chérifh the productions’ 
of the earth in évery placé according fo thae 
teinperature which he fees meet; then might the 
teniperate Elimes of Great-Britaih be feen to vie 
with the rich land of Canaan’ of old, which is 
now, becaufe of thé wickednefs of its inhabitants, 
.> ih comparifon of what it was; as only a barren 
di fart, ; 
~ Particulay thanks is due to every one of that hus 
mane fociety of worthy and refpectful gentlemen, 
whofe liberality hath fupportéed marly of the Black 
eas 3 "poor 











ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 135 
Due encouragement being given to fo great, fo. 
juft, and fuch a noble undertaking, would foon 
bring more revenue in a righteous way to the 
Britith nation, than ten times its fhare in all the 
profits that flavery can produce*; and fuch a 
laudable example would infpire every generous 
and enterprizing mind to imitate fo great and 
worthy a nation, for eftablithing religion, juttice, 
and equity to the Africans, and, in doing this, 
would be held in the /higheft efteem by all men, 
and be admired by all the world. 

Thefe three preceeding confi derations may fuf- 
fice at prefent to thew, that fome plan might be 
adopted in fuch a manner as effetually.to relieve 


the grievances and oppreffion of the Africans, 


and to bring great honour and bletfings to that 
nation, and to all men whofoever would endea- 
vour to promote fo great good to mankind; and 
it might render more confpicuous advantages to 
the noble Britons, as ‘the firft doers of it, and 
greater honour than the finding of America 
was at firft to thofe that made the difcovery: 
Though feveral difficulties may feem to arife at 
firft, and the good to be fought after may ap- 
pear as remote and unknown, as it was to explore. 
the unknown regions of the Weftern Ocean 5 


* A gentleman of my acquaintance told me tree if ever he 
hears tell of any thing of this kind taking place, he has 2 
plan in contemplation, which would, in fome equitable man- 
ner, produce from one million to fivertn millions fterling to 
the Britifh government annually, as it might be required ; of 
which a duc proportion of that revenue would be paid by the 
Africans ; and that it would prevent all fmuggling and illicit 
talicis ; in a great meafure, prevent running into debt, long 

rifonment, and all. unlawful. bankruptcies; effectually 
porent all difhoneity and fwindling, and almoft put an'end 

to all robbery, fraud and theft, 
fhould 


aie 


C7: oe on 
Baas cae 

















140 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


it. Hada treaty of agreement been firft made 
with the inhabitants of Africa, and the terms and 
_fature of fuch a fettlement fixed upon, and its 
fituation and boundary pointed out; then might 
the Africans,-and others here, have embarked. 
with a good profpeé& of enjoying happinefs and 
profperity themfelves, and have gone with a hope 
of being able to-render their fervices, in return, 
of fome advantage to their friends and benefac- 
tors of Great-Britain. But as this was not done, 
and as they were to be hurried away at all events, 
come of them after what would; and yet, after 
all, to be delayed in the fhips betore they were 
fet out from the coaft, until many of them ‘have 
perifhed with cold, and other diforders, and fe-. 
veral of the moft intelligent among them are 
dead, and others that, in all probability, would: 
have been moft ufeful for them.were hindéréd 
from going, by means’ of .fome ‘difagreeable jea- 
loafy of thofe:who were appointed as governors, 
the great profpect of doing good feems all to be 
blowa away. “And fo it appéared' to fome of 
thofe who are now gone, and at laft, hap hazard, 
were obliged to go; who endeavoured in vain 
to get away by plunging into the water, that 
they might, if poffible wade afhore, as dreading 
the profpect of their wretched fate, and ‘as be- 
holding their perilous fituation, having every 
profpect of difficulty and furrounding danger. ~ 
What with the death of fome of the original 
promoters and propofers of this charitable un- 
dertaking, andthe death and. deprivation of 
others that were to fhare the benefit of it, and 
by the adverfe motives of thofe employed to be 
the conductors thereof, we think it will be more 
than what .can‘be well expected, if we ever hear. 
Wo | Z of 


~*~ 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY” I37 - 


cof the Weft-Indians more money to have their 
manufactories carried by the labour of freemen 
than with flaves, it would be attended with greater 
bleffings and advantages to them in the end. 
What the. wages fhould be for the labour of free- 
men, isa queftion not fo eafily determined ; yet 
I fhould think, that it always ought to be fome- 
thing more than merely victuals and cloaths ; and 
if ‘a man works by the day, he fhould have the 
three hundredth part of what might be eftimated 
as fufficient to keep him in _neceffary cloaths and 
provifions for a year, and, added to that, fuch 
wages of reward as their ufefulnefs might require. 
Something of this kind fhouid be obferved in free 
countries, and then the price of provifions would 
be kept at fuch arate as the induftrious poor 
could live, without being oppreffed and {crewed 
down to work for nothing, but only barely to 
live. And were every civilized nation, where 
they boaft of liberty, fo ordered by its goyern- 
ment, that fome general and ufeful employment 
were provided for every induftrious man and wo- 
man, in fuch a manner that none fhould ftand 
fiill and be idle, and have to fay that they could 
not get employment, fo long as there are barren 
lands enough at home. and abroad fufficient to 
employ thoufands and millions of people more 
than there are. This, in a great meafure, would 
prevent thieves and robbers, and the dabour of 
many would foon enrich a nation, But thofe 
employed by the general community fhould only 
have their maintenance either given or eftimated 
in money, and half the wages of others, which 
would make them feek out for fomething elfe 
whenever they could, and half a loaf would be 
better than.no bread. The men that were em- 
WOO ployed 




















342 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


frcet water and bitter? They were afraid: that 
their doom would be to drink of the bitter wa- 
ter. For can it be readily conceived that go- 
vernment would eftablith a free-colony for them 
néarly on the fpot, while it fupports its forts and 
garrifons, to enfnare, merchandize, and to carry 
others into captivity and flavery. 

Above fifty years ago, P. Gordon, in his Geo- 
graphy, though he was no advocate againtt fla- 
very, complains of the barbarities committed 
againft the Heathen nations, and the bafe ufage 
of the negroe flaves fubjeéted -to bondage as 
brutes, and deprived of religion as men. His 
remark on the religion of the American iflands, 
fays:** As for the negroe flaves, their lot has 
‘* hitherto been, and fill is, to ferve fuch Chrif- 
** tian mafters, who fufficiently> declare what 
“« zeal they have for their converfion, by un- 
** kindly ufing a ferious divine fome time ag 
“* for only. propofing to endeavour the fain 
This was above half a century ago, and their un- 
ehriftian barbarity is {till continued. Even: in 
the: little time that I was: in’ Grenada, I faw 2 
flave receive twenty-four lafhes of a whip for 
being feen at a church on a Sunday, inftead of 
going to work in the fields; and thofe whom 
they put the greateft confidence in, are often 
ferved inthe fame manner. The noble propofals 
offered for inftru€ting the heathen nations and peo- 


ple in his: Geography, has been attended to with’ 


great fupinenefs and indifference. The author: 
withes, that ‘© fincere endeavours might be made 
‘¢ to extend the limits of our Saviour’s kingdom,. 
*¢ with: thofe of our own dominions; and to 


“« fpread the true religion as far as the Britith fails: 
** have done for traffic,” And he adds, ‘* Let 


** our 





: 
qi 
: 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 139 


poor about London. . Lhofe that. honor ‘their 
Maker bave mercy on the poor; and many blefings 
are upon the bead of the jut: may the fear of the 
Lord prolong their days, and caufe their memory to 
be bleffed, and may thew number be encreafed to fill 
their expectation with gladnefs; for they have. not 
only commiferated the poor in general, dut ever 
thofe which are accounted as beafts, and imputed as, 
vile in the fight of others: ‘The part that the 
britith government has taken, to co-operate with 
them, has certainly a flattering and laudable ap- 
pearance of doing;fome good; and the fitting 
out dhips to fupply a company of. Black People 
with clothes and provifions, and to carry them to 
fettle at Sierra, Leona, in the Weft coatt of Africa, 
as a free colony to Great-Britain, in a peaceable 
alliance with the inhabitants, has every appear- 
ance of honour, and the approbation of friends. 
According to thé plan, humanity hath made its 
appearance in a more honorable way of coloni- 
zation, than any Chriftian nation have ever done 
before, and may be productive of much good, if 
they continue to encourage and fupport them. 
But after all, there is fome doubt whether their 


own flattering expectation in the manner as fet. 


forth to them, and the hope of their friends may 
not be defeated and rendered abortive; and: 
there is fome reafon to fear, that they never will 
be fettled as intended, in any permanent and. 
peaceable way at Sierra Leona. 

This profpect of fettling a free colony to Great 
Britain in a peaceable alliance with the inhabit- 
ants of Africa at Sierra Leona, has neither alto- 
gether met with the credulous approbation of 
the Africans here, nor yet been fought after with: 


any prudent and right plan by the promoters of. 


if, 

















» 


144. THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 
the infidious pirates, depredators, murderers 
and flave-holders. And as it might diffufe know- 
ledge and inftruction to others, that it’ might 
receive a tribute of reward from all its territo- 
ries, forts and garrifons, without being oppref- 
five to any. But contrary to this the wickednefs 
of many of ‘the WiritePeople who keep flaves, 
and contrary to all the laws and duties of Chrif- 
tianity which the Scriptures teach, they have in 
general endeavoured to keep the Black People in 
total ignorance as much as they can, which muft 
be a great difhonor to any Chriftian government, 
and injurious to the fafety and happinefs of rulers. 
Put in order to diffufe any knowledge of Chrif- 
tianity to the unlearned Heathens, thofe who un- 
dertake to do any thing therein ought to be wife 
and -honeft men.’ Their own learning, though 
the more the better, is not fo much required as 
that they fhould be men of the fame mind and 
principles of the apoftle Paul; men that would 
hate coveteoufnefs, and who would hazard their 
lives for the caufe and gofpel of our Lord and 
Saviour Jefus Chrift. ‘* I think it needlefs to 
** to exprefs how commendable fuch a defign 
“* would be in itfelf, and how defirable the: pro- 
<¢ motion thereof fhould be to all who ftile them- 
“ felves Chriftians, of what party or profeffion 
‘* foever they are.” Rational methods might be 
taken to have the Scriptures tranflated into many 
foreign languages; ‘* and a competent number: 
‘* of young ftudents of theology might be edu- 
** cated at home in thefe foreign languages, to 
 S* afford a conftant fupply of “able men, who 
** might yearly go abroad, and be fufficiently 
“¢ qualified at their firft arrival to undertake the | 
' $¢ great work for:which they: were fent.” But 


as 








SON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. TAI - 


of any good in proportion to fo great, well- 
defizned, laudable and expenfive charity. Many 
more of the. Black People ftill in this country 
would have, with great gladnefs, embraced: the 
opportunity, longing to reach their native land ; 
but as the old faying is, A burnt child dreads the 
fire, fome of thefe unfortunate fons and daugh- 
ters of Africa have been feverally unlawfully 
dragezed away from their native abodes, under 
various pretences, by the infidious treachery of 
others, and have been brought into the hands of | er 
barbarous robbers and pirates, and, like fheep ee 
to the market, ‘have been fold into captivity and a 
flavery, and thereby have been deprived of their | 
natural liberty and property, and every connec- : 
tion that they held dear and valuable, and fub- . 
jected to the. cruel fervice of the hard-hearted 
brutes called planters. But fome of them, by 
various fervices either to the public or to indi- oe 
viduals, as more particularly in the courfe of laft ei! 
war, have gotten their liberty again in this free 
country. They are thankful for the:refpite, but 
afraid of being enfnared again; for the Euro- 
pean feafaring people in general, who’ trade to 
foreign parts, have fuch a prejudice againft Black 
People, that they ufe them more like affes than 
men, fo that a Black Man is fcarcely ever fafe' 
among them. Much affiduity was made ufe: to 
perfwade the Black People in general to embrace: 
the opportunity of going. with this company of 
tranfports; but the wifer fort declined.from all 
thoughts of it, unlefs they could hear of. fome 
better plan taking place for their fecurity and 
fafety.. For as it feemed prudent and obvious to 
many of them: taking heed to that facred en- 
guiry; Doth a fountain fend forth at the fame place 
iso! : Sweet 





ie) 








146 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS 


intemperate, frenzy, enthufiaftic, and fanaticifm may 
be varioufly applied, and often wrongfully ; but, 
perhaps-never better, or more fitly, than to be 
afcribed as the genuine charaéter of this author’s 
brutifh philofophy ; and he may fubfcribe it, and 
the meaning of thefe words, with as much affinity 
to himfelf, as he bears a relation to a Hume, or 
to his friend Tobin. The poor negroes in the 
Weift-Indies, have fuffered enough by fuch reli- 
‘gion asthe philofophers of the North produce ; 
Proteftants, as they are calied, are the moft bar- 
barous flave-holders, and there are none can equal 
the Scotch floggers ‘and negroe-drivers, and the 
barbarous Dutch cruelties. ‘Perhaps as the church 
of Rome begins to fink in its power, its followers 
may encreafe in virtue and humanity ; fo that 
many, who are the profeffed adherents thereof, 
would even blufh and abhor the very mention of 
the cruelty and bloody deeds that their anceftors 
have committed; and we find flavery itfelf more 
tolerable among them, than it isin the Proteftant 
countries. | 
But I fhall add another obfervation, whichI am 
forry to find among Chriftians, and 1 think it is 
a great deficiency among the clergy in general, 
when covetous and profligate men are admitted 
amongft them, who either do not. know, or 
dare not fpeak the truth, but negleét their 
duty much, or do it with fuch fupinenels, that 
it becomes good for nothing, Sometimes an 
old woman felling matches, will preach a bet- 
ter, and a more “orthodox fermon, than fome 
of the clergy, who are only decked out (as Mr. 
Turnbul calls it) with the external trappings ' 
of religion. Much of the great wickednefs 
of others licth at their door, and thefe words of 
the eae are ay HiCuale tothem: And firf, 
fae 





ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. 143 


our planters duly confider, that to extirpate 
* natives, is rather a fupplanting than planting a 
new colony ; and that it is far more honouras 
ble to overcome paganifm in one, than to de- 
“ firoy a thoufand pagans. Each convert is a 
-* conqueft.” 

To put an end to the xedesdmeimetflavery and 
merchandizing of men, and to prevent murder, 
extirpation and diffolution, is what every righte- 
ous nation ought to feek after; and to endeavour 
to diffufe knowledge and inftrudtion to all the hea- 
then nations wherever they can, is the grand du- 
ty of all Chriftian men. But while the horrible 
traffic of flavery is admitted and practiced, there 
can be but little hope of any good propofals meet- 
‘ing with fuccefs anywhere ; for. the aban- 
doned carriers of it on have fpread the poifon of 
their iniquity wherever they come, at home and 
abroad. Were the iniquitous laws in fupport of 
it, and the whole of that oppreffion and injuftice 
abolithed, and the righteous laws of Chriftianity, 
equity, juftice, and humanity eftablithed in the 
room thereof, multitudes of. nations would flock: 
to the ftandard of truth, and inftead of revolting 
away, they would count it their greateft happi- 
nefs to be under the protection and jurifdiction 
of a righteous government. And in that refpect, 
in the multitude of the people is the King’s honour ; 
but in the want of people, is the deftruction of the 
Prince. 

We would with to have the grandeur and fame 
of the Britith empire to extend far and wide; 
and the glory and honor of God to be promoted 
by it, and the intereft of Chriftianity fet forth 
among all the nations wherever its influence and 
power'can extend; but nat tobe fupported by 

the 


€é 

















448 THOUGHTS AND SENTIMENTS, &Xc. 

And let me now. hope that yow will pardon me 
in ail that I have been thus telling you, O ye in- 
habitants, of Great-Britain! to whom! owe the 
greateft refpect; to your king! to yourfelves! 
and to your government And tho’ many things 
which | have written may feem harth, it cannot be 
otherwife evaded. when fuch horible ‘iniquity is 
tranfacted : and tho’ to fome what I have faid 
_™ay appear as the rattling leaves of autumn, that 
may foon be blown away rand whirled in a vortex 
where few can hear and know : I mutt yet fay, al- 
though it is not for me to determine the manner, 
that the: voice of our complaint implies a ven- 
- geance, becaufe of the great iniquity that you 
have done, and becaufe ok. the cruel injuftice done 
unto.\us Africans ; and it ought to. found in your 
ars as the’ rolling waves around your circum-am- 
bient fhores.; and if it is not hearkened unto, it 
may yet arife with a louder voice, as the rolling 
thunder, and it may encreafe in the force of its 
volubility, not only to fhake the leaves of the moft 
fiout in heart, but to rend the mountains.before 
them, and to cleave in pieces the rocks under them, 
and.to-go on with fury to finite the ftouteft oaks 
in the foreft; and even to make that which is 
ftrong, and wherein you think that your ftrength 
lieth, to become as itubble, and as the bron of 
rotten wood, that will do you no good, and your 
truft in it will become, a, inare of infatuation to 
you! j ‘ 





Te ia ae 


ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. I45 


as a. hindrance to this, the many Anti-chriftian 
errors which are gone abroad into the world, and 
all the popifh fuperftition and nonfenfe, and the 
various aflimilations unto it, with the falfe philo- 
fophy which abounds among Chriftians, feems to 
threaten with an univerfal deluge; but God hath 
promifed to fill the world with a knowledge of 
himfelf, and he hath fet up his bow, in the ra- 
tional heavens, as well as in the clouds, as a token 
that he will ftop the proud ways of error and de- 
lufion, -that hitherto they may come, and no fars 
ther. The holy arch of truth is to be feen in the 
azure paths of the pious and wife, and confpicu- 
oufly painted in crimfon over the martyrs tombs. 
Thefe, with the golden altars of truth, built up 
by the reformed churches, and many pious, good 
and righteous men, are bulwarks that will ever 
fland againft all the forts of error. Teaching 
would be exceeding neceffary to the pagan na- 


tions and ignorant people in every place and. 


fituation; but they do not need any unfcriptural 


forms and ceremonies to be taught unto them ;, 


they can devife fuperftitions enough among them- 


felves, and church government too, if ever they’ 


need any. : 
And hence we would agree in this one thing 
with that erroneous philofopher, who: has lately 
wrote An Apology for Negro Slavery, ‘* But if the 
‘* flave is only to be made acquainted with the 
‘*‘ form, without the fubftance; if he is only to 
‘© be decked out with the external trappings of 
** religion; if he is only to be taught the un- 
‘* cheering principles of gloomy fuperftition; or, 
** af he is only to be infpired with the intemperate 
‘* frenzy of enthufiaftic fanaticifm, it were better 


“© that he remained in that dark ftate, where he. 


* could not fee goad from ill.” But thele words 
ie intemperate, 














ON THE EVIL OF SLAVERY. I47 


Saith the Lord, I will recompence their iniquity, and 
their fin double; becanfe they bave defiled my land, 
they have filled mine inheritance with the carcafes of 
their detefiable and abominable things. Such are the 
errors of men. Church, fignifies an affembly of 
people ; but a building of wood, brick or ftone, 
where the people meet together, is generally cal- 
led fo ; and fhould the people be frightened away 
by the many abominable dead carcafes which they 
meet with, they fhould follow the multitudes to 
the fields, to the vallies, to the mountains, to the 
iflands, to the rivers, and to the fhips, and com- 
pel them to come in, that the houfe of the Lord 
may be filled. But when we find fomie of the 
covetous connivers with flave-holders, in the 
Weft-Indies, fo ignorant as to difpute whether a 
Pagan can be baptized without giving him a 
Chriftian name, we cannot expeét. much from 
them, or think that they will follow after much 
good. Noname, whether Chriftian or Pagan, 
has any thing to do with baptifm; if the requifite 
qualities of knowledge and faith be found ina 
man, he may be baptized let his name be what 
it will. And Chriftianity does not require that 
we fhould be deprived of our own perfonal name, 
or the name of our anceftors; but it miay very 
fitly add another name unto us, Chriftian, or 
one anointed, And it might as well be anfwered | 
fo to that queftion in the Englith liturgy, What 
és your name ?—A Chriftian. 

“* A Chriftian is the higheft fiile of man ! 

‘© And is there, who the bleffed crofs wipes off 

“© As a foul blot, from his difhonor’d brow 2? 

“< Tt angels tremble, ’tis at fuch a fight : 

“© The wretch they quit difponding of their charge, 
© More firuck with grief or wonder who can tell 2” 


L 2 And 











ee a0 ee ~— Soper ha 
: ahh igi = 5 


en a =
