---
title: Unhappy India
collection: 21-anti-colonial
region: India (British Raj)
counter: British empire
note: a nationalist’s 1928 reckoning with British rule
source: Internet Archive
source_url: https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.89043
language: English
license: public domain
---
UOT Hi 


0014819 


THE 
ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY : 
TOWN HALL, BOMBAY-400 001, ; 


Digitiz from 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


By the same Author: 


Young India 

The United States of America 

England’s Debt to India 

The Arya Samaj 

The Political Future of India 

The Evolution of Japan 

The Problem of National Education in India 


MAHATMA GANDHI. 
The leader of the Non-Cooperation movement. 


- { 


Unhappy India 


by . 
LAJPAT RAI 


SEeconp EpiTIon 
(Revised, Enlarged & Illustrated). 


BANNA PUBLISHING CO. _ 
CALCUTTA 
1928 


First Edition—(May), 1928. 
Reprint—(June), 1928. 
(Revised Edition)—(July), 1928 


a We 


001481 


DEDICATED 


With love and gratitude to’ those numberless 
American men and women who stand for the free- 
dom of the world; who know no distinctions of 
colour, race or creed; and who profess a religion of 
love, humanity and. justice. To them the 
oppressed people of the jearth look for sympathy 
in their struggle for emancipation, and in them is 
centred the hope-of world-peace. 


LAJPAT RAT. 


CHAPTER 


\ XVI 
XVII 
XVIII 
xIx 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE ed eee 
INTRODUCTION oes Gace 
THE ARGUMENT : a 
THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES vee 
THE LIGHT THAT FAILED 


LEARNING AND EARNING--AND HARD- 


HEADED AMERICANS _... iste 
A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 


HISTORY OF COMPULSORY PRIMARY. 


EDUCATION bm ie 
‘WHY 1S LIGHT DENIED?’ Ris 
THE HINDU CASTE SYSTEM 


THE UNTOUCHABLES—HIS FRIENDS AND 
HIS EXPLOITERS sists, eis 


LESS THAN THE PARIAR ... 
LESS THAN THE PARIAH (concluded) 
WOMAN IN INDIA—A RETROSPECT 
WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE ‘3 
EARLY TO MARRY AND EARLY TO DIE ... 
THE HINDU WIDOW sis 
Be DEVADASI Bai bis 
* SCHOOLING, FREE OF CHARGE’ 
THE SEX URGE IN THE WEST 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON 
CHURCHILL 


viii 
CHAPTER 
XX 
XXI 
XXII 
XXIII 
XXIV 
XXV 


XXVI 
XXVII 


XXVIII 
XXIX 
XXX 
XXXI 
XXXII 


XXXII 


CONTENTS 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW 
THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS 
WHY THE COW STARVES 
INDIA—-HOME OF PLENTY 
INDIA—‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 


POVERTY—THE ROCK BOTTOM~ PHYSI- 
CAL BASE OF INDIA’S ILEUS 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 


SOME ASPECTS. OF THE DRAIN TO- 
pay (concluded) 


‘ DIVIDE ET IMPERA ” 
‘THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’ 
BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 
THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 


“CUMBROUS, COMPLEX, 
SYSTEM ’ 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 


CONFUSED 


APPENDICES 


SOME OPINIONS 
INDIA ” 

DEPRESSED CLASSES ae 

THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA AND CASTE 


MASS EDUCATION IN INDIA ¢ 
INDEX ae 


ABOUT. ‘ MOTHER 


PAGE 
269 
278 
290 
301 
319 


330 
373 


382 
399 
411 
426 
440 


465 
470 


487 
518 
537 
543 
545 


PREFACE 


Not many words are needed to send out this 
book into the world. I claim neither originality 
nor literary merit for it. In my judgment it is 
easier to write an original thesis than to hunt up 
authorities, verify and quote them. But being the 
‘member of a subject race, writing a book 
in defence of my motherland,-in refutation 
of the calumnies invented and circulated through- 
out the world from base motives, I could not but 
refer to, and quote from authorities. There are 
not many statements in this book (in fact I doubt 
if there are any) in-support of which reputed and 
reliable authority has not been quoted. It is easy 
to speak ill of the under-dog. It is difficult to 
defend him. The very fact that he is an under. 
dog goes against him. Nothing is more humiliat- 
ing than-the necessity of quoting the testimony of 
foreigners in. defence. The process in itself 
involves an admission of inferiority. But there is 
nouse hidjng the fact that the white peoples of 
the West are not prepared to accept and believe any 
testimony but that of persons of their own race 
and coldur. The book has been written mainly 
for them, and so it has been necessary to keep 


x PREFACE 


their needs in view. The foreign editions are to 
be larger in size and to contain extra matter that, 
for various reasons, could not be embodied in this 
edition. 


Efforts are also being made to collect illustra- 
tions for the foreign edition. My best thanks are 
due to my fellow-worker and friend, Lala Feroz 
Chand, Editor of The People, but for whose colla- 
boration the book might not have been prepared, . 
printed and published so soon. 


One word more and I have done. It is with 
extreme reluctance, amounting to pain, that I have 
referred to certain phases of American life. There 
is another side of American life—beautiful, noble, 
humane, full of the milk of human kindness for 
all races, all colours and all peoples of the world, 
of which I had personal experience during my five 
years’ residence in that country. In order to 
expiate the sin of noting down some of the dark 
spots of American life in this book I may have to 
write another book depicting the bright traits of 
American character in the shape of personal 
narrative and character sketches. In this book 
these would be out of place. They would not fit 
in. with my argument. I hope my American 
friends will pardon me for giving only one side of 
American life. America was’ not the theme of 


PREFACE xi 


this book. I have spoken of certain phases of 
American life only by way of comparison. 

The book has been prepared, printed and 
published in great hurry. No one'is more con- 
scious of its defects than my humble self, but 
there is one satisfaction that nothing is stated. 
herein which I do not believe to be true, 

In referring to Mother India I have used the 
English edition. 


New Dethi: 
| January, 1928. LAJPAT RAT. 


we 


A 


as 


job) SR 


Om 


CNG WIRD 
NP | Barak 1925 


Rabindranath Tagore 


Perhaps no man in modern times has shown such versatility in so may} 
branches of art and_ letters as Rabindranath Tagore, poet, philosopheh} 
novelist, short story writer, dramatist, essayist and musical composer. |, 

_ Rabindranath is also possessed of rare histrionic gifts and a phantastic im® 
gination for design and decoration. He is also famous as an educationist, socid 
reformer and a religious leader of the Brahmo Samaj. 


INTRODUCTION 
1G 


Subjection to foreign yoke is one of the most 
potent causes of the decay of nations—Prof. 
E. A. Ross. 


Speaking from a national point of view, no 
curse is greater than that of political subjection 
to another people. The marching hordes of a 
ynonarch are nothing in their ruinous effects 
on the country they overrun as seo wok with 
the gradual loss of a country’s freedom by the 
complete subjugation of its. people by a foreign 
army and its governance through the fear of 
bayonets. The invader comes, plundering, . 
devastating, uprooting and sweeping everything 
before it like a hurricane. But he either goes 
away with his -plunder or settles down in the 
country and_ identifies himself with the people. 
To the first type belonged invaders like Alexander, 
Mahmud-of Ghazni, Timur, Chengiz Khan, Nadir 
Shah, and Ahmad Shah Abdali; to the second 
belonged men who led the Scythians and the . 
Huns into India and settled down here and 
became a part and parcel of the Indian nation, or 
like Mahmud of Ghor and Babar laid the founda- 
tions of dynasties deep on the soil of India. 


It ig true that in either case a great deal of 
humiliation, degradation and _ economic loss 
_is suffered by the people of the country, but, 


xiv UNHAPPY INDIA 


eventually the people and the invader become 
one. They mingle their blood one with the other, 
they exchange their cultures and ways of life, and 
strive for the evolution of a new culture and_a 
new people with the strong points of both. In 
either case the curse of foreign rule is neither so 
keen and poignant, nor so devastating. and 
humiliating as it is when a nation imposes its 
rule over another and maintains it-by all her 
political, economic and military resources. An 
appeal to the generosity, magnanimity and’ sense 
of justice in an individual sovereign or ruler may 
for once meet with success, but that to a nation 
or a democracy never can. —No rule over. a foreign 
people is so exacting and so merciless in its 
operations as that of a democracy. A democratic 
form of government may be good for domestic 
purposes, but the domination of a democracy over 
other peoples is disastrous in its effects, and is 
fraught with possibilities of infinite mischief. 


Political \subjection is the punishment of 
social evils and national crimes, but once imposed, 
it adds.to their volume and intensity. It effect- 
ively checks any rejuvenation or reconstruction. 
It accentuates social evils and weaknesses. It: 
leads to poverty in all its hideous forms, mental, 
moral and physical. If ever an awakening comes, 
it is delayed, or checked and crushed ‘by all the 
forces of law and diplomacy, and of cunning and 
fraud. It is a part of the imperial game to paint 
the subject people in the blackest colours, and to 
slander and libel them most shamelessly. The 
object is to produce and perpetuate the slave 


INTRODUCTION xv 


mentality of the subject people, and to obtain the 
moral sanction of the rest of the world for usurp- 
ing the rights, properties and liberties of other 
peoples. This is the genesis of the cult of the 
white man’s burden. This is the mentality 
which stimulates the Empire-builder. This is the 
material with which the ‘ steel frames’ are forged 
to keep the subject peoples in bondage and to 
‘prevent them ‘from doing harm to themselves ’ 
-by aspiring to, and working for their freedom. 
That is how Britain made her Empire in India, 
that is how the U. S, A. took possession of the 
Philippine Isles and now refuses to vacate them. 


It is true that sometimes empire-making_ 
begins in a fit of self-forgetfulness, for temporary © 
purposes of safety or trade, but soon, very soon, it 
becomes wilful and unscrupulous empire-build- 
ing. Empires. built. and made have to be 
maintained and-managed and fresh territories 
added to it. Sometimes, however, empires based 
on fraud and maintained by force, have the 
knack of awakening the political consciousness 
of the subject peoples. Political domination 
leads.to economic exploitation. Economic 
exploitation leads to dirt, disease and distress, 
until. they drive even the meekest people on 
earth to rebellion, passive or active, and create © 
the desire-for freedom. The rulers. resent this. 
At first they try to crush this spirit for emancipa- 
tion out of existence by ridicule and contempt, or 
by ignoring it altogether. Then comes the stage 
of control, which is followed by a policy of 
repression cum conciliation leading to cunning 


xvi UNHAPPY INDIA 


and fraud, chicanery and charlatanism.. The 
struggle goes on. The Imperialists divide them- 
selves into two parties: (a) The advocates of pure 
force and no nonsense; (0) The liberals who trot 
out the plea of trusteeship by convincing the 
.‘ wards’ inside, and the world outside, that the 
people are unfit to rule themselves, and that the 
best interests of the ruled themselves demand a 
never-ending continuance of the~ trusteeship. 
Certain theoretical conditions are laid down, the 
fulfilment of. which might lead to the ending of 
the period of trusteeship, but the actual policy is 
‘directed to check and prevent the fulfilment of 
these conditions, and thus a vicious circle is 
created by which both the people affected and the 
world at large are deceived. Want of literacy, 
lack of social purity and social solidarity, the 
existence of depressed and suppressed classes, the 
low nature of private and public morality, and 
incapacity to build arms, to lead armies and to 
organise scientific defence, all these are trumped 
up as justifying a denial of freedom; every effort 
is at the same time made to perpetuate these dis- 
qualifications. The subject people are declared 
deficient in character, which alone is said to 
enable people to rule themselves, or to deal fairly 
as between one class and another. The lesson of 
their own domestic history or that of other peoples 
is clean forgotten by the ruling race, and _ great 
point is made of the so-called backward condition 
of the aspiring nation. It is declared from house- 
tops that these people have got into the slough of 
slave-mentality::. they hug their chains; they love 


INTRODUCTION. XVii : 


their ignorance; they adore their poverty; they are 
devoted to dirt, disease and distress, they are 
afraid of freedom, and they hate the classes which 
cry for liberty and raise the standard of revolt 
against established absolutism, entrenched foreign 
autocracy, and personified exploitation. Such is 
the curse of political subjection and economic 
bondage that the slaves themselves fail to re- 
cognize that the only way to develop a. character 
for self-government and a free life is to break their 
chains and throw off the yoke. Such is the process 
of imperial hypnotism and of sophisticated, well- 
organised and well-planned propaganda that the 
subjects themselves, while disgusted with their 
chained life, are yet afraid of freedom. Thus 
things keep moving ina vicious circle until 
Nemesis overtakes all and starts a fresh chapter in 
history. 


Every schoolboy. knows that for ages Europe 
was plunged in barbarity, ignorance and bondage. 
When we say Europe, we mean the white races of 
the world—Europe and America, for America is 
only a child of Europe. The white races got their 
religion from Asia; arts and industries they copied 
from Egypt; moral standards they borrowed from 
India.and Palestine. Whatever is really good and 
moral among the modern nations of the world is 
largely a gift of the East. According to some, even 
their blood is Asiatic in origin. Even casual 
students of history know that only three centuries 
back Asia ruled and dominated at least half of 
modern Europe... Alexander’s were the only 
armies that ever met with victory in pre-Christian 


= 


xviii UNHAPPY INDIA 


Asia. They affected but a small part of Asia, and 
that also only for a short period of a few years. 
Alexander’s raid was well recompensed by the 
raids and victories. of the Huns, of Chengiz Khan 
and Timur, and then of the Moors and Turks. 
For centuries Russia, Turkey, Sicily, Spain and 
the Balkans were ruled and dominated by the 
Asiatics. Europe’s dominance over Asia is not 
more than two centuries old. It virtually began 
with the conquest of India, and, God willing, will 
end with her emancipation. It is this fear which 
is the motive behind an unholy’ combination of 
all the white peoples of the earth against India’s 
aspirations to political freedom.» India is the crux 
of the problem of the clash of colour. India’s 
freedom means the freedom of the whole coloured 
world. This explains the great popularity and 
success which Miss._Katherine Mayo’s book, 
Mother India, has gained throughout the West. 


Miss Mayo’s mentality is the mentality of the 
white races as a whole against the black or brown 
or yellow peoples of Asia. She is only the mouth- 
piece of the oppressors of the East. The awaken- 
ing of the East has frightened both Europe and 
America. Hence this hysterical exhibition of 
temper, and this studied, deliberate, infamous 
propaganda against a race so ancient and so 
cultured. 


II. 


Miss Katherine Mayo is by her antecedents a 
tool of the Jingoes of America. She is a journalist 
whose only claim to authorship is a facile pen, @ 


INTRODUCTION xix 


familiarity with sensational catch-words and a 
habit of telling doubtful stories in a crackling 
style. Even a superficial reader can point out her 
ignorance of history, psychology and politics. Yet 
she is an able writer of sorts. Her first debut into 
the realm of authorship was made by the publica- 
tion of a volume of her ‘researches’ into.the 
condition of the Filipinos who have been knock- 
ing at the door of America for their. promised 
freedom. The book was named The Isles of Fear. 
Mr. 8. K. Ratcliffe, sometime Editor of the Cal- 
cutta Statesman, and a famous English journalist, 
now popular in the U. S. A. by his lectures and 
contributions to the American Press, tells us in the 
course of his review of Mother India (published in 
the New York, New Repwodlic) : 


‘““Two years ago, when I read Katherine 
Mayo’s propagandist ~volume on the Philippines, 
it seemed to me Certain that she would go next to 
India and produce a book enforcing a conclusion 
precisely similar to the one reiterated in The Isles 
of Fear. The thesis of that vigorous manifesto, it 
will be.remembered, is that the United States 
must keep its governing hand upon the archi- 
pelago, for, if it did not, the Filipinos would be 
skinned alive by their own landlords, lawyers, 
usurpers.”” 


We have reason to believe that Miss Mayo’s 
visit to India was not a spontaneous one, and that 
she was urged to come io India by those Britishers 
with vested interests, who think that the develop- 
ment of self-government in India is a menance to 


xx UNHAPPY INDIA 


them and their pockets. Obviously we can have 
no direct’ evidence in support of this allegation. 
But of strong circumstantial evidence there is no 
dearth. Mr. Lionel Curtis is one of those 
‘ progressive ’ gentlemen who are interested in the 
integrity and prosperity of the British Empire. He 
is a member of the Round Table Group in. Great 
Britain. This Group is vitally interested in the 
problems of the Empire, and its members devote 
their time and energy to bringing the different 
parts of the Empire together and to making them 
understand each other better. “The Empire, how- 
ever, for which they stand is a ‘ Commonwealth of 
Nations ’ in which the white, British as well as 
Colonial, shall rule and. exploit the ‘natives.’ 
Mr. Curtis visited India in 1916-17—about the time 
of the famous pronouncement of Mr. Montague in 
August 1917, in the House of Commons, pledging 
the word of Great Britain to grant self-government 
to India in progressive stages. Mr. Montague came 
to India to study the situation and to report to 
Parliament how best to give effect to that pledge. 
Mr. Lionel Curtis also made somewhat similar 
professions. While the Secretary of State tried to 
give something, it was the Round Table knight’s 
concern to see that little was given, and even that 
little rendered ineffective. He entered into a 
conspiracy with two eminent ~Britishers of the 
Indian Civil Service, members of the Round Table 
Group, both in charge of high offices in one of the 
provinces of India. The object of this conspiracy 
was to give a voice and share to the white 
Dominions of Great Britain in determining the 


INTRODUCTION Xxi 


future of India and to strengthen the chains with 
which she was bound down for the glorification of 
the Empire. One of the documents which con- 
tained the infamous story of this conspiracy fell 
by chance into the hands of Mr. Gandhi, and he 
made it public. Mr. Curtis was caught.red- 
handed, and had to explain away the Round 
Table circular as a private letter to ‘ intimate 
friends.’ By repute -he and his -fellow-cons- 
pirators of the Indian Civil Service were the 
authors of dyarchy and such other features of the 
Montague-Chelmsford Report as have been the 
bane of the Reforms Act of 1919. 


In August 1925 Mr. Curtis happened to be in 
Massachusetts, U. 8, A. He met Miss Katherine 
Mayo, and was at once so much enamoured of her 
production, The Isles of Fear, that he wrote a fore- 
word for the English edition of that book. The 
language of the foreword makes it highly probable 
that Mr. Curtis—even if he did not find the money 
for Miss Mayo’s expensive voyage to India—had 
something to.do with the idea that Miss Mayo’s 
Philippine work be followed by a visit to India 
with similar motives and aims. Said Mr. Curtis 
in the foreword :* 


“ The British Government is responsible for 
more dependencies than all the other nations put 
together. Qur experience is centuries old. [May 
we ask how many centuries old, as the beginning 
of the British Empire in Asia is not even full two 
centuries old?] we can hardly afford to ignore 


*The Isles of Fear, (London: Faber and Gwyer) pp. ix—xii. 


Xxii UNHAPPY INDIA 


the experience of others, especially that of the 
young light-hearted masters of the West... In 
discussing the Indian or Colonial estimates a 
Minister might well be expected to show Parlia- 
ment that he knew how American or Dutch 
administrators were handling analogous problems 
in the Philippines or Java. In 1917 the. policy 
pursued by America in the Philippines was a 
commonplace of nationalist propaganda. in India. 
In the following year when retiring from the 
Indian Government, Sir W. Meyer visited the 
Philippines, but if he reported. on American 
methods the fact has never been disclosed by the 
India Office.”’ 


In the following paragraph Mr. Curtis makes 
it clear how valuable Miss Mayo’s book on the 
Philippine Islands~could be to the English ad- 
ministrators of India: 


“The Jones Law passed by the American 
Congress in 1916 transferred the control of legisla- 
tion and supply to a legislature answerable toa 
Philippine electorate, while leaving the executive 
power-to.a governor responsible to the President 
of the U.S. A. A system, the close equivalent of 
the Jones Law was the only alternative to that 
embodied in the constitution which was given to 
India in 1920. For this reason alone the operation 
of the Jones Law in the Philippines déserves to be 
studied by observers who bring to their task an 
adequate knowledge of Indian conditions. I 
commend this book to English readers in the hope 
of provoking such enquiries.”’ 


INTRODUCTION xxiii 


Mr. Curtis is conscious that ‘ Miss Mayo’s 
account of the results which have followed the 
American attempt to “‘hasten’’ self-government in 
the Philippines will probably be used to discredit 
the poney applied to India in the pronouncement 
of 1917.’ 


Miss Mayo protests that she has written. the 
book only for the use of her own people, but she 
has not yet told us of what use a wholesale 
denunciation of the Indian people could be to the 
people of the United States, unlessit was the same 
kind of use for which Mr. Curtis recommended 
The Isles of Fear to the British-Indian administra- 
tors, 


Anyhow we are justified.in concluding that in 
August 1925 there was some kind of mutual dis- 
cussion and understanding between Mr. L. Curtis, 
the champion of British imperialism, and Miss 
Mayo, the author of The Isles of Fear, which led to 
Miss Mayo’s visit to the India Office, en route to 
India ‘ early in October 1925.’ Who introduced 
her to the authorities of the India Office? Who 
persuaded. the latter to give her introductions to 
her for use in India? These are: questions that 
Mr. Curtis may answer for the benefit of the 
curious if he chooses. Be that as it may, Miss 
Mayo ‘called at the India Office’ ‘early in 
October 1925.’ The good people of the India Office 
asked her, ‘‘ What would you like us to do for 
you?’ She answered : 


‘*Nothing, except to believe what I say. A 
foreign stranger prying about India, not studying 


XXIV UNHAPPY INDIA 


ancient architecture, not. seeking philosophers or 
poets, not even hunting big game, and commission- 
ed by no one, anywhere, may seem a queer figure. 
Especially if that stranger develops an acute 
tendency to ask questions. I should like to be 
accepted that I am neither an idle busybody-nor a 
political agent, but merely an ordinary American 
citizen seeking test facts to lay before my own 
people.” 


On her own admission the India Office were 
not slow to give introductions. 


This sounds suspicious enough. But here are 
a few further facts that I found out on enquiry. 
Miss Mayo was the guest of a member of the 
Government of India and his wife during her stay 
at Delhi in the winter of 1926. She was a guest 
at least at one Government House in India. The 
Home Member of,.the Government of India has 
admitted in the Legislative Assembly that the 
government officials in India did give her help 
and showed her courtesies,—though he contends 
these were not different from those that are given 
or shown to other publicists or visitors. This 
statement cannot be accepted at its face value 
when. we find Miss Mayo admitting that sometimes 
she accompanied ‘ a District Commissioner on his 
tours of chequered duty,’ sometimes she ‘ sat in’ 
‘at village councils of peasants, or at an Indian 
Municipal Board meeting’ How could an 
American woman, an utter stranger to the 
country, absolutely ignorant of its many verna- 
culars, ‘ sit in’ at the village councils of peasants, 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


unless she was taken to these (probably pre- 
arranged) councils by English-speaking Indian 
officials deputed by higher officers ? 


Miss Mayo was at the India Office in London 
in October 1925. In her foreword she gives no 
date or year to show when she completed her 
manuscripts. Inside the title sheet of the American 
edition ‘May 1927’ is given as the month when it 
was first printed. From October 1925. to May 
1927, exclusive of both months, the total period 
which Miss Mayo spent on this book (from the 
date of her starting for India to the date of the 
first publication of her book) seems not to have 
exceeded 18 months. And during this period we 
must understand sha toured in India from 
the North-Western. Frontier. Province to Madras, 
visited many towns and villages, studied the 
history of the various. communities and their 
social, industrial _and~ political life. She visited 
homes and hospitals and discussed metaphysics 
and philosophic outlooks on life. She managed to 
include in this stupendous task printed debates of 
the nine provincial councils, the two chambers of 
the Indian legislature, the blue books and reports 
of the numerous government departments of all 
the. provinces quite extending over a period of 
two decades. This period of 18 months includes 
the voyage back to America and the writing and 
printing of the book. Has any writer ever 
one such a feat in such a short time single- 

anded ? 


To Some these facts would be a conclusive 
proof of Miss Mayo’s coming to India through 


2 


“Xxvi UNHAPPY INDIA 


some agency of Anglo-Indians, official and non- 
official, who wanted her to write a book of the 
kind she had written about the Philippines in 
1924. For our more sceptical readers we shall 


add— 


1. That her book was first boomed. in the 
British Isles by the leading Tory organs which had 
been agitating against the advanced Indian 
political parties and their claims for Swaraj. 


2. That the chief of these Tory papers, The 
London Times, refused to give publicity to an 
important letter* of protest, signed by almost all 
the influential Indians, officials and non-officials, 
then present in London. The letter ran— 


“ Our’ attention has been drawn to the recent 
publication, entitled Mother India, by an American 
tourist, Miss Kaherine’ Mayo, who paid a visit to 
India during the cold weather of 1925-26. It has 
never been our lot. to read a book which indulges in 
such a wholesale, indiscriminate vilification of 
Indian civilization and Indian character. 


*The letter was signed by Sir A. C. Chatterjee, High 
Commissioner for India; Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, ex-Member of 
the Viceroy’s Executive Council; Sir Chimanlal Setalvad, ex- 
Member of the Executive Council of the Governor of Bombay; 
Mr. Sachchidananda Sinha, ex-Member of th: Executive Council 
of the Governor of Bihar and Orissa; Sir M. M. Bhowanagree; 
Mr. Dube, Barrister-at-Law, practising before His Majesty’s 
Privy Council; Mr. Kamat, Member of the Royal Commission for 
Agriculture; and all the Indian Members of the Council of the 
Secretary of State for India, namely, Sir Mahomed Rafique, Mr. 
S. N. Mullick and Dr. Pranjpaye. The Z'imes refused to publish 
this letter although it was an important statement by prominent 


perhicity eeuter’s propagandist news service gave it absolutely no 


INTRODUCTION XXvii 


““'We concede that like other cold weather 
tourists, Miss Mayo was entitled to form and 
express her own opinions. But when a foreigner, 
who spends not more than afew months in our 
country, uses the material gleaned from hospital 
cases, culled from criminal trial reports.and 
deduced from her own observation of isolated 
happenings, and seeks to fortify herself with quota- 
tions divorced from context, and then proceeds on 
such slender basis to formulate a general indict- 
ment against the character and culture of a great 
country like India, possessed of an ancient civiliza- 
tion, it is time that we protested. 


‘She depicts the entire nation of 320 million 
people as physical degenerates, moral perverts and 
unabashed liars. If an Indian could have the 
temerity to pass a similar judgment on any nation 
of the West, after but afew months’ residence in 
any country in Europe or America, and to indict 
the Western people, their civilization and character 
on the strength of the reports of sensational cases 
and crimes, moral perversions and physical 
degeneracy as evidenced by the proceedings of the 
courts, hospital and personal experiences, official 
reports, newspaper paragraphs and_ other special 
instances he would be rightly condemned as un- 
worthy of serious attention... 


‘We should not have felt called upon to take 
any public notice of a book of this character, but 
when we find that the publication is receiving 
serious attention of the British Press to the obvious 
detriment of India, at this juncture, we think it 


XXxviili UNHAPPY INDIA 


our duty to warn the British public against what 
strikes us as being a singularly mischievous book.” 


3. That the book has been distributed free 
both in Great Britain and America. The Rt. Hon. 
Col. Wedgwood, M.P., received three copies—all 
free. Itis only propaganda books that are supplied 
gratis so generously. 


II. 


In the last section I quoted a letter which a 
number of responsible Indians sent to The London 
Times in August 1927 when. Miss Mayo’s book was 
being boomed by the benevolent British Press. 
Three of the signatories were members of the India 
Council at Whitehall (two Hindus and one 
Mussalman). They had, before, their appointment 
to their present offices; held high offices in India. 
One had been the Judge of a High Court 
established by Royal Charter; another a Minister 
of Education to the Government of Bombay. Two 
of the other Indians had been Executive 
Councillors.of the Government of India and one of 
the Government of Bombay. One of them is at 
present holding the exalted office of the High 
Commissioner of India in London; and so on. 
Their opinion on Mother India is weighty. They 
cannot be brushed aside as mere agitators or men 
of no position. It would not be a compliment to 
the Government of India to say that the opinion 
of these eminent gentlemen who had held such 
high offices under the Government, is false or 
untrustworthy. 


INTRODUCTION xxix 


Now I propose to refer to the opinion of one 
whom a great American Christian leader has 
‘compared with Christ, and whom several Wester- 
ners have characterized as the greatest man of the 
age. I mean Mahatma Gandhi. In the course of 
a signed article in his own weekly, Young India, 
under the caption ‘ Drain Inspector’s Report,’ 
Mahatma Gandhi made the following remarks 
about this book : 


** The book is cleverly and powerfully written. 
The carefully chosen quotations give it the 
appearance of a truthful book, but the impression 
it leaves on my mind is that itis the report of a 
drain inspector sent out .with the one purpose of 
opening and examining the drains of the country 
to be reported upon or to give a graphic descrip- 
tion of the stench exuded by the open drains. If 
Miss Mayo had confessed that she had gone to 
India merely to open out and examine the drains 
of India, there would perhaps be little to complain 
about her compilation... 


‘ I feel that no one who has any knowledge of 
India-can possibly accept her terrible accusations 
against the thought and the life of the people of 
this unhappy country. The book is without doubt 
untruthful, be the facts stated ever so truthful. If 
T open out-and describe with punctilious care all 
the stench exuded from the drains of London and 
say, ‘ Behold London,’ my facts will be incapable 
of challenge, but my judgment will be rightly 
condemned as a travesty of truth. Miss Mayo’s 
book is nothing better, nothing else. The authoress 


XXX UNHAPPY INDIA 


says she was dissatisfied with the literature she 
read about India and so she came to India ‘ to see 
what a volunteer unsubsidized, uncommitted and 
unattached could observe of common things in 
daily human life.’ 


‘After having read the book with great 
attention, I regret to say that I find it difficult to 
accept this claim. Unsubsidized she may be. 
Uncommitted and unattached she certainly fails 
to show herself in any page. We in. India are 
accustomed to interested publications patronized 
—‘ patronized ’ is accepted as an elegant synonym 
for ‘ subsidized ’"—by the Government. We have 
become used to understanding from pre-British 
days, that the art (peripgted by the British) of 
government includes the harnessing of the secret 
services of men learned, and reported to be honest 
and honourable for shadowing suspects and for 
writing up the virtues of the Government of the 
day as if the certificate had come from disinterest- 
ed quarters. I hope that Miss Mayo will not take 
offence if she. comes under the shadow of such 
suspicion... 


‘{Mother India] is doubly untruthful. It is 
untruthful in that she condemns a whole nation, 
or. in-her words ‘ the peoples of India’ (she will! 
not have us as: one nation), practically without 
any reservation, as to their sanitation, morals, 
religion, etc. It is also untruthful because she 
claims for the British Government merits which 
cannot be sustained and which many 4n honest 
British officer would blush to see the Government 
credited withl.x 


INTRODUCTION Xxxi 


‘Miss Mayo is an avowed Indophobe and 
‘Anglophil, refusing to see anything good about 
Indians and anything bad about the British and 
their rule... 


‘Nor are all the authoress’s quotations. or 
isolated facts truthfully stated. I propose to pick 
up those I have personal knowledge of. The book 
bristles with quotations torn from their context 
and with extracts which have been authoritatively 
challenged. 


‘ The authoress has violated all sense of pro- 
riety by associating the Poet’ Rabindra Nath 
Tagore’s name with child-marriage. The Poet has 
indeed referred to early marriage as not an un- 
desirable institution. But there is a world of 
difference between child-marriage and early mar- 
riage. If she had taken the trouble of making the 
acquaintance of the free and freedom-loving girls 
and women of Shantiniketan she would have 
known the Poet's meaning of early marriage. 


“She has done me the honour of quoting me 
frequently in support of her argument. Any 
person who collects extracts from a reformer’s 
diary,tears them from their context, and proceeds 
to. condemn, on the strength of these, the people in 
whose midst the reformer has worked, would get 
no hearing from sane and unbiased readers or 
hearers. 


‘ But in her hurry to see everything Indian in 
a bad light she has not only taken liberty with my 
writings but she has not thought it necessary even 


XXXii UNHAPPY INDIA 


to verify through me certain things ascribed by 
her or others to me... 


‘The nineteenth chapter is a collection of 
authorities in praise of the achievements of the 
British Government, almost every one of which 
has been repeatedly challenged both by English 
and Indian writers of unimpeachable integrity. 
The seventeenth chapter is written to show that 
we area ‘ world menace.’ If as a result of Miss 
Mayo’s effort the League of Nations is moved to 
declare India a segregated country, unfit for ex- 
ploitation,. I have no doubt both the West and the 
East would be the gainers. We may then have 
our internecine wars. Hindus may be eaten up, 
as she threatens, by the hordes from the North- 
‘West and Central Asia-—-that were a position in- 
finitely superior to one of evergrowing emascula- 
tion. Even as electrocution is a humaner method 
of killing than the.horrid method of roasting alive, 
so would a sudden. overwhelming swoop from 
Central Asia. upon the unresisting, insanitary, 
superstitious;. and sexuality-ridden Hindus, as 
Miss Mayo describes us to be, be a humane deli- 
verance from the living and ignominious death 
which we are going through at the present 
moment. Unfortunately, however, such is not Miss 
Mayo’s goal. Her case is to perpetuate white 
domination in India on the plea of India’s unfit- 
ness to rule herself... 


‘ The picturesque statements that this: clever 
authoress puts into the mouths of the various 
characters read like so many pages from a sensa- 


INTRODUCTION XXxili 


tional novel in which no regard has to be paid to 
truth. Many of her statements seem to me to be 
utterly unworthy of belief and_do not put the men 
and women to whom they are ascribed in a favour- 
able light. Take for instance this statement put 
into the mouth of a prince :. 


‘Our treaties are with the Crown of- 
England,’? one of them said to me, with incisive 
calm. ‘‘ The princes of India made no treaty with 
a Government that included Bengali-babus. We 
shall never deal with this new lot of Jacks-in-office. 
While Britain stays, Britain will send us English 
gentlemen to speak for the King-Emperor, and all 
will be as it should be between friends. If Britain 
leaves, we, the princes, will know how to 
straighten out India, even.as princes should.” * 


_. ‘However fallen Indian princes may be, I 
should want unimpeachable evidence before 1 
could believe that there can be in India a prince so 
degraded as to make such a statement. Needless 
to say, the authoress does not give the name of the 
prince. 


“A still more scandalous statement occurs on 
page 314 and reads as follows: 


‘** His Highness does not believe,” said the 
Dewan, ‘‘ that Britain is going to leave India. But 
still, under this new regime in England, they may 
be so ill-advised. So His Highness is getting his 
troops in shape, accumulating munitions and 
coining silver. And if the English do go, three 


* Mother India, p. 316 (Amer. Edition). 


XXxiv UNHAPPY INDIA 


months afterward, not a rupee or a virgin will be 
left in all Bengal.” 


‘ The reader is kept in darkness as to the name 
of His Highness or of the enlightened Dewan. 


‘I should be sorry indeed to think that_there 
are many Englishmen and Englishwomen\ who 
say one thing to their Indian friends and another 
to their Western confidants. Those Englishmen 
and Englishwomen who may chance to read the 
sweepings gathered together by Miss Mayo with 
her muck-rake will recognize the statements I 
have in mind. In seeking to see an India de- 
graded Miss Mayo has unconsciously degraded 
the characters whom she has used as her instru- 
ments for proving her facts, which she boasts 
cannot be ‘disproved or shaken.’ I hope I have 
given sufficient prima facie proof in this article to 
show that many of her facts stand disproved even 
in isolation. Put together they give a wholly false 
picture... 


‘I do not- remember having given the message 
Miss Mayo. imputes to me. The only one present 
who took. any notes at all has no recollection of the 
message imputed to me. But I do know what 
message I give every American who comes to see 
me: ‘‘ Do not believe newspapers and the catchy 
literature you get in America. But if you want to 
know anything about India go to India as 
students, study India for yourself. If you cannot 
go, make a study of all that is written abeut India, 
for her and against her, and then form your own 
conclusions. The ordinary literature you get is 


INTRODUCTION XXXV 


either exaggerated vilification of India or 
exaggerated praise.” I warn Americans and 
Englishmen against copying Miss Mayo. She 
came not with an open mind as she claims, but 
with her preconceived notions and prejudices, 
which she betrays on every page, not excluding 
even the introductory chapter in which she recites 
the claim.” 


I have given these copious extracts from 
Mahatma Gandhi as by common consent he is 
accepted to be the ppets the most saintly and 
the most truthful of all the living Indians. Miss 
Mayo may not consider him saintly enough to 
compete with the Indian \Civil Servants or the 
Christian missionaries working in India, ag she 
insinuates in one of the interviews she gave to a 
Press reporter. But her estimate of Gandhi is in 
line with the relative estimates of Indians and 
Westerners made-in her book. Next to Mahatma 
Gandhi the two other Indians who enjoy such 
international fame as is unique for the sons of an 
Asiatic and-subjugated country are the poet, 
Rabindranath Tagore (knighted by the British 
Government and doctored by its universities), a 
winner of the Nobel Prize, and Dr. Sir J. C. Bose, 
F.RS., the great scientist. 


Tagore has expressed his opinion of the book 
on two occasions—(a@) in a letter to the Manchester 
Guardian, (b) in a letter to The Nation, New York. 
Elsewhere we give extracts from both. 


Dr. Bose calls it a filthy book not worthy of 
attention. 


XXXVi UNHAPPY INDIA 


In the Appendix to this book we are putting 
together the opinions some prominent people, who 
know India much better than Miss Mayo, have 
expressed about Mother India. Rabindranath 
Tagore accuses her of ‘deliberately untruthful 
irresponsibility ’ in handling his writings. The 
late Lord Sinha, the only Indian ever appointed 
as Governor of a province, entirely agrees with 
Mr. Gandhi that ‘ Miss Mayo has had.a good sniff 
at all the filthy drains of India.’ He calls her 
‘book ‘a lie, and a false picture.’- The Executive 
Committee of the National Christian Council of 
India, which is presided over by the Lord Bishop 
of Calcutta and Metropolitan of India, asserts that 
‘ the picture of India which emerges from Miss 
Mayo’s book is untrue to the facts and unjust to 
the people of India.’ Eminent foreigners who 
know India intimately-have condemned the book 
in strong terms. Mr. Edward Thompson, novelist 
and playwright, author of An Indian Day, calls 
Mother India ‘ one long nagging,’ and expresses 
the opinion that Miss Mayo lost her case ‘ when 
‘she wove into it a bitter conviction that the white 
man’s rule-is so overwhelmingly good for inferior 
‘breeds that it is only wickedness that makes them 
dissatisfied. Sir John Maynard, retired Exe- 
cutive Councillor, finds it hard to write with 
restraint about Miss Mayo’s book. Col. Wedg- 
wood, M.P., writing (in the Hindu Annual, 1927) 
of Miss Mayo’s generalizations about sex life in 
India says: 


‘Tt has always been the habit of civilized 
peoples to attribute to neighbours whom they 


INTRODUCTION XXxvii 


feared and hated just those vices which were un- 
popular. In that way contempt could take the 
place of fear. The Germans said of the French 
that they were exhausted by sexual excesses,— 
only they put it more shortly. In the time of the 
Crusades all followers of the ‘ false Mahound.” 
were addicted to unnatural vice; so were the Bul- 
garians or the Albigenses, when Christianity had 
to be worked up against them. French medieval 
dislike of the raiding English led them to speak of 
us as ‘ tailed monkeys, though that~ particular 
form of sexual perversion is one from which we 
are exceptionally free.” 


The reader will find the. opinions of several. 
other people about Mother India in the Appendix.. 


iil. 


While dealing with Hindu life, customs and 
manners, Hindu religion and Hindu philosophy, 
Miss Mayo_has chiefly relied on the authority of 
the Abbé Dubois and has quoted from his book on 
these subjects profusely. It seems proper, there- 
fore, to. deal with the authority of the Abbé once: 
for.all_ in this place and to point out what value 
can be attached to his opinions and comments. 


Dubois was a Jesuit missionary. A refugee: 
from the French Revolution, he came and settled 
down in India. There is reason to believe that all 
the time he lived among the Hindus he posed as: 
a Brahman. There is also reason to believe that 
he was ‘a Tamil, far more than a Sanskrit,. 


XXXviii UNHAPPY INDIA 


scholar,’*—which is a polite way of saying that he 
was not much of a Sanskrit scholar. His opinions 
about Hindu religion and Hindu learning are not 
of much value. European knowledge of Hindu 
literature and religion in Dubois’s days was ex- 
tremely limited. Since then much that is of great 
scientific value has been discovered and. made 
‘known, and Western scholars have written a great 
deal about Hindu religion. Hindu philosophy and 
Hindu law. The investigations of Western scholars. 
are now being supplemented by Indian savants. 
Max Miller, Deussen, Welkins, Rapson, Colebrook, 
Sir William Jones, Lanman,. Macdonnel, Keith, 
Foucher, Sylvian Levi and-a host of others among 
the Europeans; Jayaswal, B. N. Seal, R. G. Bhan- 
‘darkar, Sarkar, R. L. Mitter, and a host of others 
among the Indians, are ,far better authorities on 
these subjects than the Abbé Dubois. Miss Mayo 
‘does not know any one of them. She does not refer 
to their writings and opinions. She relies almost 
exclusively on M. Dubois, whose knowledge was 
‘gleaned mostly from what translations of Sanskrit 
works into European languages existed then. 
About his personal observations also it should not 
‘be forgotten that he lived the whole of the time he 
spent-in India in that part of the Deccan which is 
situated south of the Kistna. The editor of the 
Oxford edition of his work remarks :* 


“ At the same time he [Dubois]! disclaims for 
his work any general applicability to the whole of 


‘ Pi iv of the Introduction to the Oxford edition pf Dubois’s 
ook. 
 *Ibid., p. xiii. 


INTRODUCTION Xxxix 


India. His observations extend, broadly speaking, 
to the India that lies south of the Vindhyan range; 
and even within those limits he is careful to re- 
mark that local differences are so many and so 
marked that there is no class or sect or community 
of Hindus that has not, in addition to the general 
rules of YWindu society, some domestic usages 
peculiar to itself. So that, as he says, it is im- 
possible to generalize with complete accuracy on 
any subject connected with them.” 


Mr. K. Nataranjan, Editor of The Indian 
Social Reformer, who is himself an advanced 
social reformer, remarks in the course of a series 
of articles on Miss Mayo’s book ‘published in his 
weekly :* 


_ * [The Abbé] was-an impostor from first to 
last.... ‘ I had no sooner arrived among the natives 
of India.’ he writes, ‘ than I recognised the absolute 
necessity of gaining their confidence. Accordingly 
I made it my constant rule to live as they did. [ 
adopted their style of clothing, and I studied their 
customs and methods of life in order to be exactly 
like them. I even went so far as to avoid any 
display of repugnance to the majority of their 
peculiar prejudices. By such circumspect conduct I 
was able to ensure a free and hearty welcome from 
people of all castes and conditions, and was often 
favoured of their own accord with the most curious 
and interesting particulars about themselves.’t 
Notwithstanding all this camouflage, the Abbé’s 

*Mr. Nataranjan’s articles have beén published as a book by 
Messrs. Natesan & Co., Madras. 

tDubois, op. cit., p. 8. 


xl ' UNHAPPY INDIA 


work as a Christian missionary was, on his own 
admission, a humiliating failure. ‘ The restraints 
and privations under which I have lived,’ he wrote, 
‘by conforming myself to the usages of the coun- 
try; embracing, in many respects, the prejudices 
of the natives; living like them, and becoming all 
but a Hindu myself; in short by being made all 
things to all men that I might by all means save 
some—all these have proved of no avail to me to 
make proselytes. During the long period I have 
lived in India, in the capacity of a missionary, I 
have made, with the assistance of a native 
missionary, in all between two and three hundred 
converts of both sexes. Of this number two- 
thirds were pariahs or beggars; and the rest were 
composed of Sudras, vagrants, outcastes of several 
tribes, who being, without resource turned 
Christian in order to form connections, chiefly for 
the purpose of marriage, or with some other 
interested views.*. The Abbé, foiled in his mis- 
sionary work, thought of serving Christianity in 
another way... He writes : t 


‘“‘ There is one motive which above all others 
has influenced my determination [to write the 
book]. It struck me that a faithful picture of the 
wickedness and incongruities of polytheism and 
idolatry would by its very ugliness help greatly to 
set off the beauties and perfections of Christianity. 
It was thus that the Lacedemonians placed 
drunken slaves in the sight of their children in 


*Editor’s Introduction fo 3rd (Oxford) edition of Dubois’s 
book, pp. xxvi, xxvii. 


¢ Idtd., Author’s Preface, p. 9. 


INTRODUCTION xli 


order to inspire the latter with a horror of 
intemperance.’ ”’ 


No reader of Miss Mayo’s book can afford to 
forget these admissions which altogether vitiate 
the conclusions in Dubois’s book as well as that of 
its new version called Mother India. 


The code by which the Jesuit missionaries in 
India went may be judged from the fact that one 
of Dubois’s predecessors, the great missionary, 
Robert de Nobili (seventeenth century), who also, 
like Dubois, worked in the southern presidency, 
and anticipated his methods by simulating the 
Brahman mode of life, and even wearing the 
sacred thread, ‘ went so far as to forge a fifth Veda 
in Sanskrit and to insert into it Christian truths.’* 


Mr. Nataranjan draws attention to a few more - 
facts about the Abbé: 


‘‘ The period.during which the Abbé lived in 
India was also the period of greatest rivalry 
between the British and the French. The fact 
that the Abbé retired with a pension from the 
British East India Company ‘ in recognition of 
many services he had rendered to India’ may be 
regarded either as a testimony to the disinterested 
generosity of the East India Company, or to the 
judicious patriotism of the Abbé himself.” 


The Abbé stands convicted out of his own 
mouth. Mr. Nataranjan pertinently asks: 


** Suppose a Hindu were to spend some years 
in the United States with a like motive to produce 
* Indian Problems, Bishop Whitehead : (Constable), p. 172. 

3 


xiii UNHAPPY INDIA 


a faithful. picture of the wickedness and incon- 
gruities of Mammon-worship so that by its very 
ugliness it may help greatly to set off the beauties 
and perfections of the Vedanta, no serious student 
of American culture and civilization would think 
of relying on him as an authority on the subject. 
The Abbé’s book is the last source to which. any 
foreigner, after reading this candid | avowal, 
should look for a true and faithful.account of 
Hindu manners and customs.” 


-It is not only the personal history of the Abbé, 
but also that of his book that-is relevant here. I 
shall let the reader have it in Mr. Nataranjan’s 
language : , 


“Even such a hostile’ witness as the Abbé 
Dubois is obliged to admit that Hindu women 
were treated with the~greatest consideration, at 
least in public.. In the first translation of his 
work published in 1817 by the East India Company 
occurred the following passage : 


‘But, degraded as the Hindu women are in 
private life, it must be admitted that they receive 
the highest respect in public. They certainly do 
not. pay them those flat and frivolous compliments 
which are used amongst us, and which are the 
disgrace of both sexes; but, on the other hand, 
they have no insults to dread. A woman may go 
wheresoever she pleases; she may walk in the 
most public places (must I except those where the 
Europeans abound?) and have nothing to fear 
from libertines numerous as they are in the 
country. ‘A man who should stop. to gaze on a 


INTRODUCTION xhiii 


‘woman in the street, or elsewhere, would be 
universally hooted as an insolent and a most low- 
bred fellow.* 


‘In the revised version from which the late 
Mr, Beauchamp made the present translation in 
1897, and from the third edition of which_Miss 
Mayo makes her citations, the uncomplimentary 
reflections on contemporary European manners 
are carefully omitted. The passage is recast as 
under : 


** But if women enjoy very little consideration 
in private life, they are in some degree com- 
pensated by the respect which is paid to them in 
public. They do not, it istrue, receive those 
insipid compliments which we have agreed to 
consider polite; but then, on the other hand, they 
are safe from the risk of insult. A Hindu woman 
can: go anywhere alone. even in the most crowded 
places, and she need never fear the impertinent 
‘looks and jokes of idle loungers. . This appears to 
me to be really remarkable in a country where the 
moral depravity of inhabitants is carried to such 
lengths.. A house inhabited solely by women is a 
sanctuary which the most shameless libertine 
would not dream of violating.’’* 


Miss Mayo, while busy muck-raking from 
Dubois’s book, carefully omitted to note his 
opinion when she made the assertion that no 
Hindu woman of child-bearing age could venture 


*’Abbe Dubois’s book, 1817 edition, p. 220. 
¢ 3rd Oxford edition, pp. 339-340. 


xliv UNHAPPY INDIA 


within reach of Indian men. Here she forgot to 
consult her Dubois. 


To Dubois’s propagandist unscrupulousness 
Miss Mayo adds cleverness in handling quotations. 
Referring to the way she cites Dubois’s authority 
in season and out of season, Mr. Nataranjan very 
rightly remarks : 


“The deliberate disingenuousness of Miss 
Katherine Mayo is clear from the fact that in all 
her several references to the Abbé Dubois’s book, 
she not once tells the reader that the manuscript of 
the book was submitted to the East India Company 
in 1807, and that the account in it relates toa 
period separated from our time by a century and a 
quarter. In one place at least she implies that the 
account relates to a period. not very remote from 
ours. We refer to her statement that the Abbé 
found ‘ this ancient law [relating to the behaviour 
of a wife towards her husband] still the code of 
nineteenth century Hinduism, * while, the greater 
part of the Abbé’s Indian career belongs to the 
eighteenth. century. It may be nothing to Miss 
Katherine Mayo to skip over a century in order to 
achieve her purpose of blackening the Hindus in 
the eyes of the world, but one might ask what the 
position of women and social condition were 
generally in Europe, or even in Miss Mayo’s own 
country, a hundred years ago. But comparisons 
are odious.” [Italics are ours.] 


For another instance of Miss Mayo’s ‘caution’ 
in handling even her fellow Hindu-phohe, Dubois, 


* Mother India, p. 74. 


INTRODUCTION xiv 


the reader may compare her quotation from the 
Abbé’s book regarding learning among the Hindus. 
Thus she quotes: : 


“<The Brahmans| saw well enough,’ says 
Dubois, ‘ what a moral ascendency knowledge 
would give them over the other castes, and they 
therefore made a mystery of it by taking all 
possible precautions to prevent other classes from 
obtaining access to it.’’ 


The first two sentences of the paragraph from 
which this quotation is taken have been omitted as 
they credit the Hindus with having cultivated 
learning from. the earliest time and the Brahmans 
with having ‘always been as it were its de- 
positories.’} 


Miss Mayo evidently) did not want to let this 
kind of ‘ damaging’ statement to go in her book. 
The excerpt reproduced above is followed by 
another quotation from Dubois, which in Miss 
Mayo’s book reads thus : 


' “*T do not believe that Brahmans of modern © 
times are,in any degree, more learned than their 
ancestors of the time of Lycurgus and Pythagoras. 
During this long space of time, many barbarous 
races have emerged from the darkness of 
ignorance, have attained the summit of civiliza- 
tion, and have extended their  iniellectual 
researches...yet all this time the Hindus have 
been perfectly stationary. We do not find amongst 
them any ‘trace of mental or moral improvement,. 


+ Oxford edition, p. 376. 


xlvi UNHAPPY INDIA 


any sign of advance in the arts and sciences. 
Every impartial observer must, indeed, admit that 
they are now very far behind the peoples who 
inscribed their names long after them on the roll 
of civilized nations.’ ” 

The words omitted, marked by dots, have 
perhaps been ‘deleted because they would have 
shown.that Dubois was very much lacking in the 
habit of exactitude. In the original the sentence 
reads, ‘ have extended their intellectual researches 
almost to the utmost limits of human intelligence.’ - 


While on this subject I would like to give 
some more instances of Miss Mayo’s dishonest use 
of quotation marks, and her lack of scruples in 
ascribing statements to people she met in India. 
Her usual method is to omit names—‘ one whose 
veracity cannot be questioned,’ ‘a Mussalman 
landlord,’ ‘ a lawyer,’ “a prince’ come in as an- 
onymous witnesses:. But the few cases in which 
she does mention names are quite enough to let us 
judge her general standard of honesty and vera- 
city. 

+ I have taken some pains to investigate as to 
how she has reported or quoted other people, and 
my. investigation has lent strong support to the 
charges I have made against Miss Mayo in the 
above paragraph. 

The Rajah of Panagal happens to be among 
those quoted in Mother India by name.* Here is 
what he tells me about the statements ascribed to 
him by Miss Mayo: a a 


* Page 165. 


INTRODUCTION xivii 


* Your letter of the 13th instant to hand. Miss 
Mayo is not accurate in reproducing my replies. 
The language used in the dialogue is, I think, her 
own. I wrote to you in my last letter what, to the 
best of my recollection, I told her.”’ 


The ‘ last letter’ referred to reads : 


‘“When Miss Mayo was at the Government 
House in Madras I had an occasion to meet her. 
On that occasion I remember having stated in 
reply to her questions that the present deplorable 
state of illiteracy in this Province is in some 
measure due to the superstitious ideas prevailing 
among the masses, and that according to Varna- 
phrama Dharma the lower classes, who form the 
bulk of the population, could not take to literary 
pursuits. I told her-too that even to this day 
sections of people are precluded from being ad- 
mitted to Hindu schools, particularly to schools 
where Sanskrit and Shastras are taught; that non- 
Brahmans are enjoined by Smritis to avoid even 
listening to the recitation of Vedas, the punish- 
ment for disobedience to the injunction being to 
have the ears of the listeners filled with molten 
lead;.and that after the British association with 
the administration and the broadcasting of higher 
education in the country the superstitions regard- 
ing. Varnashrama Dharma are gradually losing 
ground, with the result that the non-Brahman 
classes do not now hesitate to take advantage of 
the existence of the various schools and colleges.” 

Another story about which I made some in- 
vestigation is that found on page 319 of Mother 
India. Says Miss Mayo: = = qe 


xIvili UNHAPPY INDIA 


“Then I recall a little party given in Delhi | 
by an Indian friend in order that I might privately 
hear the opinions of certain Home Rule politicians. 
Most of the guests were, like my host, Bengali 
Hindus belonging to the Western educated pro- 
fessional class. They had spoken at length on. the 
coming expulsion of Britain from India and on the 
future in which they themselves would rule the 
land. ‘ And what,’ I asked, ‘ is your-plan for the 
princes?’ ‘ We shall wipe them out!’ exclaimed 
one with conviction, and all the rest nodded 
assent.” 


In the absence of any names it was not easy 
to get a clue for verification... But from enquiries 
from all the possible people who could have ar- 
ranged such a party or-who could have attended it, 
I learn that Mr. K. C. Roy of the Associated Press 
arranged a lunch’to which a number of Indian 
gentlemen were invited. The only other Bengali 
present was Mr. Sen, Mr. K. C. Roy’s assistant. 
Mr. K. C. Roy has assured me that Miss Mayo’s 

- story of what transpired at the meeting (if she 
really refers to that party) is absolutely untrue. 
Mrs. K..C, Roy in a letter to me writes: 


“We gave a luncheon party to Miss Mayo at 
Maiden’s Hotel, Delhi, during her short stay in the 
Capital. She came to us with excellent introduc- 
tions. At the lunch there were only two Bengalis, 
namely, my husband and Mr. Sen. All the others 
were non-Bengalis. Prominent among our guests 
were Mr. M. A. Jinnah, leader of the Independent 
Party and Mr. S. Chetty. As I can recollect, the 
discussion ran on Indian constitutional develop- 


INTRODUCTION xlix 


ment, her defence, communal harmony, child- 
welfare, and art and culture in Delhi. I do not 
recollect whether the position of the Indian princes 
was discussed. At any rate, I know that there 
was no discussion as to their being ‘ wiped out.’.”’ 


To both Gandhi and Tagore Miss Mayo has 
ascribed opinions regarding physicians and sur- 
geons that they protest are not theirs. No wonder 
Gandhi should be impelled to say in his comment 
on her method: 


‘*But in her hurry to see everything Indian in 
a bad light, she has not only taken liberty with my 
writings, but she has not thought it necessary even 
to verify through me certain things ascribed by her 
or others to me. In fact she has combined in her 
own person, what we understand in India, the 
judical and the executive officer. She is both the 
prosecutor and the judge.” 


Take the following statement made by Miss 
Mayo about.the operation on M. Gandhi while he 
was in prison. Mark the inverted commas: 


“As he happened to be in the prison at the 
time,.a British surgeon of the Indian Medical 
Service came straightaway to see him. ‘ Mr. 
Gandhi,’ said the surgeon, as the incident was then 
reported, ‘I am sorry to tell you that you have 
appendicitis. If you were my patient, I should 
operate at once. But you will probably prefer to 
call in your Ayurvedic physician.’ ”’ 


“Mr. Gandhi proved otherwise minded. 


| ae UNHAPPY INDIA 


“*T should prefer not to operate,’ pursued the 
surgeon, because in-case the outcome should be un- 
fortunate, ‘all your friends will lay it as a charge of 
malicious intent against us, whose duty is to care 
for you.’ 


“* Tf you will only consent to operate,’ pleaded 
Mr. Gandhi, ‘I will call in my friends now, and 
explain to them that you do so at my request. : 


**So Mr. Gandhi wilfully went to an ‘ institu- 
tion for propagating sin,’ was operated upon by 
one of the ‘ worst of all,’ an officer of the Indian 
Medical Service, and was. attentively nursed 
through convalescence by an English sister whom 
he is understood to have thought after all rather a 

‘ useful sort of person.’ ” 


Gandhiji comments on this: 


“‘ This is a travesty of truth. I shall confine 


myself to correcting only what is libellous and not 
the other inaccuracies. There was no question 
here of calling in any Ayurvedic physician. Col. 
Maddock, who performed the operation, had the 
right, if he-had so chosen, to perform the operation 
without a reference to me, and even in spite of me. 
But. he and Surgeon-General Hooten ‘showed a 
delicate consideration to me and asked me whether 
I would wait for my own doctors, who were know 
to them and who were also trained in the Western 
medicine and surgical science. I would not be 
behind-hand in returning their courtesy and con- 
sideration, and I immediately told them that they 
could perform the operation without waiting fot 
my doctors whoin they had ‘telegraphed, and thal 


=~ 


INTRODUCTION — di 


I would gladly give them a note for their protection 
in the event of the operation miscarrying. | 

endeavoured to show that I had no distrust either 
in their ability or their good faith. It was to mea 
happy opportunity of demonstrating my personal 
goodwill.” 


Miss Bose, Principal of the Lahore Victoria. 
School, has likewise protested against the distorted 
version in Mother India of the talk Miss Mayo had 
with her. Miss Bose was interviewed by the Rev. 
H. A. Popley about the statements ascribed to her 
by Miss Mayo. Here is what the Rev. Popley 
writes in the Indian Witness, a Methodist weekly 
published at Lucknow: 


‘* On pages 132 and 133 she gives an account 
of the Victoria School, Lahore, and quotes, in in- 
verted commas, statements of the Principal, Miss 
Bose. I have consulted this lady and find that a 
great many of the things printed in inverted 
commas were never spoken. Further, Miss Bose 
is not of the third generation of an Indian Chris- 
tian family. The statement, in para third of 
that page (132), in regard to lower caste children is 
not.accurate and was never made. On the top of 
page 134 she says that male pandits have to teach 
behind a curtain. Miss Bose informs me that 
‘Hindu girls are always taught Sanskrit by male 
pandits without purdah, and that the statement in 
regard to the pandit of tottering age, that used to be 
the case 40 years ago. The third para on page 133 
dealing withthe aim of the school is quite inaccur- 
ate, says’ Miss Bose; and she adds ‘ sewing has 


lii UNHAPPY INDIA 


been an art among Indian women for ages’, in 
reference to Miss Mayo’s remark that ‘sewing is 
almost unknown to most of the women of India.’ 
The quotation in inverted commas, on the top of 
page 134, that ‘ their cooking in later life, they 
would never by nature do with their own hands, 
but would leave it entirely to filthy servants, whence 
come much sickness and death,’ is entirely ima- 
ginary. Miss Bose says in reply to it, ‘ Cooking 
is done by ladies of every class, even when they 
have servants. Servants are not filthy in any good 
house, and certainly not in Hindu houses.’ 


*‘T have felt it necessary to deal with this 
rather extensively because it isa case which I have 
been able to investigate, and here we find an en- 
tire lack of appreciation for strict accuracy. It is 
most likely that in the innumerable quotations 
given without names the same inaccuracy would 
be found.” 


Miss Mayo makes some statements about the 
finances of the Victoria School to show that edu- 
cated Indians are not prepared to spend anything 
on the education of their girls. The facts cited 
here by Miss Mayo have been challenged by Dewan 
Bahadur Kunj Behari Thapar, O.B.E., who is 
connected with the management of the Victoria 
School. I have reproduced Mr. Thapar’s letter on 
page 209. 


In a previous section we have quoted what 
Gandhi and Tagore have written about «Mother 
India. Both of them have accused Miss Mayo of 
misquotation. Tagore, in any case, has been 


INTRODUCTION liii 


quoted by her in a thoroughly dishonest way, and 
made to represent opinions he has never held. 
Here are some excerpts from Tagore’s letter which 
appeared in the New York Nation of January 4, 
1928 : 


‘TI happen to be one of those whom the writer 
has specially honoured with her attention, and 
selected as a target for her midnight raid. - Difficult 

‘though it is for me completely to defend myself 
from such a widespread range of mischief, I must 
try through your organ to reach the-ears of at least 
some of my friends, who are on the other side of 
the ‘Aitlantic, and have, I hope, the chivalry to 
suspend their judgment about.the veracity of these 
shocking statements made by a casual tourist 
against a whole people, before lightly believing 
them to be honourable. 


‘ For my own defence, I shall use the follow- 
ing extract from a paper written by Mr. Natarajan, 
one of the most fearless critics of our social evils. 
He has incidentally dealt with the incriminating 
allegation against me, deliberately concocted by 
Miss Mayo out of a few sentences from my contri- 
bution to Keyserling’s Book of Marriage—cleverly 
burgling away their true meaning and shaping 
them into an utterly false testimony for her own 
nefarious purpose. Mr. Natarajan writes as 
follows : 


_ ‘© “Tagore sets forth his own ideal of marriage 
in five long pages at the end of his paper (Keyser- 
ling, pages 117 et seq.) ‘Let me,’ he says, ‘as an 
individual Indian, offer in conclusion my own 


liv UNHAPPY INDIA 


personal contribution to the discussion of the 
marriage question generally. He holds that the 
marriage system all over the world—and not only 
in India—from the earliest ages till now, isa 
barrier in the way of the true union of man and 
‘woman, which is possible only when ‘ society shall 
be able to offer a large field for the creative work 
of women’s special faculty, without detracting 
from the creative work in the home.’ 


‘If Miss Katherine Mayo was not a purblind 
propagandist but an honest enquirer, and if she 
had not the patience to read: Tagore’s essay, she 
might have asked any one in Calcutta what the 
age of marriage of girls is in Tagore’s own family. 
That she was determined to discredit the poet is 
evident.” 


‘Let me ask some-of your readers to read my 

aper on Hindu marriage in Keyserling’s book and 
challenge, in fairness to me, Miss Mayo to prove 
that it was my own opinion, as she asserts, that 
child-marriage is “a flower of the sublimated 
spirit, a_conquest over sexuality and materialism 
won by exalted intellect for the eugenic uplift of 
the race,” implying *‘ the conviction, simply, that 
Indian women must be securely bound and deli- 
vered before their womanhood is upon them, if they 
are to be kept in hand.” 


“Let me in conclusion draw the attention of 
your readers to another amazing piece of false 
statement in which she introduces me, with a 
‘sneer, as a defender of the ‘‘ Ayurvedic ” system 


INTRODUCTION lv 


of medicine against Western medical SENOS. Let 
her prove this libel if she can. 


‘There are other numerous witnesses who, 
like myself. if they find their access to the 
Western readers, will be able to place their 
complaints before them, informing them how their 
views have been misinterpreted, their words 
mutilated, and facts tortured into a deformity 
which is worse than untruth. 


SANTINIKETAN, 
9 November, 1927. 


RABINDRANATH TAGORE. 


The Englishman, a Calcutta Anglo-Indian 
daily, publishes, in its issue of March 7, an appre- 
ciation of the late Lord Sinha written by Mr. N. 
N. Sircar, ‘ one of the leaders of the High Court 
Bar in Calcutta.’ Mr. Sircar, we are told, ‘ was 
closely associated with Lord Sinha, and had an 
intimate knowledge of his activities and views” 
Mr. Sircar’s appreciation exposes yet another of 
Miss Mayo’s lies; we are reproducing below the 
part relevant here: 


“I refer to his [Sinha’s] abhorrence of being 
in the limelight, and a deep-rooted objection to 
publicity of any matter in which he was concerned. 
In Miss Mayo’s Mother India,...there is a chapter 
headed ‘ A Counsel of Perfection ” (Ch. XVI. In 
this chapter Miss Mayo narrates a conversation 
with a ‘Hindu nobleman who is an eminent 
lawyer,’ and whose name Miss Mayo has not dis- 


lvi UNHAPPY INDIA 


closed as ‘it would bea graceless requital of 
courtesy to name the gentleman just quoted.’ 


“ This Hindu lawyer is no other than Lord 
Sinha—a fact confirmed by him, It is known to 
some of his friends that the interview took place 
at 17, Elysium Row, Lord Sinha’s residence. 


‘ At this interview Lord Sinha is reported to 
have complained about the condition of villages in 
Bengal—and the inadequate attention paid to 
them. by the Government. Lord:Sinha, it is stated, 
said: ‘ But surely, they could have done more and 
faster. And they let my people starve. Miss 
Mayo then proceeds to cover Lord Sinha with 
ridicule and sarcasm by stating that this wealthy 
man, ‘with the income of an eminent lawyer of 
New York,’ has done; nothing for his village 
[Raipur] though it is “ but a comfortable after-. 
noon’s ride away from his home.’ 


‘As Lord Sinha never cared to advertise 
himself, he did not care to inform Miss Mayo that 
the facts. aré that the pucca school building at 
Raipur-has been constructed at Lord Sinha’s 
expense, that both ‘the village school and the 
village dispensary have always been maintained 
by him, and permanent provision has been made 
for them, that he paid Rs. 10,000 to the Agricul- 
tural Institute of his district, and that his acts of 
help and charity to his village and villagers have 
been too many to be mentioned. 


‘When Miss Mayo’s book was published in 
London I happened to be there. Lord Sinha’s 


INTRODUCTION lvii 


attention was drawn to the gross injustice done to. 
him by Miss Mayo: in fact a contradiction for 
publication in the press had been drafted for him, 
but Lord Sinha refused permission for its issue.’’ 


This nails another lie to the counter. 


IV. 


The question of discussing European sex 
morality in this book has cost me many anxious 
nights. I have far greater respect for Miss Mayo’s: 
sex than she seems to have, irrespective of race,. 
colour or caste. I believe that there is nothing so 
beautiful and so sacred as-woman. Motherhood 
places her above everything else in this world and 
that is why motherhood is held in such high esteem 
in India. Ancient Hindus worshipped woman in 
‘different forms.~ Shakti (energy), Saraswati 
(learning), Lakshmi (wealth), Durga (motherhood), 
are all female deities. The mother, the wife, the. 
sister, the daughter, each has a separate festival 
dedicated toher. Ihave no hesitation in admitting 
that Hindu society has fallen from its social ideals. 
In my judgment this is primarily a reflection of 
political bondage, and it: is not easy to effect a 
radical change for the better unless and until India 
is politically free. 


We have been actively engaged in reconstruct- 
ing Hindu society socially. at least since the 
foundation of the Brahmo Samaj in 1830. The- 
Arya Samaj has been very active in this respect 
since 1877. Other agencies for sociat reform too 

4 


Iiii UNHAPPY INDIA 


have been quite active in this matter. We have 
denounced early marriage from thousands of plat- 
forms, and even though we got practically no help 
from the legislature, we have made substantial 
progress in raising the marriageable age of boys 
and girls. Marriage at the age of 12 is common 
now only among certain communities and castes. 
Personally I consider it a social crime to marry a 
girl under the age of 16, even though Indian girls 
reach puberty at about the age of 12. We have 
carried on an incessant war against the restrictions 
imposed upon the remarriage of widows, and surely 
some improvement is visible, though there is still 
alot to do. The restrictions.on widow remarriage 
‘are to be found in a few eastes and communities, 
not in all. All the same, thousands of widow re- 
marriages are reported every year among all 
classes and castes and sections of the people. 
There are castes.among Moslems and Christians 
too. Some of them do not allow their widows to 
remarry. But there is progress all round. There 
is not one orthodox caste or community in which © 
widow remarriages have not taken place. During 
the last decade the struggle between the orthodox 
Hindus and the reformers has been very keen, 
and the former have considerably lost ground. 


The age of consent in India is 13, as fixed by 
statute. There is a bill before the Central Legisla- 
ture to raise it to 14. It is being opposed by the 
Government. There is another bill to fix the 
matriageable age of girls at 12. Both are private 
bills introduced by Hindu members of the Legisla- 
tive Assembly. 


INTRODUCTION lix 


Similarly, the movement to remove untouch- 
ability is very widespread and influential. Large 
sums of money have been spent by private Hindu 
agencies to remove untouchability and provide 
general and special educational facilities for the 
depressed classes, and otherwise to uplift.them 
socially and economically. The statement that 
the movement is opposed by a ‘ myriad’ tongues 
is a wicked lie because even the most orthodox are 
now anxious to do justice to the depressed classes. 
Personally I do not believe in caste. I am in 
favour of its complete abolition. “Nor do I believe 
in any distinction between the rights of men and 
‘women as regards. marriage. 


All these matters have been discussed in 
detail in the body of the book, and Miss Mayo’s 
statements challenged and refuted. If Miss Mayo 
had confined herself._to a bona fide criticism of 
Hindu social life-the Indian social reformer would 
have stood by, her and taken advantage of her 
criticisms without ever thinking of exposing the 
social vices ofthe West in retaliation. Itis no 
business of ours to throw mud at other nations. 
There.are evils in every society. Rightly or 
wrongly, we Indians believe that, even with some 
objectionable customs, sex life in India is much 
purer, much healthier and much more moral than 
itis in the West. We honestly believe that the 
‘sex stimulus’ in India is not so morbidly strong 
as it is in the West. As for venereal diseases we 
believe there is no comparison between the East 
and the West. The disparity is simply huge, and 

our medical men think that except among some 


lx UNHAPPY INDIA 


hill tribes the diseases were pactically unknown in 
Indian life before the advent of the British. 
Syphilis is called ‘ Bad-i-Farang,’ being a disease: 
of Farangis (Europeans). 


If, however, Miss Mayo had said that. our 
social life was rotten and needed reform and re- 
construction, we would not have felt so much 
annoyed as we do now at the base use she has 
made of her imperfect knowledge and at her 
wicked generalizations for political and racial 
propaganda. Even the India Office in London 
had warned her against such generalizations but 
she did not heed that and has run down a whole 
nation of 315 millions of human beings. She has 
invented false charges against us to show that we 
are unfit for political freedom, and that the British 
Government is the very best thing for us. During 
my recent visits to Europe in 1924, 1926, and 1927, 
I have observed that a wide-spread, well-organized, 
well-financed and influentially backed propaganda 
is being carried on, not only in Great Britain, but. 
also in othercountries of the West, especially in 
the United States of America, against India’s right 
and claim to. self-government. All kinds of 
agencies are at work in this campaign of vilifica- 
tion.. Anglo-Indians retired from service or still 
in service, missionaries and commercial magnates, 
all have joined hands. The methods employed 
are very subtle and insidious. Political and 
economic troubles are kept in the background and 
social evils are brought out in the limelight. As 
usual, exaggerated and false pictures are put on 
the screen, which create a feeling of loathing and 


INTRODUCTION Lxi 


disgust against the Indian people. Press, plat- 
form, pulpit, the stage and cinema are all being 
used against us. There is no doubt that Miss 
Mayo’s Mother India is a part of that propaganda. 
It seems that her mission in life is to oppose and 
bring into ridicule and contempt all the Asiatic 
movements for freedom from the Anglo-Saxon 
yoke. 


As I have already said, Miss Mayo came in 
contact with Mr. Lionel Curtisin August 1925. 
In his foreword to the English edition of the Isles 
of Fear Mr. Curtis remarked as follows :* 


‘* Here [in Williams Town] and elsewhere in 
the United States I have met such friends who can 
speak with official and_ first-hand knowledge of the 
events and conditions described in the book. In 
two opinions they all agree. Miss Mayo, they tell 
me, has written nothing which in their opinion is 
not the truth... They add, however, that there 
are other facts of the situation which Miss Mayo 
could scarcely be expected to observe unless she 
had visited the Islands in previous years... All 
of my informants had been in India and had met 
several of the Nationalist leaders. To my ques- 
tion,-how they compared with the Philippine 
leaders, they, each, replied (on separate occasions) 
that the Indian leaders stood on a different and 
altogether higher plane.” 


Mr. Curtis knew, and Miss Mayo must have 
known that a revision of the Reforms was due and 


*Curtis op. cit. 


lxii UNHAPPY INDIA 


that the Statutory inquiry into the working of the 
reforms was about to be undertaken. The London 
Times and other ‘Tory papers had been agitating 
for some time past over the constitution of this 
commission. They wanted no Indians on it. 
They had been prejudicing the British public 
against India by their attacks on the Hindu social 
system and by laying special emphasis on the dis- 
abilities of the untouchables. The Times had been 
devoting column after.column to the exposure of 
these so-called evils. It seems probable that the 
British Tory Press knew that a book of the kind 
was in preparation. So when the book came out 
they began to boom it as_the work ofa ‘ dis- 
interested’ foreigner. It was the most valuable 
support to their cause. Such was their anxiety to 
shut out any criticism of the book from its readers 
that they threw all journalistic ethics to the winds 
and refused to publish the criticisms of Mother 
India though signed by the most influential and 
reliable Indians, official and non-official, then 
present in London. The book has been distributed 
free by the thousand. All these facts leave no 
doubt _in-the mind of an Indian that the real 
motive behind the book is political and racial. 


In these circumstances should we not hit back 
by stating what is perfectly true—that the vices 
attributed to us by Miss Mayo are to be found, 
Some of them even more widely and intensely, 
also in European society and that they are not 
considered to be abarto national and political 
freedom? As I have said, the question has cost 
me many sleepless nights, but I have finally come 


INTRODUCTION Ixiit 


to the conclusion that my duty to my country and 
to truth requires that I should not leave my 
rejoinder incomplete, and that even though the 
task be not congenial to my nature, I must do it. 


When I returned from America in 1920 I was 
repeatedly asked to write my impressions of 
Western life, but I declined to do so as such action 
might involve mein, the unpleasant task of dis- 
cussing the dark side of sex morality in the West. 
I believe in seeing the best in every nation. That 
is how we can improve international relations and 
advance the cause of international peace. If I 
am, therefore, for the first timein my life, going 
to depart from that rule; the responsibility is 
entirely Miss Mayo’s or that of her Anglo-Indian 
supporters. 


V. 


Not only in the-use, rather more aptly in the 
abuse, of her authorities, but also in her own 
writing Miss Mayo’s one endeavour is to draw 
a dark and dreary picture of our life. Her sweep- 
ing generalizations are often without a shred of 
truth in them. Her mind is obscured by our 
excessive sensuality, and on the Freudian hypo- 
thesis her frequent references to this topic, in 
season and.out of season, suggest morbidity of an 
uncommon order. For our readers we reproduce 
below a few typical statements : 


Page 25.—If you do employ them [women 
teachers for primary education] you invite the 
ruin of each woman that you so expose. 


Lxiv UNHAPPY INDIA 


Page 30.—The infant that survives the birth 
strain...... [is] often venereally poisoned. 


Page 30.—The child growing up in the home 
learns, from earliest grasp of word and act, to 
dwell upon sex relations. 


Pages 32-33.—In many parts of the country, 
north and south, the little boy, his, mind so 
prepared, is likely, if physically attractive, to be 
drafted for the satisfaction of grown men, or to be 
regularly attached to a temple, in the capacity of 
prostitute. Neither parent as a rule sees any harm 
in this, but is, rather, flattered’ that the son has 
been found pleasing. 


This, also, is a matter neither of rank nor of 
special ignorance. In fact, so far are they from 
seeing good and evil as we see good and evil, that 
the mother, high caste-or low caste, will practise 
upon children—the girl ‘ to make her sleep well,’ 
the boy ‘ to make him manly,’ an abuse which the 
boy, at least, is apt to continue daily for the rest 
of his life. 

This last point should be noticed. Highest 
medical \authorities in widely scattered sections 
attest that practically every child brought under 
observation, for whatever reason, bears on its 
body the signs of this habit. 

Page 34.—Little in the popular Hindu code 
suggests self-restraint in any direction, least of all 
in sex relations. 

Page 34.—After the rough outline just given, 
small surprise will meet the statement that from 


INTRODUCTION Ixv 


one end of the land to the other the average male 
Hindu of thirty years, provided he has means to 
command his pleasure, is an old man; and that 
from seven to eight, out of every ten such males 
between the ages of twenty-five and thitry, are 
impotent. These figures are not random, and are 
affected by little save the proviso above given.*. 


* Page 61.—[Indian women] commonly ex- 
perience marital use two and three times a day. 


Page 67.—Until the Pax Britannica reached 
so far [the Khyber Pass], few Hindus came 
through alive, unless mounted and clad as women. 


Page 84.—An inmate of her husband’s home 
at the time of his death, the widow, although she 
has no legal claim for protection, may be retained 
there on the terms above described, or she may be 
turned adrift. Then she must live by charity— 
_ or by prostitution, into which she not seldom falls. 
‘And her dingy, ragged figure, her bristly, shaven 
head, even though its stubble be white over the 
haggard face of unhappy age, is often to be seen 
in temple.crowds or'in the streets of pilgrimage 
cities, where sometimes niggard piety doles her a 
handful of rice. 


Page 86.—The remarriage of a Hindu widow- 
ed wife is still held to be inconceivable. 


Page 91.—Therefore, in total, you have the 
half-blind, the aged, the crippled, the palsied and 


*Even a sympathetic British reviewer of Miss Mayo’s book, 
Mr. Rushbrook Williams, formerly Publicity Agent of the Indian 
Government, 18 forced to point out the evident absurdity of such 
a staement. See his review in the Asiatic Review, London. 


Ixvi UNHAPPY INDIA 


the diseased, drawn from the dirtiest poor, as sole 
ministrants to the women of India in the most. 
delicate, the most dangerous and the most import- 
ant hour of their existence. [This is about mid- 
wives. | 


Page 154.—To-day the defenders of untouch- 
ability are myriad, and, though Mr. Gandhi. lives 
his faith, but few of his supporters have at any 
time cared to follow hin so far. 


Page 308.—‘* Without the British no Hindus 
will remain in India except such as we [Pathans] 
keep for slaves.” 


. Page 325.—“If we protect our babies the gods 
will be jealous and bring us all bad luck ”!!! 
[These words are put into the mouth of a Bengali 
mother. | 


Page 332.—No orthodox Hindu, and certainly 
no. woman, will consent to wear shoes. 


We have given only a few samples. These 
and many more of such statements we shall notice 
in the body of our book. But can a writer, who 
indulges. in such wild generalizations on such 4 
lavish scale, be taken seriously by serious 
people? 


A POSTSCRIPT. 


In Liberty, a weekly magazine owned by the 
Chicago Tribune, in its issue of the 14th January, 
1928, Miss Mayo has an article that attempts. to 
meet some of the criticisms on Mother India. 


INTRODUCTION - lxvii 


She refers in particular to Mahatma Gandhi’s 

review of her book from which we have already 

quoted at length. Being clever at quibbling she 

tries to hoodwink the public by throwing the real 
issues involved in the background when protesting 

that she had not said that the Mahatma always had 

two secretaries about him to take down all that he 
said, a fact which is a mere side issue. ‘If Mr. 

Gandhi were to look on page 222 [page 202, English 
edition] he would discover that he has inserted the 
word “ always” into my text.’ “Nothing of the 
kind. Mr. Gandhi has inserted nothing into her 
text; he merely says that without using the word 
‘ always’ Miss Mayo conveys the impression that 
she is not merely describing the occasion of her 
visit to his ‘ Ashram.’ 


But that, however, is a trivial thing. Much 
more important is the message incident. And in 
this Miss Mayo certainly does not come out with 
credit to herself. Says she: 


iz) 


Hien I duly received back the corrected and 
expanded report of the interview, over Mr. 
Gandhi’s own signature. 


“The first sentence of this document of several 
typed pages, now before me, is his reply to my 
opening question: ‘ Have you any message for 
America?’ It reads as it was spoken, and as I 
have printed it: ‘ My message to America is the 
hum of this spinning-wheel.’ 


‘Mr. Gandhi now seeks to disavow the ‘ mes- 
sage’ as the invention of an enemy. ‘I do not 


ixviii UNHAPPY INDIA 


remember having given the message......The only 
one present who took any notes at all has no re- 
collection of the message imputed to me,’ he 
says.” 


But what are the facts about this mesenge? 
At the time of writing his review on. Mother India 
Mahatma Gandhi—being on tour—had not the 
notes of the interview with him. But in his 
recent article in Young India (February 2, 1928) 
written in reply to Miss Mayo’s article in the 
Liberty he has given the facts thus: 


‘‘ Her adherence to the statement that I did 
give her the message she ascribes to me proves her 
to be guilty of gross suppression of truth. She 
seems to have thought that I would not have a 
copy of the corrected interview between her and 
me. Unfortunately for her I happen to possess a 
copy of her notes. Here is the full quotation re- 
ferring to the hum of the wheel : 


“* My message to America is simply the hum 
of this wheel: Letters and newspaper cuttings I 
get from-America show that one set of people over- 
rates the. results of Non-violent Non-co-operation 
and the. other not only underrates it, but imputes 
all kinds of motives to those who are concerned 
with the movement. Don’t exaggerate one way 
or the other. If, therefore, some earnest Americans 
will study the movement impartially and patient- 
ly, then itis likely that the United States may 
know something of the movement which I do 
consider to be unique, although I am the author 
of it. What I meanis that our movement is 


INTRODUCTION : beix 


summed ur in the spinning-wheel with all its. 
implications. It is to me a substitute for gun- 
powder—for it brings the message of self-reliance 
and hope to the millions of India. And when 
they are really awakened they would not need, to 
lift their little finger in order to regain their free- 
dom. The message of the spinning-wheel is, 
really, to replace the spirit of exploitation by the 
spirit of service. The dominant note in the West 
is the note of exploitation. I have no desire that 
my country should copy that spirit or that note.’ 


‘The first sentence only of the foregoing 
extract, which Miss Mayo quotes without the most 
important commentary on it, is intended to ridicule 
me. But the whole paragraph, I hope, makes my 
meaning and message-clear and intelligible... I 
claim, however, that the message, as it appears in 
the full paragraph quoted, is not different from 
what I have stated in the article Miss Mayo 
attempts to shake.” 


The message, as is now plain, was not 
‘invented ’ by Miss Mayo; but her offence remains 
as grave-as it was—for her dishonest parody of 
the message is in no way more honourable than 
an outright invention. Having no defence to offer 
she has only quibbled again. And yet this ‘ trivial 
quibble,’ as she calls this episode. releases her 
‘from the necessity of further considering Mr. 
Gandhi's criticism at this writing.’ 


Mahatma Gandhi’s protest that the Mother 
India ‘ story’ of the Sassoon Hospital operation. 
on him was grossly misleading has not been 


Se ae UNHAPPY INDIA 


noticed by her, she having released herself from 
the further necessity of considering Gandhi! 


And, again, what about her taking liberty \ 
with Tagore’s paper in Keyserling’s book{ \If 
Miss Mayo’s article in any way seeks tocmake 
amends for the grave wrong she did Tagore, or 
even if she has some quibble in def of her 
indefensible mishandling, we do no it in the 
excerpts from her article that we h seen. 


, a » 
A 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


LALA LAJPAT RAI, M.L.A. 


31 


CHAPTER I 


THE ARGUMENT — 


The first two parts of Miss Mayo’s work 
(chapters I—X) deal with the social life—that is 
to say the social evils—-of the Hindus. Most. of 
the evils dealt with by her, so far as they exist, are 
really common to all classes of Indians, but she 
generally singles out the Hindus for her malicious 
attacks. . These chapters are full of rash and vile 
generalizations against the manhood and woman- 
hood of India. Sometimes these-charges contain 
just that dash of truth which makes a statement 
more dangerous than an utter falsehood. No 
Indian, however keenly conscious he may be of 
the evils of the existing social order, and however 
great may be his ardour for radical reform, can, in 
any case, accept the picture drawn by Miss Mayo 
as anything but grossly exaggerated and untrue. 


The fact is that Miss Mayo began with entirely 
wrong premises and presumptions. We have seen 
in the Intreduction that there is good reason to 
suppose that this ‘ unsubsidized, uncommitted, 
and unattached’ woman journalist from America 
came on a mission of political propaganda. Her 
object was to whitewash British imperialism, and 
in the fulfilment of that mission she has ignored 
all the decencies of a writer’s art. For. illiteracy, 
misery and disease in India she assigns no respon- 
sibility to the State. To her all that there is in 
India is wrong, and is so because the Hindu ‘is 

5: Z 


2 UNHAPPY INDIA 


either a savage sensual beast, or a pervert, or 
both. 


The details of her picture of Indian social life 
form the subject of discussion in the chapters 
that follow. But Miss Mayo’s logic, according. to 
which the Indian Government is absolved from.all 
responsibility in the matter, must be examined at 
the very outset, for it is fundamental to her argu- 
ment. 


On page 23 of. Mother India we find Sir 
Chimanlal Setalvad and Mahatma Gandhi 
quoted. The ultra-moderate politician, 8ir 
Chimanlal, is reported to have stated: ‘‘ What 
this country suffers from is want of initiative, 
ule of enterprise, and want of hard, sustained 
work.” 


This is put in juxtaposition with a sentence 
taken from Mahatma Gandhi’s weekly, Young 
India. ‘‘ We rightly charge the English rulers 
for our helplessness and lack of initiative and 
originality.” 

Then follows another statement attributed 
to ‘ other public men of India,’ who demand : 


““* Why are our enthusiasms so sterile? Why 
are. our mutual pledges, our self-dedications to 
brotherhood and the cause.of liberty so soon spent 
and forgotten? Why is our manhood itself so 
brief? Why do we tire so soon and die so young?’ 
Only to answer themselves with the cry: ‘ Our 
spiritual part is wounded and bleeding. Our very 
souls are poisoned by the shadow of the arrogant 


THE ARGUMENT 3 


stranger, blotting out our sun. Nothing can be 
done—nothing, anywhere, but to mount the poli- 
tical platform and faithfully denounce our tyrant 
until he takes his flight. When Britain has 
abdicated and gone, then, and not till then, free 
men breathing free air, may we turn our minds 
to the lesser needs of our dear Mother India.’.” 


To all this Miss Mayo’s glib reply is: 


‘*The British administration of India, be it 
good, bad, or indifferent, has nothing whatever to 
do with the conditions above indicated. Inertia, 
helplessness, lack of initiative and originality, lack 
of staying power and of_ sustained loyalties, 
sterility of enthusiasm, weakness of life-vigour 
itself—all are traits that truly characterize the 
Indian not only of to-day, but of long-past history. 
‘All, furthermore, will_continue to characterize 
him, in increasing degree, until he admits their 
causes and with his-own two hands uproots them. 
His soul and body are indeed chained in slavery. 
But he himself wields and hugs his chains and 
with violence defends them. No agency but a new 
spirit within his own breast can set him free. 
And his arraignments of outside elements, past, 
present.or to come, serve only to deceive his own 
mind and to put off the day of his deliverance. 


‘ Take a girl-child twelve years old, a pitiful 
physical specimen in bone and blood, illiterate, 
ignorant, without any sort of training in habits of 
health. Force motherhood upon her at the 
earliest possible moment. Rear her weakling son 
in intensive vicious practices that drain his small 


4. -UNHAPPY INDIA 


vitality day by day. Give him no outlet in sports. 
Give him habits that make him, by the time he is 
thirty years of age, a decrepit and querulous old 
-wreck—and will you ask what has sapped the 
energy of his manhood? 


‘Take a huge population, mainly rural, illi- 
terate and loving its illiteracy. Try to give it pri- 
mary education without employing any of its 
women as teachers—because if you do employ 
them you invite the ruin of each woman that you 
“so expose. Will you ask why that people’s edu- 
cation proceeds slowly ? 


‘Take bodies and minds bred and built on the 
lines thus indicated. Will you ask why the death- 
rate is high and the people poor? 


‘Whether British or Russian or Japanese sil 
in the seat of the highest; whether the native 
princes divide the land, reviving old days of 
princely dominance; or whether some autonomy 
more complete than that now existing be set up, 
the only power that can hasten the pace of Indian 
development toward freedom, beyond the pace it 
is travelling to-day, is the power of the men of 
India, wasting no more time in talk, recrimina- 
tions, and shiftings of blame, but facing and 
attacking, with the best resolution they can 
muster, the task that awaits them in their own 
bodies and souls.” 


‘To avoid doing her any injustice we have 
quoted Miss Mayo at length. — 


THE ARGUMENT 5 


Now it is quite plausible to argue that we 
Indians have by our disunion and foolishness 
invited foreign rule, and must blame ourselves 
if that rule has dwarfed our stature, emasculated. 
our bodies, made us incapable of initiative, 
blocked our way to progress and national .effici- 
ency. If such were Miss Mayo’s argument, we 
would admit its force. In fact, it is because this 
argument is so strong that we want to throw off 
the foreign yoke and be free to develop to our full 
stature as a nation. . 


But Miss Mayo seems to argue in quite a 
different way. To her, political environment has 
nothing to do with national inefficiency and help- 
lessness. Are initiative and enterprise in a 
nation wholly independent of its political en- 
vironment? Are literacy, health, national effi- 
ciency in no way influenced by those who run the 
legislative and administrative machinery? ‘Are 
these things dependent wholly on social custom, 
as Miss Mayo would have us believe? Are not, on 
the other hand, even social customs largely 
determined by the political conditions prevailing 
in a country and the literacy of her people? 


These questions go to the very root of the 
matter. For, to us, it seems that the Indian pro- 
‘blem is primarily a politico-economic one, and 
one of social customs is only secondary. 


To suit her purpose Miss Mayo assumes the 
existence. of certain facts which do not exist at 
all. Secondly, she fancifully traces them to 
‘long-past history ’—of which she is.. utterly 


6 UNHAPPY INDIA 


ignorant. Thirdly, she entirely ignores the 
effects of economic and political bondage on the 

whole life of a people, including even the social 

and spiritual. 


Miss Mayo argues in a most superficial way 
when she thus lightly dismisses the political 
factor. It must have been women like Miss Mayo 
that elicited this unenviable tribute from a very 
distinguished psychologist, Professor, Miinster- 
berg, in his sympathetic but frank study of 
America:* ‘‘ The American .woman who has 
scarcely a shred of education, looks in vain for 
any subject on which she has not firm convictions 
already at hand... The ‘arrogance of this femi- 
nine lack of knowledge is the symptom of a 
profound trait in the feminine soul, and points to 
dangers springing from the domination of women 
in the intellectual life:..” 


Why is a girl-child of 12 years ‘a_ pitiful 
physical specimen in bone and blood?’ asks Miss 
Mayo. The>causes may be: (a) heredity, (6) in- 
sufficient food, (¢) unhygienic conditions of life, 
(a) illiteracy and ignorance. Leaving (a) alone 
can anyone say, that (b), (c) and (d) are not 
affected by political conditions? It is an admit- 
ted-fact that children born of weak parents can to 
a great extent make up for inherited weakness if 
they are well looked after afterwards. But if to 
hereditary weakness are added the disabilities 
which result from political bondage and economic 


*The Americans, Pp. 587. 


THE ARGUMENT 7 


penury then God help such children. It is the 
duty of a national government to see that every 
child that is born is well looked after, and, if the 
parents. are too poor to bring it up in a healthy 
atmosphere and to fit it for the duties of citizen- 
ship, the responsibility is the State’s. It is the 
recognition of this principle that has led in 
modern times to the establishment of ‘national 
nurseries’ for the benefit of deficiently born 
children, and of national public schools for the 
free and compulsory education of all children, 
irrespective and regardless of their parents. The 
prohibition of child labour,’ the compulsory 
physical education of all the citizens, the State or 
municipal feeding of .the insufficiently fed 
children, the compulsory and periodical medical 
examination, and, last but not least, a provision 
by the State for unemployment, are everyday 
facts in free and progressive lands. Why are the 
States taking so~much trouble to root out 
drunkenness, to remedy and cure venereal dis- 
ease, to regulate nee and to prevent over- 
crowding? Why have the different governments 
in the “world established Ministries of Health? 
Why has the government in Britain taken up the 
problems of milk supply and the provision of 
good sanitary houses for all and sundry? Why 
has all this been done if Miss Mayo’s premises are 
correct? 


If the national governments of the world 
were justified in undertaking these responsibili- 
ties, why has the Government of India shirked 
them? The explanation igs obvious. The Govern- 


8 UNHAPPY INDIA 


ment of India is a foreign government whose chief 
business in India is to get the most out of her and 
to exploit her for the. benefit. of the Empire. When 
Sir Austen Chamberlain (an ex-Secretary of State 
for India) speaking at the Savoy Hotel on March 
29, 1917, said that India would not and ought not 
to remain content to be a hewer of wood and 
drawer of water for the rest of the Empire; the 
implication was clear that so far Indiahad been 
no better than a hewer of wood and drawer of 
water for the Empire. In that position she 
continues to be to this day. The whole economic 
er of British rule in India is evidence of 
that.* | 


Given the fact that for the last 200 years India 
has been exploited by the British for the benefit of 
their Empire, her social degradation, the physical 
degeneration of her sons and daughters and the 
lack of initiative and spirit in them can be-easily 
explained. Everyone knows, perhaps Miss Mayo 
not excepted; what social legislation in Great 
Britain, Germany, France, the United States, and 
Japan has done within the last 75 years. There 
is no sphere of child or adult life, the ‘ sanctity’ 
of which has not been invaded by law and adminis- 
trative orders. It is only a national State that 
identifies itself with the nation. The interests of 
the two are so inter-dependent as to make them 
wholly identified with each other. Even in 


*In subsequent chapters I shall have occasion to refer to this. 
But for fuller particulars I must refer the reader to documents 
quoted from, and referred to by me in my book England’s Debt 
to India, published by B. W. Huebsch, New York, 1917. 


» * 


Lokamanya Bala Gangadhar Tilak 


' Tilak, at first a teacher. of mathematics _ in Poona 
» Ferguson College, then a journalist and Hindu leader, had to 
suffer imprisonment on long terms twice. He was a_ versatile 
enius ; his researches in the Vedas astonished the greatest 
estern orientalists. But above all he shines as the most 
fearless as well as the most capable leader of the nationalist 
movement. His appellation Lokamanya—Honoured of the People 
—shows what a magic he held over millions of Indians. 


THE ARGUMENT 9 


ancient India the State had a great deal to do with 
social life and public health. Hindu law-givers 
and commentators devoted volumes to public 
education in all its branches, student life, public 
and personal hygiene, marriage, etc, — 


To-day every political thinker and «every 
statesman recognizes the responsibility of \ the 
State in equipping the citizen properly for the 
race of life. The thing is so obvious to-day that 
it may seem superfluous to labour the point and 
cite authorities. However, in view of the fact 
that the question is vital to Miss Mayo’s argument 
it may be worth while to have the opinion of some 
recent writers. 


The American sociologist, Professor Scott 
Nearing, remarks in one of his best books, Social 
Adjustment :* . 


_“ Tn a large community, maladjustment [i.e., 
‘social maladjustment] can be removed only by 
concentrating public opinion in the form of legis- 
lation. Among large groups public opinion may 
relieve maladjustment temporarily but permanent 
reform can be effected only through legislative 
expression.” [Italics are ours. ] 


Discussing modern social philosophy, Mr. L. 
T.\. Hobhouse, the great Liberal thinker of 
England, has often pointed out how the present 
ideas of the responsibility of the State in social 
matters have developed. In one of his bookst he 


* Macmillan, 1911, p. 323. ‘ 


t Social Evolution and Political Theory, Columbia University 
Press, 1911, pp. 178 et. seg. . 


10 UNHAPPY INDIA 


speaks of the extension of the sphere of common 
responsibility in the remarkable growth of State 
control, and discusses the principles on which the 
responsibility of the State for employment is 
based leading toa State provision for old: age 
pensions, etc. He refers to the report of the 
minority on the Poor Law Commission. which 
recommended that ‘ the labour exchanges, them- 
selves constituting a new State agency for the 
provision of employment, should be constituted 
the centre of a machine by which no adult, healthy 
working man or woman would be left without 
means of support in periods of industrial crises. 
Speaking of the duties of a modern State, Professor 
Hobhouse remarks : 


‘“‘The determined idler must not be allowed to 
prey upon society, he must not go cadging about 
for odds and ends of useless jobs or for bits of 
charity; he must snot be allowed to keep his wife 
and children in rags, ill-housed and underfed. 
The children must be cared for; the mother, if she 
is doing her duty by them, is doing one woman’s 
work and may fairly claim public maintenance 
with no ‘possible question of a return. As to the 
man, he is a fit subject for discipline and restraint. 
For him a labour colony must be provided, where 
he must learn to work and gain his discharge as 
soon as he can prove himself efficient enough in 
mind and body to stand the stress of industrial 
competition.” 


In that strain he goes on to define the duty 
of the State towards people of different types and 


THE ARGUMENT 11 


different ages. The gist of his survey is that 
recent years have witnessed a ‘ remarkable exten- 
sion of the functions of the State as the organizer 
of certain great departments of life.’ Foremost 
amongst these is public education. ‘ Within the 
lifetime of men who still survive the function of 
the State in education was conceived as. being 
adequately discharged by the grant ,of a few 
thousands a year in support of the poor. Within 
my lifetime the State has made itself responsible 
for the elementary education of three-fourths of the 
community, and from elementary education it has 
advanced to secondary education, and at least to 
an active interest in and. a modest financial 
support of education ofa university type.’ 
‘As Professor Hobhouse points out, a good deal 
‘of the burden on the State to-day would have 
been regarded by earlier thinkers as ‘a necessary 
incident of parental responsibility.’ To-day ‘ the 
older liberty of the family is impaired by the 
principle of compulsion.’ ‘No more striking 
illustration. of. the extension of State functions 
could be given than a comparison of the budget of 
an Education Minister of the present day with 
that of 1850 or 1860.’ 


The testimony of history is clear. If one 
studies the condition of England, religious, social, 
hygienic, intellectual and industrial, before 1870— 
or still earlier, before the Reform laws of 1830—one 
would find that the condition of the masses was 
worse in most respects than that of the people of — 
India to-day. Illiteracy was rampant, disease and 
destitution were wide-spread, the condition -of 


12 UNHAPPY INDIA’ 


women and children in the factories was indescrib- 
able, and morality of any kind seemed almost 
non-existent. Down to 1870 education of the 
people was ina sad state. In speaking of the 
achievements of England in the nineteenth 
century, Mr. G. M. Trevelyan, the historian, 
says :* 


‘A characteristic of the new ~ national 
machinery, fully apparent towards the end of 
Queen Victoria’s reign, was the close inter-relation 
that had grown up on the one.hand between 
private philanthropic effort and State control, and 
on the other between local and central govern- 
ments. As Parliament and local government began 
to respond to the needs of the community as a 
whole, and as the State. became more and more 
intelligently interested in the work of private 
effort in education, medicine, sanitation and a 
hundred other sides. of life,—an elaborate system 
of State aid, enforcement and control came into 
being, through Treasury grants-in-aid to local 
bodies, State inspection of conditions of labour and 
of life, industrial insurance and the modern educa- 
tional system.” 


Again : 


“The advance in humanity, democracy and 
education, and the changes in industrial method, 
bringing large crowds of wage-earners of both 
sexes together in offices and factories, led to a new 
conception of the place of woman in society. The 
education of women, from being almost totally 


* History of England, G. M. Trevelyan, Longmans, 1926, p. 617. 


THE ARGUMENT 13 


neglected, became in a couple of generations. 
comparable to that. of men. The position of 
women in the family was altered in law, and was 
yet more altered in practice and opinion.’”* 
[Italics are ours. | 


Some of the Continental countries started 
work on these lines earlier than Great Britain. 
Germany passed a law for the compulsory educa- 
tion of her children in 1717. Discussing the 
tendencies of the British dominions to-entrust the 
State more and more with social duties, Charles. 
Pearson in his book on National Life and 
Character says :t 


‘* Let it be remembered, however, that every 
Continental State—even those of Germanic origin 
—has worked for centuries upon these lines, and 
that in England itself the first entrenchments of 
the laissez faire system have been forced.” 


These principles are recognized to-day by 
every State and every statesman. Individualist 
and Socialist, Fascist and Bolshevik countries: 
alike recognize that it is the duty of the State to 
see thatits people are not illiterate. This principle 
finds acceptance in the over-prosperous United 
States of America as much as in its indigent 
neighbour, Mexico, and as much in the Far 
Eastern Japan as in the Western lands. A. 
politically free India, would, no doubt, be no 
exception to it. Indians no more love illiteracy 


* Tbid., p. 618. 
t Macmillan, 1913, p. 19. 


14 UNHAPPY INDIA 


and ignorance than do the masses in the Western 
countries. But it must be recognized that progress 
in literacy in India, asin the West, cannot. be 
altogether without compulsion. 


CHAPTER II 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 


Chapters XIII to XVI of Miss Mayo’s book 
deal with education in India. The first of these is 
headed, ‘ Give Me Office or Give Me Death.’ Miss 
Mayo betrays a lack of humour, when she un- 
wittingly chooses a heading which in itself is the 
strongest condemnation of the educational policy 
of the British Government in India. But she does 
not seem to recognize that the Government in 
India owes a duty to the. people in matters 
educational. Her sole concern is to find fault 
with the Hindus and throw the whole blame ‘for 
the inadequacy of education. and of the defects of 
the British Indian educational system on their 
broad shoulders. Chapter XIII of Mother India 
opens thus: 


“‘ Education, some Indian politicians affirm, 
should be driven into the Indian masses by 
compulsory »measures. ‘England,’ they say, 
‘introduced compulsory education at home long 
ago. Why does she not do so here? Because, 
clearly it suits her purpose to leave the people 
ignorant.’ ” 


A ‘hot reply ’ to this, Miss Mayo tells us, was 
given her by the Raja of Panagal, the ‘ then anti- 
Brahman leader of Madras Presidency’ : 


“* Rubbish!’ he exclaimed. ‘ What did the 
Brahmans do for our education in the 5,000 years 


16 UNHAPPY INDIA 


before Britain came? JI remind you: They 
asserted their right to pour hot lead into the ears 
of the low caste man who should dare to study 
‘books. ‘All learning belonged to them, they said. 
When the Muhammadans swarmed in and took.us, 
even that was an improvement on the old Hindu 
regime. But only in Britain’s day did education 
become the right of all, with State schools, colleges, 
and universities accessible to all -castes, com- 
_ munities, and peoples.’ ” [Italics are ours. ] 


This is supported by two quotations from the 
book of the Abbé Dubois. The ‘first quotation, 
torn, as is not unusual with our authoress, from 
the context, runs thus: 


| “The Brahmans].saw well enough,’ says 

Dubois, ‘what a moral’ ascendancy knowledge 
would give them over the other castes, and they 
therefore made.a mystery of it by taking all 
possible precautions to prevent other classes from 
obtaining access to it.’ ” 


Miss Mayo omits the first two sentences of the 
paragraph from which this quotation is taken, 
for they credit the Hindus with having cultivated 
learning from the earliest times, and the Brahmans 
with having been always as ‘it were its 
depositories.* Miss Mayo evidently did not want 
to-let this kind of ‘damaging’ statement g@ into 
her book. 


We have already discussed the credentials of 
the Abbé in the Introduction, and it is unnecessary 


= pee Manners, ete., 8rd edition, Oxford University Press, 
p. 376. 


Sir P. C. Roy 
The great Bengalee educationist and ee 


who has remained unmarried and devoted his life and 


fortune to the service of his people. 


Sr. J. C. Bose, F. RB. s. 


The Great Scientist. of India who has given away the major part of his fortune 
to build up a Science Institute at Calcutta. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 17 


‘to emphasize again that no unprejudiced enquirer 
can afford to: rely on that tainted source. The 
Raja of Panagal, Miss Mayo’s other authority, has, 
‘as will bé seen from his letter reproduced in the 
Introduction, made it clear that Miss Mayo, as 
seems ‘her. wont; has in this case too been guilty 
of.a dishonest use of the inverted commas. The 
language put within the commas is not that of the 
Raja to whom it is ascribed, but of the American 
journalist herself. The Raja had referred only: to 
the ban against the study of the Vedas by the 
Shudras. but Miss Mayo, by resorting to tricks 
of the trade so familiar to her, makes the state- 
ment far’ more sweeping. Surely reciting the 
Vedas is not equivalent .to-‘ all learning,’ and 
‘study of books.’ Besides, what has the present day 
illiteracy to do with what the Brahmans'did or did 
not do ages ago? But Miss Mayo was anxious td 
supply a background.for her subsequent conclu- 
sions in which she eulogizes the Government of 
India’s work in the matter of education in India 
and throws the. whole blame of the educational 
backwardness of the Hindus on themselves. 


‘Panagal’s statement is at best that of a 
partisan, and Dubois’s remarks are irrelevant. 
Assuming that the Brahmans were so wicked as 
to.shut the doors of knowledge upon all non- 
Brahmans—which is a lie in itself—can that 
justify the behaviour in this century, of a Western 
government that poses to be civilized and up to 
date, and is no mild critic of the Brahmans? Are 
we to conclude that the modern white Brahmans. 
have taken the place of the yellow and black 

6 


18. *. UNHAPPY INDIA 


Brahmans of old India and are treading in their 
footsteps in keeping: the people of non-European 
origin in ignorance and bondage? . 


. But the charge against the Hindu Brahmans 
has no leg to stand -upon, and we have ‘excellent 
authority for proving its baselessness. I have 
before mea small book* written by a Christian 
missionary, Rev. F. E. Keay, on this subject. Rev. 
Keay is no apologist for the Brahmans. [ shall 
base the account that follows on his book. 


Rev. Keay traces the Brahmanic system of 
education to the very remotest past. By the time 
the ‘various portions of the Veda -had been 
completed, Brahmanic education was not ‘only of 
long standing but was highly organized.’ t 


It is unnecessary to go into details -here 
regarding the curricula at the Brahmanic seats of 
learning. As a rule the young Brahmans special- 
ized in the Vedic and ‘the philosophical studies. 
For the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas-‘ it is probable 
that...the ‘study of the Veda was something far 
less‘ serious than‘ [it was] for the young Brahmans, 
and. the duties: which’ the former had to perform 
in life must have necessitated their receiving the 
education suitable for their special callings before 
they became adults; Probably they tended less 
and less t6 attend the Brahmanic schools, and 
vocational schools, or at least domestic training, 


* Ancient Indian Education, Oxford University Press, 1918. 
pp Op. ctt., p. 27. oN : 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 19 


for their future duties in life were developed,’* 
‘ By the time that the earliest Dharmasutras. which 
are extant were composed (circa 500: B.C.) the 
system was in full working order, and it. had be- 
come customary for Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. as 
well as for Brahmans to be-initiated with the sacred 
thread as a preliminary to entering upon the period 
of life under Brahman teachers, which was to 
occupy at Jeast twelve years.’t é | 


Later on (between the sixth and fourth 
centuries before Christ), Kshatriya education came 
to attract special attention. The science of politics 
had grown: up. ‘ The education of the. young 
Indian nobles was not inferior to that of the Euro- 
pean knights in the times of chivalry.... The idea 
that the king and the nobles had a duty to perform 
to society in the protection of. the weak, ‘and .that 
their position was hot one so much of glory, and of 
ease as of service.to others, is.very prominent.’} 


““ A Vaishya,” says Rev. Keay on the authority 
of Manu, ‘must know. the respective value of gems, 
of pearls, of -corals, of:mefals, of cloth ‘made. of 
thread,-of perfumes, and of: condiments. ‘He must 
be acquainted with the manner of sowing’ seeds, 
and of the good’ and: bad qualities of fields, ‘and he 
must perfectly know all measures and. weights: 
Moreover, the excellence and defects’ of.:commodi- 
ties, the advantages and disadvantages of different 
countries, the probable profit and loss on merchan- 


=) MPa sy a 
OR, git, D. Bl 


t Op.. Cit., DP. 59. 3 
Op. cit., pp. 71-72. 


20 UNHAPPY. INDIA 


dise, and the means of properly rearing cattle.. 
He must be acquainted with the proper wages of 
servants, with the various languages...”* 


Brahman schools of learning known as fols 
were ‘indeed scattered all over the land. in 
numerous towns and villages.’t’ Sometimes.in’a 
town of special sanctity, or even of political im- 
portance, tols were established side by side and 
constituted a kind of university. Benares and 
Nadia furnish exampies. 


Rev. Keay sees in the educational system of 
ancient India ‘ an interesting and pleasing picture 
of the life of pupil and teacher...dating back to 
many centuries before Christ:t The teacher had 
no mercenary motive to impel him to teach, but 
_ was to perform his office solely as a duty. He was 

forbidden to accept. a fee. The pupil, on the 
completion of his course, would offer a present to 
his preceptor. But‘ except possibly in the case of 
rich pupils it could never have been in any sense 
an adequate. remuneration.’§ The pupil was 
trained to a simple life, whether he was rich or 
poor, and habits of discipline, reverence and self- 
respect. were inculcated. The discipline was 
somewhat rigorous, but had nothing harsh or 
brutal about it. In the matter of the punishment 
of the pupil the Hindus were far more humane 
than Britons of the time of Dickens. Keay quotes 


*Op. cit., pp. 72-73. 
t Op. cit., p. 51. 
fOp, ctt., p. 36. 
§ Op. cit., p- 35. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES a1 


Gautama as laying. down that, ‘asa rule, the 
pupil shall not be punished corporally. If no 
other course is possible he may be corrected with 
‘a thin rope or cane. ‘If the teacher strikes him 
with any other instrument he shall be punished 
by the king.’ Manu agrees with this in substance 
and forbids beating on a‘ noble part ’ of the body. 
Apastamba, however, allows as punishments 
‘frightening, fasting, bathing in cold. water, and 
banishment from the teacher's presence:’* 


What of the Shudras, the impatient reader 
will ask? Replies Rev. Keay: “* The Shudras 
were always shut out from Brahmanic education, 
and they also developed their own system of 
training for the young craftsman. The popular 
system of education, which will be noticed ina 
later chapter, also grew up to meet a need for 
which the Brahmanic schools made no provi- 
sion.’+ The caste system, its disadvantages 
notwithstanding, helped in keeping up high 
standards in craftsmanship which even the Abbé 
Dubois praised. “ The spirit of fine art and of 
craftsmanship has existed in India for long 
centuries, and has still a future before it,” says 
Keay. The system of education for the lads of 
each trade was a domestic one. Generally they 
were ‘brought up to the same trade as their 
fathers.” ‘The boy was taught by observing and 
handling real things,’ and the training was free 
from the artificiality of the school-room.’ The 


. * Op. ctt., p. 35. . . 
t Op. cit., p. 57. The quotations that follow about the crafts- 
man’s education are from Keay’s book, pp. 78-80. 


92 UNHAPPY INDIA. = ° 


‘ father would take a great delight. in passing on to 
his son his own skill.: ‘ In the collection of jade 
‘at the Indian Museum there is a large engraved 
bowl on which a family in the employ of the 
Emperors of Delhi was engaged for 3 generations’ 
In several crafts there was a systematic course in 
drawing for the lads. “The education of the young 
craftsman’ in India was entirely vocational, and 
even narrowly so.’ In many occupations ‘a 
knowledge of reading and writing would not be 
required for the direct purposes of the craft, and 
would. not be learnt. But certain Sanskrit works 
would, in some occupations, be learnt by heart.’ 


- Rev. Keay sums up™his survey of the 
Brahmanic system :* 


“Like the Muhammadan education with 
which it has many points of similarity, it [the 
Brahmanic education] was at least not inferior to 
the education of Europe, before the Revival of 
Learning. Not only did the Brahman educators 
develop a system of education which survived the 
crumbling of empires and the changes of society, 
but they. also; through all these thousands of years, 
kept aglow the torch of higher learning, and 
numbered amongst them many great thinkers 
who have left their mark not only upon the learn- 
ing of India; but-upon the intellectual life of the 
world.”.. [Italics are ours.}.. 7 


When Buddhism came, it had also to organize 
and develop a system of education. . The Buddhist 


* Op. cit., p. 57. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 23 


system was very much like the Brahmanical. 
-system ‘from which it borrowed largely. Some of 

the Buddhist universities were of enormous size. 

.Their high standards of learning attracted many 

scholars from China, some of whom have recorded 

descriptions of these seats of learning. Buddhist 

education was by no means merely theological 

education. The study of medicine received special 

attention at the Buddhist universities. The 
‘Buddhist seats of learning did not shut their doors 

upon any caste or creed. The high caste, the low 

caste, the Buddhist, the would-be Buddhist, the 
non-Buddhist, all were welcome. The contribu- 
tion of Buddhist monks to.elementary mass edu-. 
cation was also considerable. Because of its Bud- 
dhist monasteries practically every male adult in 
Burma was literate when the British set foot 
there. “In Burma,”—says Rev. Keay, “‘ before 
the country came‘under British control, almost 
the whole male population passed through the 
monasteries, and were taught by the monks.’’* 
Under British rule of course that universal literacy 
has not survived. 

These systems continued tenaciously even 
when political power passed on to the Muslims. 
Says-Rev. Keay : tf 


** Some of the more ruthless, or more ortho- 
dox, of Muhammadan sovereigns destroyed Brah- 
man places of learning, and scattered their 
students, but in spite of this interruption, Brahman 


*Op. cit., pp. 50-51. 


+The quotations (from Keay) about elementary education 
are from chapter V of the :work referred to. 


24 UNHAPPY INDIA 


learning continued.’ The Buddhist institutions 
‘gradually decayed and disappeared, a process 
which was helped by the assimilation of Buddhism 
in India with Hinduism. But the Brahman edu- 
cation continued in spite of difficulties, and, as the 
Buddhist centres of learning decayed, those of the 
Brahmans became more prominent.’ 
* 


.A reference has already. been made to the 
system of popular elementary education, which 
flourished. side by side with-that of higher Sans- 
krit learning. We must now go into it more fully 
to see whether mass literacy was.such an unknown 
thing in India as writers like Miss Katherine 
Mayo would have us believe: 


Says Rev. Keay :* 


“Side by side;—however, with these [the 
Brahmanic, Buddhistic and Muslim systems] 
there grew up at some time and in most parts of 
India, a popular system of elementary education 
which was open generally to all comers. It must 
have arisen to supply a popular demand for 
instruction in reading, writing and arithmetic, 
and was made use of chiefly by the trading and 
agricultural classes.” 


The italics are ours, and are intended to make 
it clear that the contention that it is the caste 
system and the Brahmans that are responsible, 
wholly or largely, for the present day illiteracy in 
India, is nothing short of a gratuitous lie. As 


*Ibid., p. 107. 


Late Sir Asutosh Mookerjee 
Sir Asutosh was a Judge of the Calcutta High-Court and the chief 
architect and organiser of the Calcutta University, the first and foremost 
university in India. He was known as the “Bengal Tiger” for his 
masterful personality and unrelenting attitude towards all Governmental 
opposition to his plans. 


Late Sir Surendranath Banerjea 
One of the founders of the Indian National Congress. 
In his early career he was for sometime in the Indian 
Civil Service. An educationist and one of the greatest 
leaders of his day, his devotion to his motherland is 
manifest throughout his long and active public life. 


-THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 25 


Rev. Keay points out, this indigenous system. of 
mass elementary education was independent 
of the Sanskrit school. ‘There was no mutual 
dependence or connection between them.’ The 
elementary school catered to the trading and 
artisan classes, the Sanskrit school to the religious 
and the learned. 


It is difficult to trace when this system of 
national literacy’ originated, but there can be no 
doubt that it continued in full vigour~all through 
the Muslim period and had not died out when. the 
British came into power. Official records, in- 
complete as their account of the disappearing 
system is, leave no room for doubt about its having 
been wide-spread Rev: Keay refers briefly to the 
evidence furnished, by British-Indian records an 


British officials : 


= 


‘“‘ There was-then, before. the British Govern- 
ment took over control of education in India, a 
wide-spread, popular, indigenous system. . It: was 
not confined. to one or two provinces, but’ was 
found in. various parts of India, though some 
districts were more advanced than others. In the 
inquiry made for the Madras Presidency in 
1822-26, it was calculated that rather less than 
one-sixth of the boys of school-going age received 
education of some sort. In the similar enquiry’ 


made for the Bombay Presidency (1823-28) the 


number of boys under instruction was put down 
as about one in eight. In one of the , districts in 
Bengal, where Adam carried out his inquiry, he 
found 13.2 per cent. of the whole male population 


26 ' UNHAPPY INDIA | 


receiving instruction. In another district he 
found 9 per cent. of all children of school-going 
‘age under instruction. William Ward says that 
it was supposed that about one-fifth of the male 
population of Bengal could read. In some parts 
of India the number under instruction .would 
probably be less than that in the three provinces 
mentioned. Wide-spread, therefore, as elementary 
education was, it did not include a~very large 
proportion even of the male’ population, and 
poner females of course it bardly existed at 
a Riis e . 


The conclusion in the last sentence is based 
on the evidence available\.at the time when the 
indigenous system was on the decline; even then, 
as we shall presently see from official evidence, at 
least in the case of the Punjab, the reference to 
literacy amongst women as almost non-existent is 
not warranted by facts. However, the following 
quotation from Rev. Keay’s closing chapter is 
interesting :t 


* There_is reason to believe that in these surveys the number 
of indigenous schools and of scholars receiving education therein 
was under-estimated. Even where the survey was directed by 4 
sympathetic official at the top, the subordinates collecting date 
did not evince the needed sympathy for the indigenous system; 
besides, the agency engaged in such surveys was often looked at 
askance by the people themselves. Dr. Lietner, speaking of these 
difficulties, refers to the returns of Rawalpindi district in the 
Punjab: “Of this district the public returns gave 171 schools 
with 3,700 pupils; the first returns of the district officers for 
1878-9 gave 302 schools with 5,454 pupils, but when Mr. Miller 
took the matter in hand, the existence of 681 schools with 7,145 
pupils was ascertained.” Leitmer’s History of Indigenous 
Education in the Punjab, p. 14. oes 


. £Zbid., p. 169. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES Q7 


“Few countries, and certainly no Western 
ones, have had systems of education which have 
had such along and continuous history with.so 
few modifications as some of the educational 
systems of India. The long centuries through 
which they have held sway show that they must 
have possessed elements which were of value, and 
that they were not unsuited to the needs of those 
who developed and adopted them. They pro- 
duced many great men and earnest seekers after 
truth, and their output on the intellectual side is 
by no means inconsiderable. - They developed 
many noble educational ideals, which are a valu- 
able contribution to educational thought and 
practice.” [Italics are ours. ] 


These quotations from an authority who could 
not even remotely be .accused of a pro-Hindu or 
pro-Indian bias, ought to be sufficient to convince 
any seeker after truth of the absurdity of Miss 
Mayo’s position and of the utter unreliability of 

the foundations on which she has built.. 


Fortunately we have some official documents 
also that show how fairly wide-spread education in ° 
India was, and how well the indigenous system 
fulfilled our needs, till the British took charge of 
this country and made a clean sweep of the 
indigenous structure without substituting for it 
anything that could be called satisfactory or 
adequate. A remarkable publication amongst 
these is Dr. Leitner’s History of Indigenous, Edu- 
cation in the Punjab. Dr. Leitner was an eminent 
educationist in the Punjab, who served as the first 


28 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Principal of the Lahore Government College, and 
later as the Director of Public Instruction in the 
province. The very thorough and painstaking 
investigations made by him about the indigenous 
system in the Punjab surviving to his day,—the 
' eighties—were issued as a blue-book by. the 
Government in 1882. Incidentally Dr. Leitner 
also put together the observations of, several 
earlier administrators and writers~that were 
relevant to his subject. We need offer no apo- 
logies for drawing largely upon Dr. Leitner’s 
valuable document to give the reader an idea of 
the educational position at the time the British 
came into political power in India; for to arrive at 
truth one has to turn to facts revealed by first- 
hand investigation, and. not to the propagandist 
clap-trap that Miss Mayo, has treated us to. 


The indigenous. system of elementary educa- 
tion was so much bound up with the Indian 
village system* that a paragraph about the latter- 
will not be irrelevant.t 


“One of the great characteristics of 
Hinduism, according to Mr. Ludlow, ‘‘is_ its 
municipal institutions, as embodied in the village 
system...which deals with the soil in an essentially 
personal way... The occupants of a given space 
of land are no mere aggregation of human units, 
but an organised ‘body, to which certain func- 


*“Where the village system has been swept_away by us, as in 
Bengal, there the_ village ool has equally disappeared.” 
(Ludlow in British India, quoted by Leitner, p. 18). ; 

t I bed... p. 18, , : : 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 29 


tionaries are necessary, which enjoys, as a body, 

certain rights. over the soil...even though within 

that community (certain persons) should be 

entitled to rights of what we should call absolute 

ownership. Everywhere the community has 

certain officers representing all those functions 
which appear to be most essential to village life. 

First is the headman, representing the whole 

community as towards the government; next is 

the accountant keeping a description of all the 

village lands, with the names of holders and terms 

of holding, and the accounts of individuals and of 
the village, drawing up deeds, writing letters. 

Then the police officer, not a. mere paid watchman, 

but a member of the village, hereditary, as I have 
said, in his functions, enjoying as the price of 
them a certain definite amount of land. The 
priest, often a Brahman, is another of these 
officers, hereditary in like manner; in like manner 
holding the priest’s land. The schoolmaster, 

often also the astrologer (though in other cases 

they are distinct functionaries), is another. ‘And 
do not suppose that this is an office which has 
fallen into desuetude... In every Hindu village 
which has retained anything of its form...the rudi- 
ments of knowledge are sought to be imparted; 
thereis not a child, except those of the outcastes 
(who form no part of the community), who is not 
able to read, -to write, to cipher; in the last branch 

of learning they are confessedly most proficient...’” 
[Italics ars ours. ] 


The Directors of the Company Bahadur were 
certainly no pro-Indian propagandists, and yet 


30 UNHAPPY: INDIA 


Mr. A. P. Howell,* writing in his book entitled 
Education in British India prior to 1854, and in 
1870-71, quotes passages from the First Education 
Despatch of the Court of Directors of the Company 
(June 1814), which bear glowing testimony to the 
efficiency of the indigenous system, and inci- 
dentally explain how it was financed. The reader 
will find that they form a refreshing contrast to 
the ignorant glib talk of Miss Mayo: 


. “We refer with particular satisfaction upon 
this occasion to that distinguished feature of 
internal polity, which prevails in-some parts of 
India, and by which the instruction of the people 
is provided for by a certain charge upon the 
produce of the soil, and by other endowments in 
favour of the village teachers, who are thereby 
rendered public servants of the community. 


‘ The mode of instruction that from time im- 
memorial has been practised under these masters 
has received the highest tribute of praise by its 
adoption in this country, under the direction of the 
Reverend Dr. Bell, formerly Chaplain at Madras; 
and it is now become the mode by which education 
is conducted in our [English] national establish- 
ments, from a conviction of the facility it affords 
in the acquisition of language by simplifying the 
process of instruction. 


“This venerable and benevolent institution of 
the Hindus is represented to have withstood the 
shock of revolutions, and to its operation is as- 


* Quoted by-Dr. Leitner, ‘Op. cit. pp. 21-22. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 31 


cribed thé general intelligence of the natives as 
scribes and accountants. We are so strongly per- 
suaded of its. great utility; that we are desirous 
you should take early measures to inform your- 
selves of ils present state, and that you will report 
to -us the result of your inquiries,.affording in the 
meantime the protection of - government to the 
village -teachers in all their just rights and im. 
munities, -and marking, by some favourable. 
distinction, any individual amongst them who may 
be recommended by superior merit or acquire- 
ments; for; humble as their situation may appear, 
if judged ‘by a comparison with any corresponding 
character in this country, .we understand those 
village teachers are held. in great veneration 
throughout India.” [Italies’ are ours.] ~ 


Mr. Howell comments on this as follows : 


“There is nodoubt that from time imme- 
morial’ indigenous schools have existed, as here 
alleged. In Bengal alone, in 1835, Mr. Adam 
estimated their number to be 100,000; in Madras, 
upon an. enquiry instituted by Sir Thomas Munro 
in 1822; the number of schools was reported to be 
12.498, containing 188,650 scholars; and in Bom- 
bay Presidency, about the same period, schools of. 
a similar order were found fo, be scattered all over 
it. It is much to be regretted that, as each pro- 
vince fell under our rule, the Government did not 
take advantage ofthe time when the prestige of 
conquest or gratitude for delivery from war and 
oppression were strong in the popular mind, to 
make the village school: an ‘important feature in 


32 _. UNHAPPY: INDIA 


the village system that was almost everywhere 
transmitted to us.” [Italics are ours. ] 


The second paragraph in the excerpt from the 
Education Despatch deserves special attention. 
Says Dr. Leitner: ‘‘ Just as the introduction \of 
specimens of the art-industry of India has tended 
largely to develop the present artistic taste among 
English workmen, so did the methods of instruction 
pursued in indigenous schools influence the schools 
in England.’’* 


A Bengal Inspector of Schools, deputed to 
visit the schools of the Punjab in 1868, remarked 
in the course of his report : 


* The indigenous education of India was 
founded on the sanction of the Shastras, 
which elevated it into-religious duties and confer- 
red dignity on the commonest transactions of 
everyday life. The existence of village commun- 
ities which left not only their municipal, but also 
in part their revenue and judicial administrations, 
in the hands of the people themselves, greatly 
helped to-spread education among all the different 
members. of the community. He will see the 
fruits.of the indigenous system in the numberless 
pathshalas, chatsals and tols which still overspread 
the country, and which, however wretched their 
present condition, prove by their continued exist- 
ence, in spite of neglect, contempt, .and other 
adverse circumstances of a thousand years, the 
strong stamina they acquired at their birth. At 


* Op. cit., p. 20. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 33 


the present day, the religious sanction is growing 
weak, the village communities are nearly gone, 
manufacturing industry has come to the verge of 
ruin, the heaviest incidence of taxation is falling 
upon land, and a foreign language has become the 
language of court and commerce. The natural 
incentives to popular education being thus weak, 
its progress will depend on the efforts of an en- 
lightened Government inclined to compensate to 
the people for their losses under foreign rule. 
Until a healthy political, economicaland social 
condition has been regained under-the security of 
British administration, artificial stimulants must 
supply its place as well as they are able.”* 


Miss Mayo’s malicious libel that Indians love 
ignorance and illiteracy is a lie which has no leg 
to stand upon. We readin Dr. Leitner’s report :t 


** T cannot forbear from bearing any testimony 
to the great desire and appreciation of education 
among all classes of the Hindu, Muhammadan and 
Sikh communities, as also to the great talents 
which this»‘land of the sun’ has so prodigally 
bestowed. among its children... Now, as 3,000 
years.ago, the East is the home of mental discip- 
line, culture and repose, where genius is as uni- 
versal as it is ignored, in consequence chiefly of the 
want of publicity and of easy communication. 
Without these advantages we should now be be- 
hind the Crientals, whom we despise. The one 
intelligent European, among a thousand of his dull 


*Tbid., p. 42. 
t Ibid., p. 88. 


34 . . UNHAPPY INDIA 


brethern is able to pass off his views and inventions 
as the embodiment of the civilization of his con- 
tinent. ‘When the whole East will have its cheap 
Press and railways—provided always that it does 
not seek to slavishly imitate the West in its re- 
forms—it must resume the position it once held, 
owing to the native genius of its peoples.” 


One could cite more testimonies like that. 
But those given above will suffice; Miss Mayo must 
be more royalist than the King, if she thinks these 
British writers and administrators and _ the 
Directors of John Company were~all pro-Hindu. 
However, to give the reader a more concrete and 
detailed idea we shall copy here Dr. Leitner’s cal- 
culation regarding literacy in the Punjab in the 
days immediately preceding annexation by the 
British. Dr. Leitner in his day found a sad con- 
trast with the wide-spread literacy of the pre- 
annexation days».On page 3 of his report we 
read : 


‘In backward districts, like that of Hushiar- 
pur, the Settlement Report of 1852 shows a school 
to every 19.65 male inhabitants (adults and non- 
adults), which may be contrasted with the present 
proportion of one Government or Aided school to 
every 2,818.7 inhabitants.” 


Speaking of the entire province Leitner says :* 


‘‘ Including the since-incorporated Delhi and 
Hissar Divisions, which now contain 4,476 towns 
and villages, there were, in 1854 (when an incom- 


* Ibid., p. “145. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 35 


‘plete census was taken), 33,355 towns and villages, 
and presumably the same number in 1849. Assum- 
ing, at least, the existence of 33,355 mosques, 
temples, dharmsalas and other sacred edifices in 

‘ which some teaching was carried on (not to count 
the 3,372 indigenous secular schools which were 
ascertained to exist in 1854 or to speak of the large 
number of schools held in the houses of teachers), 
and giving each ‘ Collegium ’ of pupils.an average 
attendance of 10, we shall get, at least, 333,550 
persons under instruction in a province in which 
we have now about 113,000 assumed to attend 
Government and Aided schools, and a much 
smaller number in indigenous schools (according 
to the last census the total number ‘ under instruc- 
tion ’ of every kind would only be 157,623). What 
the state of education was in the time of Ranjit 
Singh may be inferred from the enumeration of 
Sikh authors in a previous chapter. The list of 
men distinguished. for learning in other deno- 
minations is even more lengthy; whilst the evi- 
dence of ourown Administration and Settlement 
Reports (so far as I have been allowed to see them) 
is conclusive as to the general spread of the ele- 
ments of education in the province.” 


The British rulers did India a grave wrong 
when they, rooted out the useful old system, and 
-did not even care to replace it by a new one. 
Leitner discusses the passing away of the old 
system in the Punjab, and concludes among other 
things*— 


*Ibid., p. 148 . 


36 UNHAPPY INDIA 


(1) That elementary, and sometimes high, 
Oriental, classical and vernacular education was 
more widely spread in the Punjab before annexa- 
tion than it was in his day. 


(2) That the Board of Administration in the 
Punjab was ordered to resume rent-free tenures of 
land, even in the case of schools and religious edi- 
fices when their endowments were. large, thus 
following the example of the land resumption in 
Bengal. 


(3) That in consequence most of the endow- 
ments of indigenous schools were gradually des- 
troyed. 


(4) That the action of the Educational Depart- 
ment of the Punjab, in spite of constant reminders, 
tended to destroy the indigenous schools whilst 
neglecting its own primary schools. 


This in the years of grace circa 1880. 


Miss Mayo seems to imply that the chapter on 
the education of Hindu women must be something 
like the proverbial blank chapter on ‘ Snakes in 
Iceland.’ Says she, ‘ The people of India, as has 
been shown ’—presumably by the remarks of the 
discredited ‘Abbé Dubois—‘ have _ steadfastly 
opposed the education of women.’ This is iie 
No. 1 (in chapter XV). She adopts a characteris- 
tically wicked method of accounting for India’s 
illiteracy. Of the 247,000,000 people in British 
India, 50 per cent. are women; so she excludes 
123,000,000 from those who can be made literate. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 37 


Next she proceeds to exclude the ‘60 million 
untouchables.’ This is lie No. 2. , 


We are just now concerned only with lie No. 1. 
We shall later on give the Hindu idea of the posi- 
tion of women. Here we are concerned only with 
the present-day problem of women’s literacy. 


Dr. Leitner, from whose valuable report we 
have already quoted so much, has some very illu- 
minating observations to make on the education of 
women in the Punjab, during the period just 
preceding annexation by the British :* 


** The Panjabi woman has, however, not only 
been always more or less educated herself, but she 
has also been an educator of others. In ‘Dethi, fo 
instance, we find that, before the annexation of th 
Punjab, six public’schools for girls were kept by 
Panjabi women, who had emigrated to the South 
for this purpose.” a 


**In other, places, similarly, Panjabi women 
were to be found as teachers, just as the Guru or 
the Padha spread his instruction beyond the 
precincts of a province where he was becoming a 
drug_in the market.. Among Muhammadans, 
very many widows considered it a sacred duty to 
teach girls to read the Koran, and though Delhi, 
like the rest of the North-Western Provinces, was 
far behind the Punjab in female education, we find 
that it had in 1845 numerous schools for girls, kept 
in private houses.” 


*Ibid., pp. 97-8. 


38 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The following from Dr. Leitner’s evidence 
before the Education Commission of 1882 will give 
interesting details of the indigenous. system for 
girls :* - 


“*Q. 41. Is there indigenous instruetion for 
girls in. the province with which you are acquaint- 
ed; and, if so, what is its character? 


*°A. 41. Yes; the wives of Maulvis and 
Bhais, for instance, are generally taught by their 
husbands and instruct their children up to a cer- 
tain age in reading and religious duties. The 
wives of the respectable Muhammadans generally 
can also read and write (though the latter attain- 
ment is not so much encouraged as the former for 
reasons into which it is not necessary to enter). 
Some of the ladies are good Persian scholars, and 
in a distinguished, Muhammadan family that J 
know, I have been given to understand that several 
of the ladies are excellent poets. The position of 
women is far higher among Muhammadans and 
Sikhs than_is supposed, and there is no prejudice 
against their being educated, provided this can be 
done without interfering with the privacy of their 
domestic life. There are in proportion as many 
women that can read in Native States, where there 
has been no fuss made about female education, as 
there are in British territory, whilst in the latter 
also I have no doubt that many respectable women 
can read and write... There have always been 
indigenous schools for Sikh females in the districts 
between the Chenab and the Attock. That the 


* Tbid., pp. 108-4. 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 39 


wives of priests should visit females of their com- 
munity and teach them, is right and proper, but 
that girls, especially of a marriageable age, should 
cross bazaars in order to assemble in a school, is, 
I think, objectionable. Much reading of ele- 
mentary religious books, sewing, embroidery, 
cooking with extreme care for the household, 
great neatness, tenderness in trouble, and gentle 
mediation in family disputes, constitute the chief 
features of female home rule and education in the 
better classes, who regard their female relatives 
with a respect and a religious affection of which we 
have not even the outward profession in Europe.” 


The British occupation was actually followed 
by_a_decline in women’s education. That was the 
conclusion forced upon Dr. Leitner by facts 
brought out during his investigation. The causes 
of this decline, as they_appeared to Dr. Leitner, 
are thus summarized in his blue-book :* 


** There has been a decline in female teaching 
since annexation, for the following reasons : ‘ 


_ (a) Formerly the mother could. teach the 
child Panjabi. Now, wherever the child learns 
Urdu, the teaching power of the mother is lost. 


(0) The weakening of the religious feeling has 
caused the decrease of all indigenous schools, in- 
cluding those conducted by women. 


(c) Formerly a woman guilty of misconduct 
was criminally punished, so that the safeguards 


* Ibid., pp. 108-9. ; 


40 UNHAPPY INDIA 


against it were strong, and there could be less ob- 
jection to granting women more education and 
greater freedom. Since the introduction of our 
law, adultery, for instance, can, comparatively 
speaking, be committed with impunity, andthe 
necessary consequence is that the male population 
watches with greater jealousy any attempt towards: 
emancipating the female sex. 


d) The female education given by us was 
_avoided by the more respectable, because it too 
closely resembled that enjoyed bya class, which, 
if not criminal, to which our system is now re- 
ducing it, was not reputable... . 


(e) keeping the female schools in public 
places, and by always attempting in spite of any 
pledges that may have been given at the com- 
mencement of the ‘female education movement’ 
to inspect them, thus preventing the very patrons 
ui the schools from sending their own daughters to 
them. ~ 


Female education has, therefore, been 
brought into discredit with the respectable classes 
by official interference, which has already done so 
much.mischief in the Punjab in various other 
respects, and which the boon of self-government 
given at the eleventh hour can alene remedy, pro- 
vided all officials combine in a measure of tempo- 
el self-effacement for the sake of the common 


These extensive quotations have been 
occasioned by extreme. caution*on our part. We 


THE LIGHT THROUGH THE AGES 41 


did not wish to give the impression that we were 
improvising facts to prove our thesis or to give the 
lie direct to Miss Mayo’s ignorant but mischievous 
generalization. The least attention to the study of 
the subject forces one to the following conclusions: 


(t) That from the earliest times there was a 
well-organized and wide-spread system of educa- 
tion throughout India. 


(ti) That this system was a two-fold system— 
one for the aristocratic, cultured-and_ priestly 
classes aiming at religious learning and culture, 
the other for the trading and working classes aim- 
ing at economic efficiency and dexterity in the use 
of tools—-something akin to the system of 
apprenticeship in Tudor England. 


(tz) That this system, as a part of our village 
system, had lasted as a living organization till the 
British occupancy of this country. 


(jv) That this system was easily mistaken as 
a part of the body politic and uprooted by the 
British administrator, particularly anxious since 
the days of Lord Macaulay to create a class of 
subordinate officials and hirelings. 


CHAPTER III 


THE LIGHT THAT FAILED 


We suppose the quotations we have given 
from British official publications and . British 
writers make it abundantly clear that Miss Mayo’s 
insinuations that before the advent of the British 
the Hindus had no system of education \ and that 
even now they are resisting all attempts to spread 
education and literacy are entirely misleading. 
In several provinces literacy -was more . wide- 
spread at the time the British took possession of 
them than it is to-day after-175 years of British 
rule. The old Indian system was admirably 
adapted to the genius and the needs of the people. 
The British of course did not destroy the old 
system without any aim in view. Their vandalism 
was for the greater part deliberate. To find out 
the motives underlying the educational policy we 
have to turn to its authors, the British administra- 
tors of the last century, and of the last years of the 
eighteenth century. 


Charles Grant in his book on the education of 
the Indian people, published towards the end of 
the eighteenth century, remarked: ‘‘In_ the 
success [of the new educational policy] would lie 
our safety, not our danger.” ‘‘ We shall take the 
most rational means to remove inherent great dis- 
orders, to attach the Hindu people to ourselves, to 


THE LIGHT THAT FAILED 43 


ensure the safety of our possessions,* to enhance “ 
continually their value to us.” 


Some forty years later, Sir Charles Trevelyan, 
a relative of Lord Macaulay, who served John 
Company in various capacities and rose to be the 
Governor of Madras, and a member of the Supreme 
Council in India, discussed this question in his 
book, On the Education of the People of India, and 
came to the conclusion that a million sterling 
annually expended on the education of Indians 
would ‘render them at once amenable to our rule 
and worthy of our alliance.’ Very shrewdly he 
remarks : 


‘* In following this course we should be trying 
no new experiment. .The Romans at once 
civilized the nations of Europe and attached them 
to their rule by Romanizing them, or, in other 
words, by educating them in the Roman literature 
and arts and teaching them to emulate their 
conquerors instead of opposing them. Acquisi- 
tions made by superiority in war were consolidated 
by superiority in the arts of peace, and the 
remembrance of the original violence was lost in 
that of the benefits which resulted from it. The 
provincials of Italy, Spain, Africa and Gaul, 
having no ambition except to imitate the Romans, 
and share their privileges with them, remained to 
the last faithful subjects of the Empire, and the 
union was at last dissolved, not by internal revolt, 
but by ‘the shock of external violence, which 
involved conquerors and conquered in one 


* Chapter IV. Italics in these quotations are: throughout ours. 


44 UNHAPPY INDIA 


common overthrow. The Indians will, I hope, 
soon standin the same position towards us in 
which we once stood towards the Romans. 
Tacitus informs us that it was the policy of 
Julius Agricola to instruct the sons of leading men 
among the Britons in the literature and science of 
Rome and to give them a taste for the refinements 
of Roman civilization. We all know how well this 
plan answered. From being obstinate enemies, 
the Britons soon became attached and confiding 
friends; and they made more strenuous effort to 
retain the Romans than their ancestors had done 
to resist their invasion.” 


The Roman parallel. was recalled also by 
Rev. Alexander Duff—the» pioneer of English 
education in Bengal. In his paper, An Exposition 
of the late Governor-General of India’s Last Act, 
published at about the same time as Trevelyan’s 
book, he observed:: 


“When the Romans conquered a province, 
they forthwith set themselves to the task of 
Romanizing it; that is, they strove to create a taste 
for their own more refined language and literature, 
and thereby aimed at turning the song and the 
romance and the history, the thought and the 
feeling and the fancy, of the subjugated people 
into Roman channels which fed and augmented 
Roman interests. And has Rome not succeeded?” 


Trevelyan thought the indigenous education 
would not make for the safety of the British Raj. 
He therefore wanted Indian youth to be nurtured 
on English education : 


THE LIGHT THAT FAILED 45 


“The spirit of English literature...cannot . 
but be favourable to the English connection. 
Familiarly acquainted with us by means of our 
literature, the Indian youth almost ceases to 
regard us as foreigners... From violent oppo- 
nents...they are converted into zealous...and 
intelligent co-operators with us.”* 


The political motive in this policy could not 
be more clearly emphasized. 


And we have the more graphic and more 
quotable words of Trevelyan’s more illustrious 
relation, Lord Macaulay :f 


** We must at present.do our best to form a 
class who may be interpreters between us and the 
millions we govern; a-class of persons Indian in 
blood and colour but English in taste, in opinions, 
in morals and in intellect.” 


The Rt. Hon. Charles Grant, whom we have 
already quoted, wanted to ‘attach our subjects by 
affection, by interest, by winning them to our 
religion, and» our sentiments.’ That, in his 
opinion;“would have the effect of rendering our 
authority. permanent and secure.’ 


With these political motives underlying the 
educational policy, it was in vain that H. H. 
Wilson, the great Sanskritist, protested : 


“JT have noticed for some time past repeated 
effusions in the Calcutta newspapers, advocating 
a departure from principles hitherto considered 


* Minutes of 1835. tEvidence before Parl. Com., 1853. 


46 UNHAPPY INDIA 


sound and just, and recommending the exclusive 
encouragement of English as the first stage of a 
very feasible project for. the annihilation of all the 
languages of India, vernacular or classical, and 
the universal use of our native tongue throughout 
the East. As long as the reveries were confined to 
the columns of a newspaper they were inoffensive 
or even amusing; they assumed more importance 
when, in order to prepare for the extermination of 
the languages, the suppression of the alphabets 
was seriously undertaken and Oriental works were 
printed in characters which the natives could not 
read.” 


These quotations leaveno doubt as to what 
motives inspired the founders of the British- 
Indian educational policy. Their hostility to the 
prevailing systems of education sprang from 
political motives. The new system that they 
devised for India-was intended not to help cultural 
or material progress of the Indian people, but 
merely to make the work of administration easy. 
Sir John Malcolm, Governor of Bombay, in a 
Minute he wrote in 1828, recorded : 7 


‘* One of the chief objects...of diffusing educa- 
tion among the natives of India, is our increased 
power of associating them in every part of our 
administration. This I deem_ essential on 
grounds of economy, of improvement, and of 
security. 


‘IT cannot look for reduction of expenses in the 
different branches of our Government from any 
diminution of the salaries now enjoyed by 


THE LIGHT THAT FAILED ° 47 


European public servants, but I look to it from 
many of the duties they now have to petform 
being executed by natives on diminished salaries.” 


‘Natives on diminished salaries’ was the 
goal the educational system had in view!’ The 
authors of the Despatch of 1854 were driving at 
the same thing when they wrote: 


“We have always been of opinion that the 
spread of education in India will | Seber a greater 
efficiency in all branches of administration by 
enabling you to obtain the services of intelligent 
and trustworthy persons in every department of 
Government, and, on the other hand, we believe 
that the numerous vacancies of different kinds 
which have constantly-to be filled up may afford a 
great stimulus to education.” 


Sir John Malcolm in the course of the Minute 
from which we have already quoted said: 


“ From English schools being established at 
no place but Bombay the pay of writers and 
accountants is immoderately high, and when these 
move~from the Presidency they require still 
higher wages; and when well qualified they can 
from, their limited numbers, command almost any 
pay they demand. This introduces a tone of 
extravagance of demand from this class of persons 
in all our departments. Of some remedies of this 
evil I shall speak hereafter, but the real mode to 
decrease price is to multiply the article. English 
schools should be established or encouraged at 
Surat and Poona.” 


48 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The British administrators aimed at produc- 
ing the Give-Me-Office-or-Give-Me-Death type!. 
The educational machine constructed by them 
was admirably suited to this end. 


Add to this the fact that the British Govern- 
ment in India pursued a deliberate policy of 
destroying Indian industry. Lancashire arose on 
the ashes of the Indian cotton industry. In the 
name of ‘ Free Trade’ they refused to afford 
protection to the infant industries; and prevented 
their development. The banking policy, the 
currency manipulation, have meant no small | 
handicap to the Indian manufacturer. Recent 
advances in science that have revolutionized 
agriculture elsewhere -have not benefited Indian 
agriculture to any appreciable extent. The Indian 
Government seems to-be beginning to take some 
interest in practical scientific agriculture, but 
hitherto the few agricultural institutes that we 
have, produced, graduates more proficient in 
theory than in practical knowledge. I believe it 
was the late Sir Ganga Ram—‘ that fine old 
Punjabi,’ as Miss Mayo calls him--who, while 
speaking at the Agricultural College, Lyallpur, a 
few years .ago,- narrated the painful fact that 
graduates in agriculture of that. institution some- 
times approached him to get chits for jobs in the 
police department Such being the condition of 
agriculture and industries, is it any. wonder that 
young educated Indians depend so much: on 
clerical jobs under the bureaucracy ? 


MAHATMA HANS RAJ OF LAHORE. 


He has devoted his whole life over 40 years of service now to the 
cause of education in the Punjab. 


Principal RAM DEVA of Gurukul Kangri. 


He has served his whole life on a mere pittance. 


10—49 


CHAPTER IV 
Ud 
LEARNING AND EARNING—AND HARD HEADED 
AMERICANS 


It is always easy to talk of educationfor 
education’s sake, but surely it does not lie in the 
mouth of an American to indulge in that cant. 
The ancient Hindu ideal in this respect. was much 
higher and nobler than the present European or 
American ideal. In the West the chief values are 
money values—in the United States of Miss Mayo 
they may be said to be almost the sole values. 
Even universities are judged by the amount of 
Money spent on, and provided for them. The 
typical American is a creature of money, judging 
everything by its money) value. The cost of pro- 
duction, whether of a book, a picture, a film, or a 
play or even a university, is the real and the only 
understandable test of its value. Electric signs in 
Broadway, New York, in Chicago, in Philadelphia, 
in San Francisco and“ every other big town 
abound with announcements of a million dollar 
productions. A certain multi-millionaire couple 
took it into their heads to perpetuate the memory 
of their deceased son by establishing a university 
and naming it after him. They undertook a tour 
of the United States to inspect its various centres 
of university activities and to select a model for 
the proposed memorial. Everywhere they made 
ita point to enquire about the total cost of the 


8 


50 UNHAPPY INDIA 


university,—permanent and recurring. At the 
entrance of a famous university library in 
Massachusetts they put the same question to the 
gentleman who was showing them the different 
departments of! the institution, and the husband 
was overheard saying to his wife, ‘Dear, we can do 
this,’ i.e., build a university involving the cost of 
the one they were inspecting! The university 
established by them is a well-known_educational 
institution in the West but its chief claim to the 
gratitude of humanity is its money cost. The 
average American is only interested in making 
money or in spending it when made. 


The sermon of education for education’s sake 
is so often preached to us by men in high position 
who ought to know better that it will not be out 
of place to discussit.at some length, though I 
am afraid I cannot burden this book with too 
many quotations on ‘this subject. I will ask the 
reader’s indulgence for a quotation from my own 
book, The Problem of National Education in 
India, so frequently quoted by Miss Mayo herself.* 
In chapter XII of that book I discussed the 
“Money Value of Education,’ quoting largely from 
the United States Bureau of Education Bulletin 
No. 22 of 1927 (called ‘Money Value of Education’). 
Introducing the excerpts from that Bulletin I said 
in my book: ; 


“The first requisite of an. efficient system of 
national education is that it enables every citizen 


*The Problem of National Education in India, George 
‘Allen and Unwin, London, 1920. ' 


LEARNING AND EARNING - 51 


to live better, and to help others in living better. 
To live well, one requires a certain minimum of 
food, clothing, shelter, leisure, recreation, and 
means for the satisfaction of higher tastes and 
higher cravings. A nation which does not secure 
enough to enable every one of its members to live 
well, is a drag on the rest of the world. But when 
a nation of 315 millions of human beings, as well 
developed as the Indians, in possession of a 
country so rich in soil as that of India, with 
abundant natural resources of all kinds, cannot 
produce sufficient to satisfy even the minimum 
demands of half of its population, it is a sight for 
the gods to weep at. India’s phenomenal] proverty 
is one of the tragic facts of its life; and it is mainly 
due to the lack of means of.education. 


‘“* Under the circumstances, the first aim of all 
publicly imparted education in India should be to 
increase the productive capacity of its citizens. 
Education is the first’ necessity of such a nation, 
and it should be the first charge on all national 
revenues. ~The nation should strive every nerve 
to go without all luxuries, nay, even without 
secondary necessities, in order to place this’ first 
necessity of national life within the reach.of every 
boy and girl, and of every adult capable of learn- 
ing. This is only possible by a general wide- 
spread system of vocational education, and by a 
general dissemination of practical, scientific 
knowledge applicable to the ordinary needs of life 
and vocational efficiency. e°4 


‘*‘Such a wide-spread system of education 
requires huge funds.. These funds are to be 


52 UNHAPPY INDIA 


furnished (a) from existing revenues, (6) from 
new taxes, (c) by practising economy in other 
departments of public administration, (d) and from 
national or provincial loans. In order to prepare 
the public mind to meet the demands for funds for 
education, it is necessary to bring home to the 
people ‘the material and measurable rewards of 
education.’ ” 


The last words, within quotation marks, are 
the words of the American Bulletin. -Then follow 
the results of the world-wide investigation on the 
subject made by Dr. A. Caswell Ellis, Professor of 
Philosophy of Education in the University of 
Texas, with reference to Germany, Japan and 
Russia, the United States. and other countries. 
Speaking of Germany he says : 


“ The concrete evidence of the effect of educa- 
tion in increasing. industrial efficiency is over- 
whelming, whether considered from the national 
standpoint or from that of the individual citizen. 
For example, how else to account for the fact that 
a nation like Germany, with limited natural 
resources, but with excellent public schools, has 
grown in wealth and power.so much more rapidly 
than her neighbour, Russia, which has a vigorous 
and talen national stock and vastly better 
resources but poor educational facilities? That 
the phenomenal success of Germany is the direct 
result of her thorough educational system is 
generally admitted.” _ 


About the United States he tells us: 


LEARNING AND EARNING 53 


‘<The relation of productive power to educa- 
tion is shown by the enormously increased rate of 
production that has come about everywhere since 
education became more generally diffused. The 
total wealth accumulated in America from 1492. to 
1860, a period of 368 years, was $514 per capita. 
From then till 1904, a period of only 44 years, this 
increased to $1,318 per capita, or an addition in 
44 years of $804... 


‘Since that time the increase has been even 
more striking. This increase is-—partly due to 
increased valuations or the smaller ae 
power of the dollar; to the use of accumulate 
capital, and to many other things; but aiter due 
allowance is made for all these the conclusion is 
inevitable that the education of the nation is 
largely responsible for vastly increasing the pro- 
ductive power of its ‘citizens.. The productive 
power of illiterate countries is not increasing at 
such rates.”’ 


Dr. Caswell Ellis rightly holds that natural 
resources, are worthless without education. The 
Indian Government alone refuses to recognize that 
the grinding poverty of the people of India is 
mostly due to their ignorance and illiteracy, and 
that for this appalling ignorance and illiteracy the 
British Government of India is wholly responsible. 
The Government of India has never seen that— 


‘* the efficiency of an illiterate people in com- 
petition with an educated nation is as the crooked 
stick against the sulky plough; the sickle against 
the reaper; the bullock cart against the express 


54 UNHAPPY INDIA 


train, the ocean greyhound, and the aeroplane, 
the pony messenger against the telegraph, tele- 
phone, and wireless; thé individual harangue 
against the printing press, the newspaper, the 
library ; the spinning-wheel against the factory; the 
pine faggot against the electric light; the peddling 
of skins and herbs from the ox-cart against the 
bank, the cheque book, the railroad, the depart- 
ment store; the log hut against the. steel sky- 
scraper; the unaided eye against the microscope 
and telescope; incantations and magic against the 
chemist, the hospital, the modern physician and. 
surgeon. Take away from one entire generation 
all education, and society must revert to the stick 
poset: the ox-cart, and such primitive means, 
ecause steel implements, locomotives, steam- 
ships, electricity, telephones, telegraph, water- 
works, steel buildings;.mining and chemical in- 
dustries, factories, modern sanitation. hygiene and 
medicine, books, newspapers, courts of justice, and 
laws that protect property and defend the rights 
of the weak areall impossible without education, 
and are efficient only in proportion as educated 
intelligence.is applied to them.”* 


Instead of carrying on a propaganda showing 
the money value of education, like the one carried 
on by the United States Government, the high 
officials of the Government of India are constantly 
bemoaning the tendency of the people of India to 
judge the value of education by its material re- 
turns. What a difference there is between 4 


*Dr, A. Caswell Ellis, op. cit. 


LEARNING AND EARNING 55- 


national government and a foreign government of 
exploiters imposed from without! 


On page 184 Miss Mayo, commenting on a 
uotation from my book, The Problem of Nationat 
ducation, writes: 


“In 1923-24, India’s total expenditure of 
public funds on education, including municipal, 
local, Provincial and Central Government contri- 
butions, reached 19.9 crores of rupees, or 
£13,820,000. This sum is much too small for. the 
work to be done. Nevertheless; when taken in re- 
lation to the total revenue, of British India, it 
compares not unfavourably-with the educational 
allotments of other countries.” . 


This is Miss Mayo’s characteristic way of 
dealing with figures: She not only includes 
municipal and local contributions but also the: 
income from tuition fees and private endowments. 
The total contribution of the, government from 
Central and Provincial funds in 1923-24 was only 
Rs. 9,74;76,000, i.e., less than one half of the total 
amount. 


In 1924-25—-later figures are not yet available 
—it.was Rs. 9,98,02,000 out of a total from all 
sources of Rs. 20,87,48,000. In the official report: 
for 1924-25 it is observed (page 4): ‘* The total 
expenditure by Government on education in India 
is Rs. 9,98,01,594, a sum which represents only 
_ four annas per head [about 4d. in British currency 
and about 8 cents in American currency ]...Mean- 
while the percentage of the total expenditure on 


56 _. . UNHAPPY INDIA 


education borne by Government has declined 
from 48.9 to 47.9, while the contribution from fees 
has risen from 21.8 to 22.4.” For less than 50,000 
European pupils in all stages of instruction in 
India nearly Rs. 50 lakhs are spent annually from 
the government funds alone. This gives an annual 
sum of about Rs. 100 per pupil. Distributed over 
the entire European population in India—less than 
‘2 lakhs of souls—it gives you more than Rs. 25 
per head per year. Compare it with the beggarly 
four annas per head spent on the education of the 
Indian population! It is unthinkable that any 
national government could.ever treat education so 
shabbily as the present. government in India is 
doing. Leave aside the rich and resourceful gov- 
ernments of America, Britain and France. Even 
then you know what the enlightened Calles -gov- 
ernment is doing in a poor country like Mexico. 
Can the Indian government’s effort compare even 
with that of the Mexican government ?* 


*Mr. J. W. Brown in his recent book on Modern Mexico 
(Labour Publishing Co., 1927) says that the ‘28 Mexican States 
are now spending 40 per cent. of their budgets on education, in 
addition to what the Federal Government does.’ 


The late SWAMI SHRADDHANAND 
He devoted all his life and fortune for social and educational 
service and died from the hand of a Muslim Assassin. 


CHAPTER V 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 


Private agency in India has’ done, and ‘is 
doing a good deal for the spread of literacy as.also 
for higher and technical education. The late Mr. 
J. N. Tata spent a good part of his fortune in 
making provision for higher scientific-education. 
The Bangalore Science Institute owes its existence 
to him. The Bose Institute, the Calcutta Techno- 
logical Institute (with which, the well-known 
Chemist, Dr. P. C. Ray is connected), the National 
Medical College, all owe their existence solely or 
mainly to private effort. Even official universities 
owe a good deal to the munificence of people like 
Sir Gooroodas Banerjee. The Hindu University of 
Benares not only has, arrangements for high class 
literary education but also-runs an Engineering 
college. But Miss Mayo gives you the impression 
that Indians themselves are doing nothing for the 
spread of education, and blames the Indian 
Nationalists for unfairly criticising the British ad- 
ministration for a supposed neglect of duty. Her 
charge against educated Indians, as usual, rests ~ 
ona, talk, she says, she had with a Bengali lawyer 
of unknown identity, who made good money at 
the Bar but gave no attention to the education or 
sanitation of his village. 


In the introductory chapter of my book, The 
Problem of National Education in India, I gave a 


58 UNHAPPY INDIA 


resume of what had till then (1918) been attempted 
by private enterprise in the matter. But when all 
is said, it is no use denying that education is mainly 
the business of the State of the first and foremost 
importance. Private effort, however earnest, is 
utterly helpless to meet the educational require- 
ments of a modern nation. In chapter V.of my 
book on education I gave copious extracts from the 
then recent speeches of the Rt. Hon. H. A. L. 
Fisher, at that time President of the British Board 
of Education, to emphasize how in all the civilized 
countries education in all its branches is regarded 
to-day as the business of the State. It is the right 
as well as the duty of the State to see that the 
citizens do not grow up illiterate and uneducated. 
In one of his speeches Mr. Fisher, Britain’s leading 
authority on educational, problem, said :* 


“But though the State cannot forbid wage- 
earning among young people [ why?! it should and 
must assign a value to learning as well as to 
earning. It has.a right and a duty to affirm that it 
believes in education for the masses, and that by 
education it means not a sham and make-believe, 
but something substantial, something which will 
leave a durable mark on mind and character, and 
that the claim of this education on the child is 
paramount... The State should not allow itself to 
be diverted from its great object of diffusing 
knowledge and intelligence among the people by 
the fear of being involved in some expenditure 
based on personal circumstances. It should first 


*In quoting from Fisher’s speeches I am using the material 
in chapter V of my Problem of National Education in India. 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 59 


devise a course of education, as thorough and effect- 

ive as the object demands and the available means . 
of instruction furnish, and then, having settled on 

a plan likely to give to each of its citizens the 

fullest chance for self-development. it should be 

prepared to give adequate assistance in special 
cases.” [Italics are ours. ] 


Adequate education for the masses is a right 
as well as a duty of the State. So it is not the 
Indian politicians only who demand=that educa- 
tion ‘ should be driven into the...masses by com- 
pulsory measures.’ British statesmen also affirm 
the same thing about their own country. 


We get a glimpse of the educational ideals 
that the modern stafesman has before him in the 
further excerpts from Mr. Fisher’s speeches, which 
I made originally for my book on education : 


“ The province of popular education is to equip 
the men and women of this country for the tasks 
of citizenship. /All are called upon to live, many 
are called upon to die, for the community of which 
they form.a part. That they should be rescued 
from the dumb helplessness of ignorance is, if not 
a precept of the eternal conscience, at least an ele- 
mentary part of political prudence, to which the 
prospective enfranchisement of several million new 
voters...adds a singular emphasis. But the 
argument does not rest upon grounds of political 
prudence alone, but upon the right of human 
beings to be considered as ends in themselves and 
to be entitled, so fat as our imperfect social arrange- 
ments may permit, to know and enjoy all the best 


ms 


0 UNHAPPY INDIA 


that life can offer in the sphere of knowledge, 
emotion and hope.”’ 


Speaking at Bradford Mr. Fisher said : 


** When I began my survey of national educa- 
tion I was struck—as I suppose everybody is struck 
~-by the fact that there are millions and millions 
of men and women in this country [Gree Britain | 
—who are not getting as much out of life as life 
can afford to givethem. There are-millions of men 
and women who derive no profit-from books, no 
pleasure from music or pictures, very little culti- 
vated joy from the ordinary beauties of nature. 
They pass their life bound down to dull mechanical 
toil, harnessed to iron and steel, without a gleam 
of poetry, without a touch.of imagination, without 
the faintest sense of-the glories and splendours of 
the world in which we five, unable to attach to 
their ordinary dull,task the interest which belongs 
to a scientific appreciation of the principles upon 
which that task is founded, unable equally to turn 
their leisure to any rational or cultivated account, 
and I ask myself this: Ought we to be content 
with a state of civilization in which these things 
are possible, and should it not be part of our duty 
so to\provide for posterity that they may have 
within their reach a happier, more cultivated, and 
wider life?” 


Again he expressed the same ambition when 
he said in the House of Commons: 


‘* What is it that we desire, in a broad way, for 
our people? That they should be good citizens, 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 61 


reverent and dutiful, sound in mind and body, 
skilled in the practice of their several avocations, 
and capable of turning their leisure to a rational 
use.”’ 


In making a plea for an additional grant for 
education (1917), after citing the figures relating 
to the expenditure on education in England—some 
£16,000,000 paid out of the taxes, another 
£17,000,000 out of the rates and perhaps 
£7,000,000 out of fees, voluntary contributions and 
endowments, making a total of £40,000,000, or 60 
crores of rupees in Indian coin, the Rt. Hon. Mr. 
Fisher rightly pointed out: ‘‘ But when we are 
considering a form of productive expenditure 

which is not only an investment but an insurance, 
that question cannot stand alone. We must ask a 
supplementary question. .We must ask not only 
whether we can afford-to spend the money.”’ And 
he called the ‘ supplementary ’ question the ‘ more 
important and more searching. In spite of the 
universal cry for ‘economy’ Mr. Fisher main- 
tained that‘ we should economize in the ‘‘ human 
capital ’’ of the country, our most precious posses- 
sion, which we have too long suffered to run to. 
waste.’ 


Some of the passages in Mr. Fisher’s speeches: 
are very relevant to those trying to find out how 
far national efficiency to-day depends on adequate 
mass education. While introducing a new Edu- 
cation Bill on August 10, 1917, when England was: 
in the midst of the titanic struggle of the World 
War, Mr. Fisher discussed some aspects of this. 
question : 


62 UNHAPPY INDIA 


** Attention has been increasingly directed to 
the close connection between educational and 
physical efficiency. One of the great dates in our 
social history is the establishment of the school 
medical service in 1907. We now know what we 
should not otherwise have known, how greatly the 
value of our educational system is impaired by the 
low physical condition of a vast number of the 
children, and how imperative is the necessity of 
raising the general standard of physical health 
among the children of the poor, if the great part of 
the money spent on our educational system is not 
to be wasted.” 


To Mr. Fisher one of.the lessons of the War 
was the clear indication of how education improves 
oe al efficiency. Speaking at Bradford he 
said : 


‘* Have you ever reflected, ladies and gentle- 
men, upon the astonishing influence which educa- 
tion has exercised over the course of this titanic 
conflict? how-those countries have best succeeded 
who have equipped themselves with a modert 
provision. of education, and how those countrie! 
have succeeded least who have been most. back: 
ward\in their provision of popular education? ! 
suppose there has never been a war in which thé 
contending armies have been so well educated, 0! 
in which the contending armies have owed so much 
to science and education. And whether you talb 
to the officers at the front—who will all. speak } 
you of the value which they attach to a well: 
educated non-commissioned officer or private—o! | 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION. 63 


whether you go to the headquarters staff, or 
whether you go to the great munition factories and 
sources of military supply, you always have the 
same answer to the same question. Always you 
will be told that education is the keynote of effi- 
ciency.’ [Italics are ours. | . ‘ 


Miss Mayo has ventured to offer some remarks 
on learning and earning. She tries to.concentrate 
her scorn for Indians in her chapter head, ‘ Give 
Me Office or Give Me Death.’ Infinitely nobler is 
the following from Mr. Fisher’s Manchester 
speech : | 


*“T venture to plead for a state of society in 
which learning comes. first and earning comes 
second among the obligations of youth, not for one 
class only but for all.young people. At present 
the rich learn and the poor earn. 


“Education is the eternal debt which maturity 
owes to youth. Now I do not care whether youth 
be poor or rich, we owe it education—all the edu- 
cation which it can afford to receive and all the 
education which we can afford to give.” 


It is no use expecting youth to put learning 
before earning where the eternal debt of education 
is so inadequately discharged as in India under 
British administration. | 


One would have thought that coming from 
America Miss Mayo would bring to bear on the 
problem of education in India a broad and en- 


64 UNHAPPY INDIA 


lightened outlook. But her sole object was to 
whitewash British rule and to denounce Indians. 
She makes much of the fact that by the Reforms of 
-1919 education is a Transferred subject in charge 
of Indian Ministers and that now the responsibi- 
lity of neglecting it lies on their shoulders. Here 
again she has shown an utter lack of understanding 
of the real problem. She has failed to see that the 
Indian Ministers are not quite free agents in the 
matter, Nationalist India has been crying itself 
hoarse over the unjust distribution of revenues 
between the Reserved and the Transferred sub- 
jects. The latter have no chance of being rapidly 
improved, because the distribution of revenues 
rests neither with the representatives of the veople 
nor with the Ministers,.but with the autocratic 
executive. The top-heavy administration which 
readily sanctions an addition of over a crore 
of rupees to the already exorbitant emoluments 
of the Imperial services and which has _ been 
spending about eighty crores per year on the mili- 
tary has never allowed sufficient money to the 
nation-building departments made over to the 
Ministers...Says Mr. Richey, the Education: Com- 
‘missioner to the Government of India :* 


_¢ “The. straitened finances of the central and 
local governments of India at the present time 
preclude any hope of striking educational develop- 
ments in the immediate future. The new provin- 
cial ministries of education, after successfully 
combating the attack on their schools, are now . 


. * Para. 39 of the Eighth Quinquennial Review of the Progress 
of Education in India, volume I. 


PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA. 


Founder of the Hindu University, Benares, and Uncrowned 
King of Hindu India. 


1264 


GOPAL KRISHNA GOKHALE. 


65 


13 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 65 


taking stock of their educational position with a 
view to systematic advance when the necessary 
funds are forthcoming. In such an advance, it is 
evident from the keen interest shown by the new 
Councils, they will have the support of public 
opinion...” 


In England a Fisher might tell his people that 
education is an investment even in the time of the 
Great War. The universal cry of economy would 
not deter him from planning out new and big 
programmes of mass education..If he were an 
Indian Minister he would be told by Mr. Richey, 
‘There is no short cut to educational reform.’ 


That the Ministers’. chief difficulty is that of 
finding finances is again made clear by Mr. Richey 
when he says :* 


“The financial inequalities of the provinces 
cannot but profoundly affect -their educational 
policies. While Bombay with its large and grow- 
ing revenues. can contemplate the early and 
general introduction of compulsory pene 
education, it is out of the question for Bengal wit. 
its restricted and inelastic resources to consider 
ahy such project. Since a well-organized system 
of education is one of the most potent factors in 
economic, social and political development the 
ultimate effect of such provincial divergencies can 
hardly be over-estimated.”’ 


* Para. 20 of the Eighth Quinquennial Review of the Progress 
of Education in India, volume I, 


9 


66 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Commenting on the excerpts from Mr. Fisher’s 
speeches. I wrote in my book :* 


“To us in India Mr. Fisher’s words are of 
greater significance than those of educators, 
equally well placed, of other countries, because of 
our political connection with England. Here is 
the chief educational authority of the Empire 
laying down certain principles and expounding 
truths which are, according to him of general 
application in all self-respecting, progressively- 
minded communities. We, the Indians in India, 
are not yet free to determine. our educational 
policy. Even with the promise of educational 
autonomy to the provinces,~the last word will 
ractically remain with the Imperial Government. 
‘The progress of popular education in India must, 
for along time, depend on the goodwill of the 
British officials in charge of policies and vested 
with powers over-revenues and funds.”’ 


' ~ The words are as true to-day as they were in 
1918. Having studied the educational policies of 
the various civilized nations of the world I stated 
in my book on Indian education ‘certain general 
principles which I may here summarize : 


1. National education, being the surest and 
the. most profitable national investment, is as 
necessary for national safety as the military provi- 
sion for physical defence. Universal popular 
education must be provided for by the State, and 
should be the first charge on State revenues. Any 
attempt to provide for nation-wide education by 

* National Education in India, pp. 104 et seq. 


A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION 67 


private agencies and private funds is futile, and to 
attempt it is to attempt the impossible. More- 
over it diverts public attention, from the duty of 
the State. A. national system of education must 
be provided for, enforced, financed and controlled 
by the nation, and in performing that function the 
nation must be represented by the State. 


2. The old idea that the State was concerned 
with making provision for elementary education 
alone is also gone. All over the world it is re- 
cognized that the duty of the State does not end 
with elementary education.. The economic -and 
industrial efficiency of the nation depends upon 
technical and industrial education, and that also 
must be provided for by the State. Nor can the 
State ignore the necessity of higher education, for 
intelligent and efficient leadership depends on 
that. 


3. Education does not consist in imparting a 
certain amount/of book knowledge and teaching 
the three R’s. It includes provision for the phy- 
sical development of the young. It embraces a 
provision for the general health of the child, 
including feeding, if necessary, to such an extent 
as to ensure the fullest benefit to the child from the 
provision for his education made by the State. 


*The United States Federal Government in 1923-24 spent 
$1,808,321,420 on academic education alone as compared with 
$555,077,146 spent in 1913, and from 1918 to 1926 the Federal 
Government alone spent about 38 million dollars on vocational 
education and now spends over 7 million dollars every year. 
See American Year Book, pp. 1072 and 1110. 


68 UNHAPPY INDIA 


4. In short, the duty of bringing up and 
educating the child with a view to helping him to 
become an efficient, intelligent and prudent citizen 
rests with the State and the State must be made to 
fulfil it. It no longer depends on the capacity or 
willingness of the parents. 


CHAPTER VI 
HISTORY OF COMPULSORY PRIMARY EDUCATION 


The history of compulsory primary education 
in India is sufficiently illustrative of the step- 
- motherly intentions of the British Indian Govern- 
ment. The first Bill for this .reform. was intro- 
duced by the late Mr. Gokhale in the old Imperial 
Legislative Council in 1911. It was opposed by 
the Government on the usual specious grounds : 
‘time is not yet for such a measure,’ ‘funds are not 
-available to meet the necessary expenses,’ ‘the 
masses are opposed to. compulsion on religious 
grounds,’ etc. | 


The second attempt was made in 1916 by the 
Hon’ble Mr. V. J. Patel, whose Bill sought permis- 
sion for certain advanced portions of the 
Presidency.of’ Bombay to introduce legislation 
through. municipalities for making primary 
education free and compulsory if the local 
authorities so desired and if they were willing to 
abide by certain conditions laid down by the 
Government. The Bill was. thrown out by the 
official majority in the Bombay Provincial Council 
on the pretext that the passage of such a Bill would 
be a violation of the educational policy of the 
Imperial Government, which had declared in 1913 
‘that time for such compulsory legislation in 

_primary education has not yet arrived.’ 


70 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The subsequent history is given in paras. 
190 and 191 of the Education Report for 1917-1922, 
which shows that in most cases the initiative in 
pressing these measures was taken by a Hindu 
member. The working of the compulsory primary 
education measure has been left to the discretion 
of local bodies. In speaking of the working of 
this measure Miss Mayo quotes one paragraph. 
from Mr. Richey’s report relating to the Punjab. 
She very wisely omits to mention the progress 
made in other provinces and also of the reasons 
why progress has not been more rapid. For 
example, in para. 195 Mr. Richey observes : 


“Compulsion has been-introduced under the 
Act of 1920 in a number of: wards in the city of 
Bombay. There has been a fifty per cent. increase 
in the number of schools and school-children, and 
in the number of trained teachers and a propor- 
tional increase in the general and medical 
inspectorate; a novel feature has been the appoint- 
ment of lady superintendents. The total expendi- 
ture on education in the municipality has increased 
350 per cent.” 


The statement made by Miss Mayo on page 
176 about ‘the Hindu element in the Punjab 
Legislative Council’ having attempted to exempt 
from school attendance all ‘ untouchables ’ other- 
wise known as ‘depressed classes’ is a lie, pure 
and simple. On the other hand, the following 
questions and answers taken from the proceedings 
of the Punjab Legislative Council for 1922-23. will 
show how keenly the Hindu members have 


COMPULSORY PRIMARY EDUCATION 71 


interested themselves in the cause of the depressed 
classes : a 


Q. 2211. Lala Atma Ram: 


(2) Will Government be pleased to enquire 
as to what is being done by other provincial 
governments to ameliorate the educational condi- 
tion of the depressed classes? 


(b) Will Government be pleased to consider 
the advisability of ameliorating their-educational 
condition by means of special. scholarships and 
stipends in the Primary and Secondary Schools of 
the Punjab? ‘ 


The Honourable Khan Bahadur Mian Faal-i- 
Hussain, the Government Minister for Education: 


(a) Enquiry hasbeen made from other provin-. 
cial governments whose replies are awaited. 


(6) The education of the depressed classes is 
already engaging the attention of the Government 
which has taken two steps in the direction of en- 
couragement. Aid and recognition have been 
given tothe training classes for the depressed 
classes at Moga, and under the new grant-in-aid 
rules, increased financial assistance may be given 
to private schools which entertain trained teachers. 
Government has also laid down the principle that 
its grants for the introduction of compulsory 
education are meant for the benefit of all classes 
of the community without any exception, but it is 
for the local bodies concerned to decide how the 
education of the depressed classes should be 


72 UNHAPPY INDIA 


provided for, whether in separate schools or in the 
ordinary schools. Government does not desire to 
lay down any rigid rules. 


As early as January 1922 (the Reformed 
Councils began to operate only from 1921) Mr..K. 
L. Rallia Ram moved a resolution asking~ the 
Government to set apart a sum of 10 lakhs for the 
benefit of the depressed classes. An amendment 
was proposed to reduce the sum to 3 lakhs. Rao 
Bahadur Lt. Balbir Singh and .Mr. Motilal 
Kaistha, Hindu members of the Council, opposed 
the amendment and supported the-original resolu- 
tion. This resolution was opposed on behalf of 
the Government, but, the latter giving an assur- 
ance of sympathetic consideration, was with- 
drawn. In 1923 again a Hindu member asked 
the following question : 


** Q. 2721. Rai Sahib Lala Thakur Das: 

Will Government be pleased to state: 

“(a@) what has been done since 1st January, 
1921 for the education of the depressed classes; 


**(0)-how much money has been spent in this 
behalf since January ist, 1921, up till now, and 
also how much it is proposed to be spent during the 
remainder of the current financial year; 


“(c) what results have been achieved so far? 
* The Honourable Khan Bahadur Sir Fazl-i- 
Hussain: 


It is hoped that the information required by 
the honourable member will be found in a circular 
letter, a copy of which is laid on the table.” 


COMPULSORY PRIMARY EDUCATION 73 


The last paragraph of the circular letter 
referred to in the above answer is worth quoting : 


“The Minister desires to take this opportunity 
of expressing hig appreciation of the efforts made 
by local bodies and philanthropic societies on 
behalf of depressed classes and communities; and 
he igs anxious, even in this time of acute financial 
stringency, to afford them all the encouragement 
and assistance at his command. In this noble 
work, he relies much on the co-operation of private 
effort; and much also on the desire of the com- 
munity to help itself, a desire which has already 
expressed itself in some parts of the province. He 
trusts, therefore, that the satisfactory results of 
the last few years are merely a prelude to a far 
greater improvement in the near future, and that 
the Punjab will rise to its opportunities and will, 
as a whole, take a lead in the removal of illiteracy 
and ignorance from its midst, and in the breaking 
down of the barriers between the depressed classes 
and those more fortunately circumstanced in life.” 


This is only with regard to one province. 
Similar efforts have been made in other provinces 
by. Hindus of light and pies, to uplift and 
educate the depressed classes. Yet Miss Mayo 
deliberately tries to give an impression that the 
Hindus are opposed to this. As one engaged in 
this work I can say that lakhs of rupees have been 
‘spent by me and my co-workers on this work ever 
since I returned from America in 1920. I started 
on this work as early as 1910 with large donations 
from my own purse. — ; ae, 


CHAPTER VII 


WHY IS LIGHT DENIED?’ 


Miss Mayo ignores all these facts recorded in 
the Indian Government’s own official documents. 
Sober truth does not produce. shilling shockers. 
~For these the Mother India method of putting 
down everything to the exaggerated sexuality 
of Indians comes so handy. In her chapter, 
‘Why is Light Denied?’ Miss Mayo tries to 
account for the wide-spread illiteracy in India. 
Village education cannot. be undertaken without 
women teachers, she tells us. And women 
teachers would not go.out to villages, for ‘ Indian 
women of child-bearing age cannot safely venture 
without special protection, within reach of Indian 
men,* This\wicked libel on the Indian nation 
is totally unwarranted. In sex morality the 
average Indian villager is infinitely firmer, 
stronger..and nobler- than men in Europe and 
America. I say this after experience of nearly 
half the inhabited world. Miss Mayo quotes in 
her. support a sentence from the Calcutta 
University Commission Report, which. in her 
context passes for the opinion of the Commission 


* Mother India, p. 186. 


‘ WHY IS LIGHT DENIED?’ 15 


themselves,* whilst the fact is that Miss Mayo’s 
- excerpt is part of a paragraph quoted by the 
Commission. ‘Their own remarks are confined to 
saying that ‘the lot of the women teacher is made 
extraordinarily hard by the prejudices which 
environ her’ The words italicised by us are 
something substantially different from the conten- 
tion Miss Mayo seeks to support. They also give 
the real meaning of the passage from the witness’s 
evidence---which Miss Mayo has cited as the 
Commission’s opinion—deploring the lack of a 
sense of ‘ chivalry and respect.” for a woman who 
does not live in the zenana.. Rightly or wrongly 
zenana-life is the test of respectability in rural 
Bengal.t Does this statement, made with 
reference to Bengal only, justify the sweeping 
accusation that Miss Mayo makes against all 
Indians? . 


Equally wicked and malicious is the state- 
ment ascribed to the head of an American Mission 
College in Northern India. There is no means of 
verifying its authenticity. 


(On page 191 Miss Mayo quotes from The 
Education of India, by Mr. Arthur Mayhew, late 
Director of Public Instruction in the Central 


*“The Calcutta University Commission...exprested the point 
as follows: ‘The fact has to be faced that until Bengali men 
generally learn the rudiments of respect and chivalry toward 
women who are not living in zenanas, anything like a service of 
women teachers will be impossible.’’’ (Mother India, p. 188). 


t Though not very much in the towns, nor in Madras and 
several other provinces, as admitted by Miss Mayo herself. 


6 


Provinces. 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


In quoting Mr. Mayhew she omits just 


a few words to convey a wrong impression. Let 
the pillory of parallel columns expose her trick : 


“A far ‘more serious objec- 
tion is the difficulty...to safe- 
guard these ladies who’ take 
up work outside the family 
circle. Their employment 
without offence or lapse seems 
possible only in mission settle- 
ments and schools under close 
supervision. In a _ general 
campaign they [widows] can 
play only an _ insignificant 
part.” ,~As found in Mother 
Lndia.] 


Outside the family circle. 


“A far more serious objec- 
tion is the difficulty of providing 
suitable residence a com- 
panions, in order to safeguard 
these ladies who take up) work 
Their 
employment without, offence or 
lapse seems possible only in 
mission settlements and schools 
under close.supervision. In a 
general campaign they [widows] 
can play only an insignificant 
part.’ [As in the original.] 


Dishonest dots! How by keeping out just 
four words they give quite a different meaning to 
the passage! But it is\a trick of the trade Miss 
Mayo specialises in. That an Indian widow 
going out to an out of the way village cannot live 
without suitable residence and wihout companions 
certainly does not mean that being of ‘ child-bear- 
ing age’ she ‘ cannot safely venture within reach 
of Indian men.’ 


The nature of the prejudice against women 
teachers. is described thus in the Census Report 
for the U. P. in a passage cited by Miss Mayo :* 


‘It is said that there is a feeling that the 
calling cannot be pursued by modest women. 
Prima facie, it is difficult to see how such a, feeling 
could arise, but the Indian argument to support it 
would take, probably, some such form as this: 
‘ The life’s object of woman is marriage; if she is 


* Census of India, 1911, vol. XV, p. 229. 


*‘ WHY IS LIGHT DENIED?’ FF 


married her household duties prevent her teaching. 
If she teaches, she can have no household duties 
or else she neglects them. If she has no house- 
hold duties she must be unmarried, and the only 
unmarried women are no better than they should 
be. If she neglects her household duties, she is, 
though in a different way, no better than she 
should be!” 


Perhaps the real strong reason for the paucity 
of women teachers is that there are no spinsters in 
India.* 


The sex ratio in Great Britain and other 
European countries gives rise to certain compli- 
cations, no doubt. But it also provides a contin- 
gent of women teachers who do useful work. In 
India the sex ratio leaves no army of spinster 
teachers. The married woman teacher is not so 
common in several European countries. We 
understand in the post-War years educational 
authorities_in the United Kingdom have been 
imposing restrictions afresh to discourage the 
married woman teacher. 


It is notoriously difficult, says Miss Mayo, 
quoting the authority of the Qinguennial Review 
of Education in Eastern Assam and Bengal, ‘ to 


*“Tt is.safe to say that after the age of seventeen or eighteen 
no females are unmarried who are not prostitutes or persons 
suffering from some bodily affliction such as leprosy or blindness; 
the number of genuine spinsters over twenty is exceedingly 
small, and an old maid is the rarest of phenomena!’ (Census 
of India, 1911, vol. XV, re the United Provinces, p. 229.) 


78 . UNHAPPY INDIA 


induce women of good position, other than 
Christians and Brahmos, to undergo training for 
the teaching profession; and even of those who 
are trained...the majority refuse to go to places 
where they are wanted.’ 


Yes. But how could ‘women of good \posi- 
tion’ be induced to go to distant villages when 
the scale of pay for the village primary schools is 
so low? Says Mr. Richey,* in the Eighth Quin- 
quennial Review on Education (covering the years 
1917-22) : ‘ The rise in cost does undoubtedly re- 
present in most provinces a real improvement in 
the conditions of the teaching profession...Accord- 
ing to the latest scales introduced in April 1921 
{in the U, P.] untrained, assistants receive as a 
minimum Rs. 12 [$5.00] per mensem, trained 
assistants Rs. 15 to-Rs. 20 [$5.00 to $6.50] and 
headmasters Rs. 20.rising to Rs. 30.2. In Madras, 
it is stated, the pay has been raised to Rs. 10 
(about $3.00) a month for untrained teachers and 
Rs. 12 a month for trained ones. In Bengal the 
estimated. pay is Rs. 8 to Rs. 16 per mensem. In 
Assam, for trained teachers the minimum monthly 
pay has been raised from Rs. 8 to Rs. 12. So on 
for other provinces. We know as a fact, before 
this ‘real improvement’ was effected, primary 
school teachers used to be paid Rs. 6 to Rs. 8—a 
scale of wages lower than that of coolies! While a 
‘man might have managed to eke out this miser- 
able scale of income by other work, a woman may 
not. So Rs. 6 to Rs..12 a month determines the 


*Paras. 202 et. seg. 


‘ WHY. IS LIGHT DENIED?’ 79 


ability and the skill in the teaching staff insisted 
upon by Mr. Paul.* 


When Miss Mayo speaks of the Indian village 
school teacher as a ‘ dreary incompetent,’ and-as 
a ‘heavy blanket slopped down’ upon a helpless 
mass of weaklings she has to keep in mind that 
one month’s wage of the village teacher is in 
general not enough to buy a copy Mother India. 
You cannot get 20 dollars worth of competence if 
‘you pay only 2 dollars a month.t 


There is a moral to Miss Mayo’s story of. 
Indian education, which is sought to be brought 
home to the reader by two contrasted pen-pictures 
In the first of these, with which the chapter, “‘ A 
Counsel of Perfection,” opens, we are shown a 
‘‘ respected Hindu | nobleman,” of unknown 
identity whom she charges with having neglected 
his village home with its ‘ disease, dirt and ignor- 
ance,’ in spite of his prosperity in the legal pro- 
fession. In contrast we are shown a ‘ Mussalman 
land-owner.’ in the Punjab who is alleged to have 
done so much for his tenants in his village. But 
unmistakably the land-owner’s chief qualification 
to earn Miss Mayo’s approval is that he ‘ strongly 
objects to Government’s new policy of rapid [!] 
Indianization of the public services,’ and ‘ takes 
no interest in Sward] politics. The whole object 


* Quoted by Miss Mayo on p. 4 


tin Great Britain the minimum salary of certificated 
teachers is £250 per annum and that of uncertificated ones £145 
(Labour Year Book for 1926, p. 273). In America, the average 
salary of teachers exceeds $1,248 a year. (American Year Book 
for 1925, p. 1092). 


80. UNHAPPY INDIA 


of Miss Mayo’s visit to India and of writing her 
book is once again emphasized when we find this 
study in contrasts is followed by the following chit 
to the British Deputy Commissioner : 


** But it is only to the Briton that the Indian 
villager of to-day can look for steady, sympathetic 
and practical interest and steady reliable help in 
his multitudinous necessities. It is the British 
Deputy District Commissioner, none other, who is 
‘his father and his mother’ and.-upon the mind 
of that Deputy District Commissioner the villagers’ 
troubles and the villagers’ interests sit day and 
night.” 


Tue Rr. Hon’ste Mr. S. SRINIBAS SASTRI. 
Head of the Servants of India Society. 


14—80 


Life Members of the Servants of India Society, Poona. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE HINDU CASTE SYSTEM 


Considered historically, the present caste 
system is a remnant of medieval times. In 
ancient India caste was by no means so rigid.or 
exclusive. In Buddhistic and post-Buddhistic 
periods the castes and sub-castes multiplied and 
gradually became more rigid. Originally there 
were only four castes. Then developed a large 
number of occupational castes corresponding to the 
medieval trade guilds—institutions which have 
given the central idea for the school of modern 
thinkers known as Guild Socialists, whose leaders, 
like Mr. Penty, want to bring back the social 
organization of the ‘ merrie England’ days and 
call it ‘ post-industrialism.’ . 


Scholars differ as-to what exact part each of 
the various factors—race, occupation, etc.— 
played in the evolution of Indian castes. Sir 
Denzil Ibbetson, Census Commissioner, and later 
Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, discussed the 
question.at length in his Census Report.* Accord- 
ing tohim the various factors were tribal divisions 
common to all primitive societies; the guilds based 
upon, hereditary occupation ‘common to the 
middle life of all communities; the exaltation of 
the priestly office and of the Levitical blood, and 


* Punjab Caates (reprinted from Ibbetson’s Report), Govern- 
ment Press, Lahore, 1916, pp. 9 et. seg. 


10 


82 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the ‘ preservation and support of this principle by 
the elaboration from the theories of the Hindu 
creed or cosmogony of a purely artificial set of 
rules regulating marriage and intermarriage, 
declaring certain occupations and foods to. be 
impure and polluting, and prescribing the condi- 
tions and degree of social intercourse permitted 
between the several castes.’ ‘‘ Add to these,” says 
Ibbetson, “‘ the pride of social rank and the pride 
of blood which are natural to man, and which 
alone could reconcile a nation to restrictions at 
once irksome from a domestic, and burdensome 
from a material point of view; and it is hardly to 
be wondered at that caste should have assumed 
the rigidity which distinguishes it in India.’’ 


Mr. Nesfield, however, who studied the ques- 
tion as Census Commissioner for Agra and Oudh. 
considers that the classification into castes is based 
solely on occupation. ‘* Function and function 
only,” says he, ‘‘ was the foundation upon which 
the whole caste system of India was built up.”* 
To him ‘each caste or group of castes represents 
one or other of those progressive stages of culture 
which have marked the industrial development of 
mankind not only in India, but in every other 
country in the world wherein some advance has 
been made from primeval savagery to the arts and 
industries of civilized life. The rank of any caste 
as high or low depends upon whether the industry 


*Nesfield, 4 Brief View of the Caste System in North-Western 
Province and Oudh. (Quoted in The People of India by Sir 
Herbert Risley, 2nd edition, Calcutta, 1915, pp. 265 et. seq.) 


CASTE SYSTEM 83 


represented by the caste belongs to an advanced or 
backward stage of culture.’ 


From Census officials we turn to historians. 
M. Senart,* the French Indologist, sees in Hindu 
caste only a parallel of the Roman and Greek sys- 
tems. Risley represents M. Senart as maintaining 
that caste is the ‘ normal development of ancient, 
Aryan institutions, which assumed this form in 
the struggle to adapt themselves to the conditions 
with which they came into contact in India.’ M. 
Senart relies greatly upon the general parallelism 
that may be traced between the social organization 
of the Hindus and that of the earlier Greeks and 
Romans. He points out.a close correspondence 
‘between the three series of groups, gens, curia, 
tribe at Rome; family, phratria, phuli in Greece : 
and family, gotra, caste in India.’ He seeks to 
show ‘ from the records of classical antiquity that 
the leading principles which underlie the caste 
system form part of a stock of usage and tradition 
common, to all, branches of the Aryan people.’ 
Regulation of marriage by caste was by-no means 
peculiar to India, for, as M. Senart points out, the 
Athenian genos and the Roman gens present strik- 
ing resemblances to the Indian gotra. ‘ We learn 
from Plutarch that the Romans never married a 
woman of their own kin, and among the matrons 
who figure in classical literature none bears the 
same gentile name as her husband. Nor was 
endogamy unknown. In ‘Athens in the time of 


pn! Castes d’ans PInde. (Quoted by Risley, op. cst., pp. 267 
et. seq. d , 


84 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Demosthenes membership of a phratria was con- 
fined to the offspring of the families belonging to 
the group. In Rome, the long struggle of the 
plebeians to obtain the jus connubii with patrician 
women belongs to the same class of facts; and the 
patricians, according to M. Senart, were guarding 
the endogamous rights of their order—or ‘should 
we not rather say the hypergamous rights ?—for 
in Rome, as in Athens, the primary duty of marry- 
ing a woman of equal rank did not exclude the 
possibility of union with women of humbler 
origin, foreigners or liberated “slaves. Their 
children, like those of a Shudra.in the Indian svs- 
tem, were condemned to a lower status by reason 
of the gulf of religion that separated their parents. 
We read in Manu how the gods disdain the obla- 
tions offered by a Shudra: in Rome they were 
equally offended by the presence of a stranger at 
the sacrifice of the gens.’ ‘The Roman confarreatio 
has its parallel in. the got kanala or “tribal 
trencher ” of the Punjab, the connubial meal, by 
partaking of which the wife is transferred from her 
own exogamous group to that of her husband.’ 


M.-Senart traces the parallel in notions about 
food also. ‘In Rome as in India, daily libations 
were offered to ancestors, and the funeral feasts of 
the.Greeks and Romans...correspond to the 
Shraddha of Hindu usage, which...is an ideal 
prolongation of the family meal” M. Senart 
seems even to find in the communal meals of the 
Persians and in the Roman charistia, from which 
were excluded not only strangers but any members 
of the family whose conduct had been unworthy, 


CASTE SYSTEM 85 


the analogue of the communal feast at which a 
social offender in India is received back to caste.’ 
Regarding outcasting and the powers of the caste 
panchayat M. Senart points out: ‘‘ The exclusion 
from religious and social intercourse symbolized 
by the Roman interdict aqua et igni corresponds. to 
the ancient Indian ritual for expulsion from. caste, 
where a slave fills the offender’s vessel with water 
and solemnly pours it out on the ground, and to 
the familiar formula hukka pani band karna, in 
which the modern luxury of tobacco takes the 
place of the sacred fire of the Roman excommuni- 
cation. Even the caste panchayat that wields 
these formidable sanctions~has its -parallel in the 
family councils which «in. Greece, Rome and 
‘ancient Germany assisted at the exercise of the 
patria potestas and in the chief of the gens, who, 
like the matabar-of-a caste, decided disputes 
between its members and gave decisions which 
were recognized by the State.” 


Risley .quotes Sir S. Dill* as pointing out 
‘how an.almost Oriental system of caste’ had 
made all- public functions in Rome hereditary, 
‘from the senator to the waterman on the Tiber 
or the sentinel at a frontier post.’ ‘The 
Navicularii who maintained vessels for transport 
by sea, the Pistores who provided bread for the 
people of Italy, the Pecuarii and Suarii who kept 
up the supply of butcher’s meat were all organized 
on a system as rigid and tyrannical as that which 


* Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire, 
1899. See Risley, op. ctt., pp. 271 et, seg. 


86 UNHAPPY INDIA 


prevails in India... Each caste was bound down 
to its characteristic occupation, and its matri- 
monial arrangements.) were governed by the 
curious rule that a man must marry within the 
caste, while if a woman married outside of it, her 
husband thereby acquired her status and had to 
take on the public duties that went with it.’ The 
rigidity of caste in Rome can be imagined from the 
account that follows :t 


‘‘ The man who brought the grain of Africa 
to the public stores at Ostia, the baker who made 
it into loaves for distribution, the butchers who 
brought pig from Samnium, Lucania or Bruttium, 
the purveyors of wine and. oil, the men who fed 
the furnaces of the public baths, were bound to 
their callings from one generation to another. It 
was the principle of rural serfdom applied to 
social functions. Every avenue of escape was 
closed. A man was bound to his calling not only 
by his father’s but by his mother’s condition. 
Men were not permitted to marry out of their 
guild. If the.daughter of one of the baker caste 
married.a man not belonging to it, her husband 
was bound to her father’s calling. Not even a 
dispensation obtained by some means from the 
imperial chancery, not even the power of the 
Church, could avail to break the chain of 
servitude.” 


Even to-day where is the country in which 
caste does not play a prominent part? The 
European critics forget the beam in their own eye 


+ Sir 8S. Dill, quoted by Risley. 


CASTE SYSTEM | 87 


when they chide us for the mote in ours. In 
another chapter we shall say something about the 
attitude of the white people towards the colqured 
races and of the treatment the Negro ‘ citizens’ of 
the United States get from their white ‘Brahmans.’ 
But even if one excludes coloured people—there 
is no justification for such exclusion—do. not 
wealth and birth very largely regulate classes in 
European society? They call them “classes” - 
instead of castes. but spades would be spades, 
call them by whatever name you please. 


Caste in India was a form of social and 
industrial organization just like ‘class’ in modern 
industrial society. The forms differ because the 
conditions of production have changed. Neither 
the primitive tribal order nor the feudalism of the 
middle ages would suit. the new economic condi- 
tions. Caste in India-perfected the artistic sense 
in the craftsman, such as was not found on such 
an extensive scale elsewhere. Its principal evil 
was that it stereotyped society. The present 
system of classes is by no means a perfect system 
and one.of.the great problems of the modern 
thinkeris to find out how to save civilization 
from being wrecked by class antagonism. 


To-day the Indian caste system is beyond 
doubt an anachronism. The debris of the ages 
cannot he mopped away in a day, because India 
is not free to put her house in order. The caste 
system has varied through the ages with the 
‘changing conditions, and there is no reason why 
it should not once again be made to yield place 


38 UNHAPPY INDIA 


‘to.a new order -for the new conditions. If a 
-Vedic Indian happened to visit India any day in 
the post-Buddhistic period he would feel be- 
wildered at the new and complicated system of 
caste prevailing in society. And there can be no 
doubt that a politically free India will lose no 
time in effecting fresh adjustments. As. it is, 
caste has ceased to do us any. good at all, and its 

evils have in certain respects become accentuated: 


It is said the Hindus are caste-ridden, and 
therefore unfit for democracy. It is forgotten 
that the Hindus in the past had at least as much 
of democracy as the Romans and the Athenians. 
The West used to, talk like that also of Japan. Not 
very long ago, that gifted writer, Lafcadio Hearn 
wrote :* 


‘There was @ division also into castes— 
Kabane or Set. (Iuse the term ‘castes,’ following 
Dr. Florenz, a leading authority on ancient 
Japanese civilization, who gives the meaning of 
Sét as equivalent to that of the Sanskrit varna, 
signifying ‘caste’ or ‘colour.’) Every family in the 
three great divisions of Japanese society belonged 
to some caste; and ‘each caste represented at first 
some occupation or calling.” 


Large classes of persons existed in Japan, 
who were literally known as ‘less than men.’ 
Says Mr. Hearn: 


-** Outside of the three classes of commoners, 
and hopelessly below the lowest of them, large 


“* Japan: An Interpretation (Macmillan), p. 260. 


Sir S. R. M. ANNAMALAN CHETTIAR, M.L.C., Madras. 
The donor of 20 lakhs of Rupees for establishing a university 
at Chidambaran. 


6u—L1 
“res e ut Ajor 2a}doo_7; ou) JO syURAIIG OY} JO JoquioU e& Aq peypnpuos 
*(jooyag uBqy sith tonehnA TA Pe spe sy} ye Butspnys soipe] pue spB oy) jo ojyoyd dnois v7 


CASTE SYSTEM 89 


classes of persons existed who were not reckoned 
ag Japanese, and scarcely accounted human 
beings. ‘Officially they were mentioned generically 
as chori, and were counted with the peculiar 
numerals used in counting animals: ippiki, 
nihiki, sambiki, etc. Even to-day they are 
commonly referred to not as persons (Rito) but as 
‘things’ (mono)... To English readers (chiefly 
through Mr. Mitford’s yet unrivalled Tales of Old 
Japan). they are known as Eta; but their appella- 
tions varied according to their-callings. They 
_ were pariah people.” The Hta, we are told, 
*‘ lived always in the suburbs or immediate 
neighbourhood of towns, but only in separate 
settlements of their own.. They could enter the 
town to sell their wares.or to make purchases; but 
they could not enter any shop, except the shop of 
a dealer. in footgear.. As professional singers they 
were tolerated; but. they were forbidden to enter 
any house—so they could perform their music or 
sing their songs only in the street or in a garden. 
Any occupation other than their hereditary 
callings was strictly forbidden to them. Between 
the lowest.of the commercial classes and the Eta, 
the barrier was impassable as any created by 
caste tradition in India; and never was ghetto 
more separated from the rest of a European city 
by walls and gates, than an Eta settlement from 
the rest of a Japanese town by social prejudice. 
No Japanese would dream of entering an Eta 
settlement unless obliged to do so in some official 
capacity.” 


The Eta, and then fhe ‘ pariahs,’ called 


90 UNHAPPY INDIA 


> 


Hinin—a name signifying ‘ not-human-beings. 
‘Under this appellation were included profes- 
sional mendicants, wandering minstrels, actors, 
certain classes of prostitutes and persons out- 
lawed by society. The Hinin had their own 
chiefs and their own laws. Any person expelled 
from a Japanese community might join the Hinin; 
but that signified good-bye to the rest of 
humanity.’ . 


Were the caste-ridden Japanese fit for 
‘progress’ and democracy? Says. Hearn: 


‘© Those who write to-day about the extraordi- 
nary capacity of the Japanese for organization and 
about the ‘democratic spirit’ of the people as 
natural proof of their fitness for representative gov- 
ernment in the Western sense mistake appearances 
for realities. The truth is that the extraordinary 
‘capacity of the Japanese for communal organiza- 
tion is the strongest possible evidence of their un- 
fitness for any modern democratic form of govern- 
ment. Superficially the difference between 
Japanese..social organization and local self-gov- 
ernment in the modern American or the English 
colonial meaning of the terms appears slight; and 
we may justly admire the perfect self-discipline of 
a Japanese community. But the real difference 
between the two is fundamental, prodigious, 
measurable only by thousands of years.” 


Hearn’s gloomy prophecies notwithstanding, 
ali these caste and class distinctions have now 
practically disappeared in Japan because the 


CASTE SYSTEM ‘91 


Government co-operated with the people in the 
matter and used all its influence towards the aboli- 
tion of the distinctions and divisions. Japan has 
been able to overthrow this system because of her 
political and economic independence. If India 
had been free she would have done the same. 


In India the reformers are working against 
heavy odds, for they have to contend against pre- 
judice and ignorance without absolutely any help 
from the State. In fact, the alien bureaucracy 
have devised new methods of perpetuating the old 
system and making it subserve their own ends. 
Recruitment for the army is confined to castes 
called the ‘ military castes.’ It is not every man 
who can pass the fitness tests that will be accepted 
by the recruiting officer.. He must come from one 
of the ‘ military castes,’ who are expected to be 
more ignorant and * loyal ’ than the other castes. 
Then the right to buy land is also regulated by 
caste. In the Punjab they have a list of castes for 
the Land Alienation Act, which are supposed to be 

‘ agricultural castes.’ People who have not been 
actual cultivators for several generations, whose 
chief vocation now is commerce or industry or 
state service are privileged under this Act because 
of their caste label. Such absurdities derive their 
sanction not from the Indian caste system but from 
the imperialist policy of playing off ‘ military and 
agricultural ’ against‘ non-military and non-agri- 
cultural castes ’ and of trying to create a caste of 
* loyalists.’ 


Those who think that the British Government 
and the Christian missionary will rid India of the 


92 UNHAPPY INDIA 


evils of caste, build castles in the air. The bureau- 
cracy only want to give caste a new orientation to 
make it subserve their ends. And it is only the 
superficial observer who thinks that ‘ Christian- 
ity ’ has ‘emancipated ’ the lower caste people, 
whereas Christianity in India is even more super- 
ficial than these observers. The foreign mission- 
ary, who depends on patronage from his own 
country, is anxious to show results in figures, and 
solid qualitative work is neglected. 


Caste in India is by no means confined to the 
Hindu. So far as the industrial orcer of heredi- 
tary vocational guilds is concerned Islam did not . 
affect it much. Caste plays an important part 
even in the life of the Mussalman though he has 
avoided its grossest forms like untouchability. 
Christianity has done not’even that much. As we 
shall see in the next chapter, caste and untouch- 
ability have been..affected but little among the 
converts. 


Hope lies only in a politically free India in 
which the. progressive elements will be as free to 
effect new adjustments as they were and are in 
Japan. Till that day comes we have to continue 
doing our best to overcome the impediments, but 
we know all the time that the results cannot be 
proportionate to our efforts. 


CHAPTER IX 
THE UNTOUCHABLE—HIS FRIENDS AND HIS EXPLOITERS 


Miss Mayo has devoted some chapters to an 
account of untouchability in India. The main 
thesis of the chapters, namely, that untouchability 
exists in India, is true. But Miss Mayo would not 
be her own good self if she stuck to truth alone. 
Her training as a yellow journalist and her love of 
revelling in imaginary melodramatic scenes has 
led her into wild exaggerations and fantastic in- 
ventions. In her picture the shades are deepend 
much beyond what is warranted by reality. The 
brighter side—the rapidly increasing sympathy for 
reform movements and uplift work—seems to be en- 
tirely non-existent. She is most reluctant to give 
due credit to Indian reformers. She naively thinks 
Christianity has always meant the complete eman- 
cipation for the low caste and the untouchable. 
She gives you the impression that the British ad- 
ministrator-is the truest friend of the untouchable 
whom hevis ever trying to rescue from the tyranny 
of the high caste people. Her account, here as 
elsewhere, consists of truths, untruths and the 
most dangerous class of untruths which are called 
half-truths. ‘ 


Take, for instance, her statement on page 152 
of her book. She would have us believe that the 
untouchable converts to Christianity are ‘ all set 
free from caste bondage.’ Alas, they are not. 


94 _ UNHAPPY INDIA 


The following observations of Mr. V. N. Narasim 
Iyengar in the Mysore Census Report* are as 
true of the Madras Presidency as of Mysore. 
They are more or less applicable to the whole of 
India. Says Mr. Iyengar: 


“Roman Catholicism is able to prevail among 
the Hindus more rapidly and easily by reason of 
its policy of tolerating among its converts the 
customs of caste and social observances, which 
constitute so material a part of the Indian social 
fabric. In the course of the investigations 
engendered by the census - several Roman 
Christian communities have been met with, 
which continue undisturbed in the rites and 
.usages which had guided them in their pre- 
conversion existence. “They still pay worship to 
the Kalasam at marriages and festivals, call in 
the Brahman astrologer and Purohits, use the 
Hindu religious marks, and conform to various 
other amenities, which have the advantage of 
minimizing friction in their daily intercourse 
with their Hindu fellow-caste brethren.” 


In.the Census Report of India (1911) we read: 
“ Broadly speaking, it may be said that the 
Catholic Church tolerates, and Protestant Church 
condemns the idea of caste.”t In the same report 
a Roman Catholic Bishop is quoted as having 
said that.‘ the congregations of Southern India 
have been founded on the principle that to be 


* Mysore Census Report, 1891 (quoted in the Oxford edition 
of Dubois’s Hindu Manners, etc.), p. xxvii. 


+ Ibid., p. 60. 


THE UNTOUCHABLE | 95 


baptized a man need not renounce his own casté 
‘and «nationality. They, i.e, the Christian 
converts, have always been so (i.e., Hindus in its 
natural and geographical sense) and are accepted 
‘to be so with the ranks and rights of their respec- 
tive castes. In 1921 the total number of ail 
classes of Christians, Europeans, Anglo-Indians 
and Indians in British India was 4,754,064 of 
whom nearly 30 lakhs were in the Madras Presi- 
dency (and Southern States) alone. The Roman 
’ Catholics in the whole of India numbered 1,823,079. 
Besides these there is a large number of Syrian 
Christian and other sects which are under the 
influence of caste. In many of the Roman 
Catholic churches in Southern India special seats 
are set apart for the different castes of Christians. 


The encomiums.that Miss Mayo has lavishly 
showered on the. British Administration for 
sympathetic zeal for the depressed classes are still 
more unwarranted by facts: Miss Mayo. in- 
sinuates thatthe concern now being shown by 
the Hindus of upper castes for their low-caste 
brethrenis due not so much to humanitarian 
feelings as to the consciousness that in neglecting 
the. untouchables lies a political danger to their 
community. But if political motives influence a 
certain section of the Hindus, they govern entirely 
the love and hate and all the predilections of the 
bureaucracy. The untouchable is a very recent 
discovery to the bureaucratic sympathies. The 
bureaucracy have now realised the great value of 
the untouchables as a weapon against the Indian 
aspirations for Swaraj. Their existence comes 


96 UNHAPPY INDIA 


handy as an argument against nationalist claims 
for democratic government in India. In their 
name they can reserve some seats for their own 
nominees in the legislatures. To enfranchise the 
untouchables might be dangerous for the govern- 
ment, but the paternal pose is good enough when 
it can give it more nominated allies by its side in 
the legislatures. 


One form which the bureaucratic. sympathy 
for the depressed classes has taken is to increase 
the numbers of people belonging to these classes, 
arbitrarily. We know the story of the Census 
Commissioner, who, at his sweet will by one 
stroke of pen transferred thousands of people 
belonging to certain tribes returned as Hindus to 
the category of ‘animists.” Quite as whimsical 
seems to be the attitude adopted in giving the 
numbers of untouchables. Perhaps there is 
method and political motive in this whimsicality. 
In 1917, perhaps for the first time, the Govern- 
ment of India made an attempt to give their 
numbers in their Quinquennial Report on Educa- 
tion. The total population classed according to 
the list.in the Quinquennial Education Report as 
depressed amounted to 31 million persons or ‘19 
per cent. of the Hindu and tribal population of 
British India.’* 


Since then the number has swollen, and in the 
report of 1921 itself the total figures mount up to 
nearly 52.7 millions. This figure possibly includes 
many classes that are really not untouchables at 


*Census of India, 1921, vol. I, p. 225. 


96—8I 


*sasodind aidoryjueyiyd pue jeuoneonpa 10} syye] Aeme UdAIB sey OU AL 
{viva IWIVNNV H.LAS 


Pandit THAKAR DAS BHARGAVA, M.L.A. 


An orthodox Brahmin who in reply to a question in the Legislative 
Assembly said he had no objection to eat food touched by an untouch- 
able or to dine with him. 


19—97 


THE UNTOUCHABLE . 97 


all. The fact is that ‘ a caste reckoned as untouch- 
able or depressed in one locality is not necessarily 
so in another.’ But the Census Commissioner 
guesses that the number may be between 55 and 
60 millions. We may also hazard a guess here: 
Sir Henry Sharp’s education report put the total 
of depressed classes for British India at 31.5 
millions. The table giving this figure. put the 
aboriginal population at nearly 10 millions, and 
the criminal tribes at nearly half a/million. All 
three .categories were for good reason kept 
separate. But if you wanted one-—big figure for 
the untouchables what could be easier than to add 
up these three totals! This simple process would 
give you about 42 millions for British India— 
‘which means about 52 millions for the whole of 
India. Was it by this simple process that the 
Census Commissioner of 1921 got his SCOMBOIVAHYE! 
estimate for the untouchables ?f 


Mr. Coatman;-who edits the Government of 
India’s official year-book, has simplified the situ- 
ation by accepting the higher figure. He through- 
out refers to-the 60 million untouchables. Miss 
Mayo goes further and throughout refers to the 60 
million untouchables of British India. The official 
figures, 53 to 60 millions, are for the whole of India 
including the States. Miss Mayo cleverly mani- 
pulates figures to warrant more sweeping general- 
izations. 


In 1917, i.e., just before the Reforms were 
inaugurated, the State had not yet fully realized 


t+ Sea the Appendix on this subject. 
il 


98 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the political value of the untouchable, and so was 
wasting no patronage on him. 


In the United Provinces, out of an alleged 
total number of 8,374,542 belonging to the de- 
pressed classes, the total number of persons. at 
school was only 10,924, ie., about 1 in 800. \In the 
Punjab out of a total population of over 2 milli- 
ons (2,107,593) there were only 3,453 at-school. In 
the Central Provinces oui of a total population of 
over 3 millions there were only 26,668 at school. 
In Madras alone out of a total. population of 
5,686,342 about one-fifth were at school. These 
figures probably include also Christian converts. 
In Bengal out of a total population of 6,742,913 
about 81,000 were at school: In Bombay out of a 
total of 1,635,896 some 30,568 were at school; in 
Bihar and Orissa out of a total of 1,236,300 persons 
19,841 .were at school. It will be interesting to 
read the whole paragraph in which the measures 
adopted to promote education among these classes 
were enumerated in 1917. 


The one thing to be noted is that while Miss . 
Mayo speaks of the efforts of Christian mission- 
aries in this field, amongst Hindu agencies, she 
mentions only the Servants of India Society and 
omits all mention even of the Arya Samaj work. 


The Quinquennial Report* thus briefiy des- 
cribes the educational work among untouchables 
organised by different agencies : 


* For 1912-17. 


THE UNTOUCHABLE 99 


“The problem is of special importance in 
Madras, where the Paryars, Pallas, Malas, 
Madigas, Holayas and others form the great class 
known as Panchamas. Missionaries, both 
Roman Catholic and Protestant, have been very 
active among this class and have gained many 
converts. The number of departmental ‘schools 
has increased and the Hindu community, as re- 
presented in the depressed classes mission, is 
evincing greater interest in these classes. The 
number of Panchama children at-school has risen 
from 72,190 to 120,607. The total expenditure on 
special schools has risen from Rs. 6.08 lakhs to 
Rs. 8.74 lakhs, to which Government contributes 
Rs. 4.8 lakhs. In Bombay there are 576 special 
schools and classes, of which 211 are maintained 
by local boards, 85 by municipalities and 280 by 
private agencies. These last though conducted 
mainly by Christian Missions, are also run by the 
Depressed Classes. Mission Society of Poona and 
Bombay, aided by State grants. The number of 
pupils has risen from 26,204 to 30,568. It is report- 
ed that there is no great difficulty about the admis- 
sion ofthe lowest castes to primary schools in 
Bengal. . Nevertheless, where these are settled in 
large numbers, Government opens special schools 
for them. Among Indian societies the Bengal Social 
Service League and the Society for the Improve- 
ment of the Backward Classes, Bengal and ‘Assam, 
have opened 19 and 62 schools, respectively. In 
the United Provinces Boards have recently been 
required to open special schools without fees for 
backward or depressed classes when there is a 
demand. The report enumerates the efforts made 


‘100 UNHAPPY INDIA 


in this direction, but admits that the results are as 
yet deplorably small, The Punjab report men- 
tions 44 special schools with 1,022 pupils, and the 
table shows 3,491 pupils under instruction in all 
kinds of schools. The movement for the educa- 
tion of low-caste children is gaining strength, 
chiefly through the exertions of Christian Missions 
and the Arya Samaj. In Bihar and Orissa there 
' are 41 special schools, and Rs. 7,590 was spent on 
these and other special measures. There are 42 
special schools in the Central Provinces, of which 
more than half are maintained by missionaries. 
But this policy has received little encouragement, 
as the administration consistently maintains the 
principle that boys cannot be excluded from the 
common schools on grounds of caste prejudice— 
a principle which the institution of special schools 
would seem to weaken. The effects of such pre- 
judice are gradually disappearing, and low-caste 
boys are less often than previously deterred from 
joining schools for fear of degrading treatment. 
In Delhi there’ are 16 mission schools and one 
municipal school.” 


Since 1917 when the British Government made 
the famous declaration about the political goal of 
British policy in India, great political capital has 
‘been made out of the depressed classes. They are 
a ready weapon in the hands of the reactionary 
Britons against the Home Rule movement. Not 
only the officials in India but the British papers 
‘like the London Times also frequently use the 
backwardness of these classes and their ‘ loyalty 
parades ’ as arguments against the Indian Nation- 


pe nea te 


eee a DN 
i 


THE UNTOUCHABLE 101 


alists. Special demonstrations are got up on 
special occasions, the expenditure being de- 
frayed from secret service and publicity funds 
at the disposal of the Imperial and Provincial 
governments. One of these got up demonstrations 
provides Miss Mayo with one of the captions 
for her chapters, * Behold, a Light,’ and fills 
some half a dozen pages in her book... The 
Prince of Wales is the light whom the untouch- 
ables behold with surprise and grow ecstatic. Miss 
Mayo waxes eloquent, she transforms their sur- 
prise into delight, delight into ecstasy and eee 
into frenzy. 


When the Prince paid: India a visit in 1921, 
the Indian Nationalists declared a boycott of all 
functions and receptions arranged in his honour. 
The officials had, therefore, to fall back upon 
questionable methods, -and at several places they 
imported ignorant people from villages, providing 
free transport for them, and where necessary free 
refreshments, and even new liveries. The people 
came for the sake of the tamasha (i.e., show). The 
loyalty parade described by Miss Mayo possibly 
did take~place. But the minute descriptions in 
detail, of the Prince’s smile and all that, must 
have been provided by her own imagination, and 
were probably intended only to create the impres- 
sion on the reader thatitwas perhaps an eye- 
witness that was writing the description. 
Anyway her account of the feelings of the 
untouchables on seeing the Prince and their 
ecstatic dances appears to people in India to be a 
mere figment of her imagination. 


102 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Nobody but a political propagandist—and 
Miss Mayo undeniably is one—would attach much 
value to such manufactured demonstrations. But 
Miss Mayo in describing the work of the Britisher 
for the untouchable, devotes most of her space to 
such parades and addresses. The whole tenor of 
the chapter betrays the political motive behind 
her venture. 


Yet it cannot be denied that the problem of 
untouchability is a real, live problem—which the 
Hindus are grappling with, with all the serious- 
ness that it deserves. Thousands, literally 
thousands, of Hindus are engaged in carrying on 
active propaganda against it and in organizing 
educational and economic. facilities for the un- 
touchables on which private citizens spend 
hundreds of thousands of rupees every year. 
Miss Mayo’s statement. that ‘ to-day the defenders 
of untouchability-are myriad’ is a miserable lie 
as also the assertion that * few of his [Gandhi’s] 
supporters: have at any time cared to follow him 
so far.’ What happened at the annual Hindu 
Convention of 1926 has also been described by her 
very inaccurately. The ‘squabble’ over the 
resolution relating to the untouchables was 
certainly not ‘ directed against those who would 
relax the pains of the untouchables.’ The dispute 
was over one part and only one part of the resolu- 
tion—the part relating to the right of the ‘ un- 
touchable ’ to enter the Hindu temples. 


AN educated Hindus recognize that untouch- 
ability is a blot on the fair name of Hinduism which 


THE UNTOUCHABLE 103 


must go. Mahatma Gandhi was perfectly right 
when he told Miss Mayo that ‘in spite of oppasi- 
tion untouchability is going, and going fast.’ 
The opposition is becoming weaker and weaker, 
and the movement for the removal of untouch- 
ability is rapidly coming to fruition. 


CHAPTER X 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH . 


One would have thought that the Americans 
would be the last people to declare Hindus to be 
unfit for Swavaj and democracy because of the 
existence of a class of untouchables among them. 
Americans never abdicated their.right of self- 

overnment or allowed other’ people to question 
it, in spite of the existence among them of a larger 
proportion of © untouchables.’ and a severer form 
of untouchability than thatin India. When they 
issued their famous Declaration of Independence 
slavery was an established institution in their 
country. It is less than seventy years ago that 
the American Civil. War, costing hundreds and 
thousands of lives and millions of dollars, was 
fought because of this institution. Even to-day 
the untouchables in India are neither lynched nor 
treated_so brutally as the Negroes in the United 
States are. 


T have visited the United States twice. During 
my second visit I lived there for about five 
years, with an interval of six months spent in 
Japan. I went touring all over the country and 
made a special study of the Negro problem. Ina 


Messrs. BIRLA BROTHERS. 
I. Mr. G. D. Birta. 3. Mr. R. D. Birta. 
2. Mr. J. K. Birta. 4. Mr. B. M. Birta. 


A family who have spent not less than 50 lakhs of rupees for educational 


and philanthropic work including the uplift of untouchability. 
20—104 


SETH CHHAJU RAM. 
A great educational benefactor who has just founded a hospital for 


women at his own cost besides founding several educational institutions. 


21—105 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 105 


book I finished in March 1916 I said:* “ One of 
the things that prompted me to pay a second visit 
to the United States of America was my desire to 
study the Negro problem on the spot and to 
acquaint myself with the methods that are being 
adopted for the education and uplift of the Negro 
population of these States.’ My keen interest 
was due to the fact that— 


“ The Negro is the pariah of America. There 
is some analogy between the Negro problem in the 
United States of America and the problem of the 
depressed classes in India. The two cases are not 
on all fours with each other, but there is a great 
deal common to both. The social problem in the 
United States is, in some of its phases, very 
similar to the social problem in India. Hence my 
desire to study it in. all its bearings on the spot 
and to come in contact with the Negro leaders in 
these States, 80 as to know their point of view from 
first-hand knowledge.” 


In my book I devoted a special chapter to 
* The Negro in American Politics.’ The account 
that follows is largely drawn from that chapter. 


Very stringent laws were made to keep the 
Negro down, to prevent his escape, to secure his 
recapture after escape, to assure the master a 
complete dominion over him. In 1829 when a 
master was indicted for beating a slave, the 


*The United States of America: A an 8 Vapratoe and 
a Study (2nd edition, Calcutta, 1919), p. 


106 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Supreme Court of North Carolina acquitted the 
former and ‘ affirmed the master’s right to inflict 
any kind of punishment upon his slave short of 
death.’ It was not right to suppose, the Court 
went on to say, that the relations of master and 
slave were like those of parent and child. The 
object of the parent in training his son \was to 
render him fit to live the life of a free man, and, 
as ameans to that end, he gave him.moral and 
intellectual instruction. With a slave it was 
different. Chief Justice Ruffin summed up his 
opinion upon this point in these words : 


‘* The end is the profit of the master, his 
security and the public safety; the subject one 
doomed in his own person and his posterity to 
live without knowledge and without capacity to 
make anything his own and to toil that another 
may reap the fruits... Such service can only be 
expected from one who has no will of his own, 
who surrenders his will in implicit obedience to 
that of another. Such obedience is the conse- 
quence only of uncontrolled authority. over the 
body... The power of the master must be absolute 
to render the submission of the slave perfect.” 


The treatment which the Negro. received at 
the hands of his master under these conditions of 
law may better be imagined than described. 


/ The cruelties that were inflicted during all 
this period of slavery from 1619 to 1865 on the 
Negroes beggar description. There is nothing 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 107 


parallel to that in the history of India, or for the 
matter of that in the whole history of Asia. When 
in 1865 the Northern States of the United States 
were engaged in acivil war with the -Southern 
States on the ostensible ground of Negro emanci- 
pation, liberty-loving Great Britain sided with. the 
South—the same Great Britain whom Miss Mayo 
extols to the seventh heaven for philanthropic and 
humane work in India. Humane indeed! 


Between 1792 and 1834 the four borderin 
States, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia . an 
Kentucky denied suffrage to the Negro. In 1835, 
North Carolina excluded him from the suffrage. 
New Jersey took away the sufirage of the Negro 
in 1807, Connecticut in 1814 and Pennsylvania in 
1838. ‘** These changes,” says Booker T. 
Washington, ‘‘ were all evidences of the steady 
growth in the United States, both North and 
South, of a caste system which excluded the 
Negro from the ordinary privileges of citizenship 
exclusively upon the ground of his colour. In 
1802 Ohio. demanded a bond of 500 for Negroes 
who came into the state. A Negro, even though 
a free man could not at that time testify in a case 
in which a white man was a party, and Negroes 
were not admitted to the public schools.” Similar . 
provisions were made in other States. In 1833 it 
was judicially decided that a free Negro was a 
* person ’ and not a ‘ citizen.’ 


‘** In some States [the Negroes] were forbidden 
to sell drugs, in others they might not-sell wheat 


108 UNHAPPY INDIA 


and tobacco, and in still others, to peddle market 
produce or own a boat was against the law. In 
several States it was against the law for a free 
Negra to cross the State line; in others a slave who 
was emancipated was compelled to immediately 
leave the State.” ' 


Slavery was abolished in theory only. For 
there started a campaign of depriving the Negro of 
what he had acquired in theory, bit by bit, show- 
ing, in the words of Miss Mayo, ‘that there are more 
uaye than one to keep the under-dog in his 

ennel.’ 


‘“‘ The resentment and reaction of the South,”’ 
says Mr. Usher,* “‘ caused the insertion of clauses 
in the New Constitution denying with vehemence 
the equality of the white and the black races and 
affirming that Negroes could not be citizens of the 
United States. To coerce the Negroes into working 
* Vagrancy * Acts were passed in several States in 
the fall of 1865 which declared it an offence for 
Negroes over 18 years old to be without ‘ lawful 
employment or business’ or to be found ‘ unlaw- 
fully assembling themselves together—either in 
the day or night time.’ Negroes under 18 years of 
age, “orphans or the children of parents who could 
not or would not shppaty them ’* were to be appren- 
ticed until 21 years old by the clerk of the Probate 
Court at his discretion, preferably to the former 
owners. Mississippi made a similar provision for 
the Negroes who did not pay their taxes, and then 


'*The bie of the American People. 


“ 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 109 


levied a poll-tax of one dollar a head on all Negroes 
‘for the support of the poor.’ The criminal 
statutes provided fines and compulsory work to be 
done by the criminal, for the man who would pay 
in return for the shortest period of service, in such 
elastic offences as ‘ malicious mischief,’ ‘ insulting 
gestures,’ ‘seditious speeches,’ ‘or any other 
misdemeanour.’ ”’ 


Under the guise of apprenticeship or as a 
punishment for debt or crime, they put-Acts on the 
statute book defining poverty and-crime in broad 
and comprehensive terms which ipso facto made 
every Negro guilty. They provided compulsory 
work for Negroes in debt and then had laws passed 
which instantly put every’ Negro in debt. The 
South, besides, very naturally proceeded to elect 
those very men as senators and representatives to 
the United States Congress who had been promi- 
nent in the administrative and military service of 
the Confederacy, and organized a State militia, in 
whose ranks were naturally to be found a large pro- 
portion of confederate veterans who had fought in 
the war.on their side. ‘All this raised the suspi- 
cion ofthe North. They thought that everything 
gained by the war was likely to be lost if they were 
not vigilant: the South was still in rebellion and 
would do everything possible to reduce the Negro 
to the old conditions that obtained before the aboli- 
tion. Hence the tug-of-war between the Re- 
publican Congress and the South. 


The methods resorted to for reducing the 
Negro majorities have been persistently followed 


110 UNHAPPY INDIA 


to practically disfranchise the Negro population 
altogether. To-day the Negro is politically as 
much a zero in the South as he was before the 
emancipation. The present political position of 
the Negro in the United States may be stated in 
the words of another American writer, Mr. Paul 
Leland Haworth : 


‘The provisions of the fifteenth amendment 
prohibiting the denial to citizens of the right to 
vote ‘on account of race, colour, or previous con- 
dition of servitude’ would seemingly stand in the 
way of any legal discrimination against the 
Negro’s political rights; but, as everybody knows, 
ways have been found for evading the constitu- 
tional prohibition. Following the downfall of the 
Reconstruction Governments the Negroes in the 
Southern States were virtually disfranchised by 
force or fraud, butin- 1890 Mississippi evolved a 
plan whereby the end sought could be attained in 
a quasi-legal manner. To-day every one of the 
former Confederate States, except Florida, Arkan- 
sas, Tennessee and Texas have suffrage require- 
ments which practically eliminate the Negro from 
politics, while even in the four States named as 
exceptions he is not much of a factor. By educa- 
tional or property tests the mass of ignorant and 
poor Negro voters are excluded, while loopholes 
are provided for ignorant and poor whites in the 
shape of ‘ Grandfather clauses,’ or ‘ Understand- 
ing clauses,’ which last, white registration officers 
can apply rigidly to Negroes and leniently to 
whites. The avowed purposes of these ‘ suffrage 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 111 


amendments’ was to eliminate the Negro from 
politics and, in spirit, they certainly violate the 
fifteenth amendment, and also lay the States which 
have adopted them liable to that section of the 
fourteenth amendment which provides for a reduc- 
tion in representation in proportion to the number 
of citizens excluded from the suffrage; but. the 
Supreme Court has always carefully evaded the 
constitutional issue, while Congress has not seen fit 
to reduce the representation of any State. In view 
of the existing political situation, it.is improbable 
that anything will be done to nullify the suffrage 
requirements.” 


But that is not all. . In addition to disfranch- 
ising the Negro and eliminating him from politics 
‘by force or fraud ’ the Southern legislatures have 
passed numerous discriminating laws against him. 
In 1910, 26 States-(out of 52) either by statute or 
provision in the constitution forbade the inter- 
marriage of the Negroes with whites. Such mixed 
alliances are declared void, while the contracting 
parties are held guilty of a ‘misdemeanour ’ in. 
some States, of ‘felony ’ in others, and of ‘ in- 
famous crime’ in yet others. The punishment 
varies. from imprisonment for ten years at one 
extreme in certain Southern States to a minimum 
fine of $50 in one, and to no penalty on the Negro 
participant in another. Regarding inter-mingling 
of the races, M. Siegfried remarks that ‘the woman 
may be successfully defended, but the case of the 
negress is very different.’ To get corroboration 
“we have only to compare the colour of the primi- 


112 UNHAPPY INDIA 


"tive Africans with that of the civilized Negroes 
of America.’* 


Besides these, ‘Jim Crow Laws’ are in force 
in all the former Slave States providing for 
separate accommodation for the two races on.rail- 
way carriages and (in some States) on steamboats 
and street-cars. Separate waiting-rooms and ‘rail- 
road dining-rooms are also the general rule. 
Separate cars are usually provided and.on street- 
cars white passengers are usually given front seats 
and coloured passengers the rear seats. It is 
usually impossible for a Negro passenger, however _ 
rich, to obtain a sleeping berth in railway carriages, 
and in case such a passenger in Illinois railway, 
for example, crosses the Ohio river into Kentucky, 
he must give up his berth and retire to the coloured 
coach. Very often also, the railway companies 
provide better accommodation for white passengers 
than for coloured _ones even though they both pay 
the same fare. 


No Southern State permits coloured and white 
children to attend the same public schools and 
some States extend the provision to private schools 
also. One State only recently enacted a law for- 
bidding white persons to teach in coloured schools 
and vice versa. 


Legal distinctions and discriminations are 
‘mostly confined to the South, but race prejudice 


* America Comes. of Age, A. Siegfried (Jonathan Cape, 1927), 
‘p. 99. 


x 


\ ZiI—Zz 


op *shoq @]qey>noyn 10j oWOPY 
4 "ueaysyy INYyYy Wy pueuRyppeIYyS jo Auowas99 Sutuedd 


‘ 


fuiplarg tpueqg yedoy aq fiypuog [ey 140Ysa0 
yO 22040 ‘) VA ) ‘ley qedfery very SwWRYy JuLpYy + 
yy onlay: uppeyrg, [eT + [vy u Ps iey nspy feqqeyy Aewqueajyeg !yqen .« 

“SSB LOC HDUVIY “SHLVIOOSSY GNV SUMANATY “AYOHWT “ALAIOOG Fd0Nd 


“uOpUuRy, SRC] UPR POYSAN | 


Syqen ieyLnyy 


V ‘seq I! 
iL dO SLNVAWMS 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 113 


is to be found practically throughout the United 
States. Negroes are excluded from hotels, from 
Y. M. C. A.’s and Y. W. C. A.’s, from theatres and 
saloons, and are even refused interment in 
cemeteries for the white, in some cases in direct 
violation of local laws! Because of public senti- 
ment Negroes attend separate churches and put up 
at separate hotels and get special seats in» the 
theatres. They are segregated in cities and even 
in country places and kept apart from white people 
in all relations of life. The Negro in the United 
States is worse than a pariah. 


The worst form taken by this race prejudice is 
the ‘ lynching ’ of Negroes accused or suspected of 
crimes against white people, before they have 
been tried and adjudged guilty by any court of 
justice. The ‘Ku Klux Klan’ with its wide 
organization shows American efficiency in this job. 
They have the methods of a secret revolutionary 
society, only they know they can defy ‘law and 
order’ with. much greater impunity. Speaking 
of this mob._violence against the Negro, the author 
of America Comes of Age assures us that ‘ the best 
elements of the community often take part— 
society people, high officials, and even judges... 
they have told me this themselves... The cordial, 
polished gentleman with whom you are talking is 
possibly a murderer who has gone into the wood 
at night to kill a man outnumbered a hundred 
to one; and thousands of others, your friends 
among them may have been his accomplices.’* 


*pp. 98-99. 
12 


114 . UNHAPPY INDIA 
The table appended below and the accounts 
following it will give the reader an idea of the 


extent to which ‘lynch law’ obtains and of the 
flimsy pretexts on which lynching is indulged in. 


Coloured men lynched without trial. 


Year. No. of lynchings. Year. No.of lynchings. 


1885 78 1902 86 

1886 71 1903 86 

1887 80 1904 83 

1888 | 95 1905 61° 
1889 95 1906 64 

1890 90 1907 60 

1891 121 1908 93 
1892 155 1909 73 
1893, 154 1910 65 
1894 - 134 1911 63 
1895 112 1912 63 
1896. - 80 1913 79 
1897 122 1914 69 
1898 102 1915 Sy 
1899 84 1916 55 
1900 107 — * 3917 SA 
1901 107 1918 - 64 


Total .. 2,975 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 115 


The alleged causes for 1914 were: 
No. Percent- 


: age in total. 
Murder ; wie 43 
By rioters and night raiders .. 13 i9 
Personal assaults 10 143 
Rape, attempts at rape, and pre ] | 

sence in women’s rooms 

Robbery and theft — fF 2 
Arson. ts 2 HRN | 
Resistance to search 1 J 


ILLUSTRATIVE MATTER, 1911 


The Crime of being a Negro. 

October 20, Manchester, Ga.—Because he was 
accused of knocking down a white man last night, 
Jerry Lovelace, a Negro, was taken from jail at 
2 o’clock this morning and lynched. There were 
about thirty men in the mob. 


Woman and Child Hanged. 

May 26, Okeman, Oklahama—A coloured 
woman accused of having shot a sheriff was taken 
by a mob and, together with her fourteen year-old 
son, was hanged from a bridge. The woman was 
raped_before she was hanged. 


Five Innocent Men Lynched. 


May 20, Lake City, Fla—Six men were taken 
from jail and lynched ‘ for complicity in the 


*These figures are taken from the Chicago Tribune. The 
Crisis (the organ of the National Association for the Advance- 
ment of Coloured People) believes that the numbers given by the 
Tribune are estimated too low. 


116 UNHAPPY INDIA 


murder of a prominent citizen.’ The lynchers 
came in automobiles and showed the sheriff's 
young son, who had been left in charge of the jail, 
a forged telegram purporting to come from the 
governor and ordering that the prisoners be given 
up. On investigation it was found that only one 
of the six men murdered was even accused. of a 
crime. A quarrel between a white man and a 
coloured man had been brought up before a local 
court and the coloured man had been exonerated. 
Immediately afterwards the white man went into 
the coloured man’s yard with a gun. Shots were 
exchanged and the white man was killed. The 
coloured man gave himself up at once and ‘the five 
men with him were being held merely as_ wit- 
nesses. 


| Wounded Negro Burned to Death. 


August 13, Coatesville, Pa.—There is no need 
to repeat the story of the Coatesville horror. You 
all remember the man who was taken from a bed 
in the hospital.and burned alive for having shot a 
watchman when drunk. His writhing body was 
poked back into the flames as he tried to drag him- 
self away. His teeth and charred bones were kept 
for ‘souvenirs. All arrested for this frolic have 
been acquitted. 


What a Judge Said. 


July, Lawrenceville, Ga.—Judge, Charles H. 
Brand of Lawrenceville Ga., refused to call for 
troops to protect two Negroes who came before 
him for trial, one on a charge of an alleged attack 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 117 


on a white woman; the other for ‘ loitering in a 
suspicious manner.’ 


They were lynched ; one was taken from a train 
where he was in charge of two officers (the train 
stopping while the passengers saw the lynching): 
the other was dragged out of Jail by a mop several 
hundred strong. 


Judge Brand defended his failure to secure a. 
safeguard for the prisoners, saying: 


**T don’t propose to be the engine of sacrific- 
ing any white man’s life for.all such Negro crimi- 
nals in the country... I am in perfect accord with 
my conscience and my.God. I would not imperil 
the life of one white man to save the lives of a 
hundred such Negroes.” 


What Governor Blease Says. 


November 11, Honeapath, 8. C.—Governor 
Blease of South Carolina says, in regard to a recent. 
lynching. in his State, that rather than use the 
power of his office in deterring white men from 

‘ punishing that Nigger brute,’ he ‘ would. have 
resigned his office and come to Honeapath and led 
the mob.’ 


These barbarities continue to-day as they 
were at the time I wrote my book from which I 
have extracted the illustrative matter given above. 
The following accounts taken from some issues of 


118 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The Crisis for 1927 will leave no room for doubt in 
the matter. 


We read in the August issue of that maga- 
zine : 


Lynchings. 


** The recent horrible lynchings in the United 
States, even the almost incredible burning of 
human beings alive, have ‘raised not a ripple of 
interest, not a single protest from the United States 
Government, scarcely a word from the pulpit and 
- not a syllable of horror or suggestion from the 
Defenders of the Republic, the 100 per cent. 
Americans, or the propagandists of the army and 
navy. And this in spite of the fact that the cause 
of the Louisville, ississippi, bestiality was, 
according to the Memphis Commercial-A ppeal, 
‘ wide-spread indignation at the refusal of the 
Negroes travelling in slow, second-handed Fords 
to give road to faster cars.’ And yet hiding and 
concealing this’ barbarism by every resource of 
American, silence, we are sitting in council at 
Geneva and Peking and trying to make the world 
believe that we are a civilized nation.” 


Here is another paragraph from the same 
issue : 


Mob Tactics. 


“There has been developed in the United 
States a regular technique in matters of mob 
violence. Matters move somewhat as follows: 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 119 


‘ A crime is committed. The police hasten to 
accuse @ Negro. This, of course, is popular be- 
cause the white public readily believes in Negro 
crime. A Negro is arrested. If he is promptly 
lynched the police are vindicated and the guilty 

_white persons saved from fear of detection. If 
lynching is delayed but threatened, a mob usually 
attacks the Negro district. This gives'a chance 
for looting and stealing. If any Negroes defend 
themselves, immediately the police, often assisted 
by the militia, promptly disarm-all Negroes and 
charge a number with rioting. Ifany white people 
are arrested for rioting nearly all.of them are dis- 
charged; but the Negroes are held and prosecuted. 
This serves to intimidate the Negro population and 
keeps it from attempting any self-defence, however 
innocent the defenders may be, and in no matter 
how grave danger to life, limb and property.” 


The following»is from the September issue of 
The Crisis - 


The Aiken Lynching. 


“The latest effective piece of agitation which 
we have been able to launch was against lynching. 
We have been fighting lynching for a generation 
but we still have to fight it, and we agitated against 
the Lowman lynching at Aiken, South Carolina. 
South Carolina, known as one of the proud States 
of the South, the home of Southern aristocracy, 
Aiken the winter resort of Northern aristocracy. 
Yet it was in this old State and in this select com- 
munity in-this State’ that within these recent 


120 UNHAPPY INDIA 


months occurred an incident which should cause 
every American to hang his head in shame. Three 
humble Negroes were accused of a crime, accused 
of murder, hastily tried, farcically tried, convicted 
and condemned; a few days still awaiting them 
when their cases were taken up by a coloured 
lawyer of South Carolina, Mr. N. J. Frederick. 
Mr. Frederick appealed these cases to the Supreme 
Court of South Carolina and to the credit of that 
court and to the State, the cases were remanded to 
the Circuit Court for trial. And so, inthe re-trial 
Mr. Frederick, assisted by a Southern white 
lawyer, Mr. L. G. Southard, represented the Low- 
mans, These three Negroes, two.of them men and 
one a woman, were being re-tried in the courts of 
South Carolina and in the course of the trial, upon 
motion of Mr. Frederick; the Judge directed a 
verdict of not guilty for.one of the defendants, and 
it is most probable that the other two would have 
been acquitted. But what happened? On_ that 
night a mob gathered and entered the jail through 
the connivance of the officers of the law and those 
two men and that woman were taken out and shot 
to death.” 


This is what we read about what happened 
in. ‘dark and benighted Mississippi’ in the 
September issue of The Crisis. 


“ Take the case of lynching a few days ago in 
dark and benighted Mississippi. While in New 
York City millions of people were acclaiming 
Lindbergh who had made an achievement which 
‘added to the glory of America, to its name 


Mr. BEHARI LAL CHOWDHARY. 
An untouchable member of the Dehra Dun Municipality. 


Basu PRABHU DAYAL HIMATSINGKA. 


A prominent Hindu social reformer of Calcutta belonging to the 
orthodox community. 


25—121 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 121 


throughout the whole world, and which. added to 
scientific effort and achievement, at that very hour 
when millions of Americans, not only white but 
black, in the City of New York were acclaiming 
Lindbergh, a mob of a thousand or more har- 
barians in Mississippi had taken charge of two 
Negroes, brothers, accused of killing a. slave- 
driving overseer in a sawmill. They took them 
from the hands of the constituted authorities, and 
what did they do with them? They chained them 
to a telegraph pole, baptized them. in gasoline and 
set them afire.” 


The following account will be found in Dr. Du 
Bois’s editorial ‘ postscript’ in The Crisis for July 
1927 : 


Coffeeville, Kansas. 


‘* Two white high school girls in a Kansas 
city of 20,000 inhabitants claim to have been 
raped by Negroes on March 17. Bloodhounds are 
brought.. They lead to the Negro quarter and 
three Negroes are arrested. Two of them are dis- 
charged ‘but the other is held. On March 18 a 
mob of 2,000 attack the City Hallin order to 
lynch this black man. The mob damages the 
City Hall, loots stores and chases Negroes, 
Twenty or more Negroes arm themselves and 
gather in a pool room. Two of their leaders, 
Anderson and Ford, shoot into the mob and check 
it, although themselves desperately wounded. 
They are now under arrest and on trial for 
‘inciting to riot.’. ‘ 


122 UNHAPPY INDIA 


‘Then the truth begins to leak out. The 
white people try to hush the matter up but the 
Negroes petition fora Grand Jury. The Coffee- 
ville Daily Journal acknowledges, May 30, that 
white men and not Negroes were the bedfellows 
of the two girls and one white man is to-day in jail 
charged with rape while one of the girls is also in 
jail as accessory. What comment is adequate?” 


A brief account of the Massacre of East 
St. Louis in 1917 will serve to disillusion those 
who believe in the moral superiority of the white 
man. In this account mark the part played by 
white women and children : ‘ 


Massacre of East St. Louis. 


‘‘The happenings in East St. Louis, Illinois, in 
July 1917, were lynch-law on a wholesale scale. 
The trouble arose. because the employers in East 
St. Louis had imported from the South large 
numbers of Negro workers to replace the white 
strikers. The .white workers took the law into 
their own hands, and started Negro hunting. 
Women, children, the aged, none were spared. 
Negroes’ houses were set fire to—in many cases 
the inmates could not escape. The white police, 
it was admitted even by white journals, for the 
most part, merely stood by or perhaps even helped 
the white rioters. The following account appear- 
ing in St. Louis Star throws light on the attitude of 
the police and militia : 


‘Some of the militia were active in the fray. 
Miss Gruening tells of the two soldiers, members 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 123 


of Troop L, from Loney. She passed them a few 
days after the riot near Cabokia Creek and entered 
into conversation with them. They boasted that 
here 7 ‘ niggers’ were thrown into the creek and 
every time the niggers came up people rocked them 
till they were all drowned.... ‘And how many 
niggers did .you, boys, kill?’ she asked: They 
were modestly uncertain—they were not quite sure 
how many, but they had certainly shot to kill. 
That had been their orders. ‘ What,’ asked Miss 
Gruening, ‘to shoot to kill niggers?’ The 

grinned cheerfully. ‘Oh, no. Only to kill all we 
saw starting fires.’ ‘ And did you see any start- 
ing fires?’ ‘No, all we saw was niggers flying.’ ” 


Miss Gruening reported to the Military Board 
of Enquiry, and offered to identify the boys. The 
Board put her off with evasive replies. 


The NationalAssociation for the Advance- 
ment of Coloured People deputed Miss Gruening 
and Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, the gifted Negro writer, 
to investigate into the outrages. The facts and 
pictures.collected by these two were published in 
Dr. Du Bois’s magazine, The Crisis, for September, 
1917, and make most gruesome reading. The 
accounts here given are summarized from an 
article in The Crisis. 


The Crisis compares the East St. Louis out- 
rages with the so-called German atrocities, and 
says: ‘‘ Germany has nothing on East St. Louis 
when it comes to ‘frightfulness’... In all the 
accounts given of German atrocities, no one, we 


124 UNHAPPY INDIA 


believe has accused the Germans of taking pleasure 
in the sufferings of their victims. But these 
rioters combined business and pleasure.” This is 
supported by Carlos F. Hurd, staff reporter of the 
St. Louis Post-Despatch, who, writing in his paper 
as an eye-witness, says: : 


‘* The East St. Louis affair, as I saw it, was a 
man hunt, conducted on a sporting. basis, though 
with anything but the fair play which is the prin- 
ciple of sport... There was a horrible; cool deli- 
berateness and a spirit of fun aboutit... ‘ Get a 
nigger,’ was the slogan and it was varied by the 
recurrent cry, ‘ Get another.’ It was like nothing 
so much as the holiday crowd, with thumbs turned 
down, in the Roman Colosseum except that the 
shouters were their own gladiators and their own 
wild beasts.”’ 


- There you have the American love of slogans 
and lust for excitement. The jaded senses of the 
American rioters were athirst for something strik- 
ing. They wanted to revel in their grim sport. 
The extreme mechanization of life in America 
creates an. abnormal craving for crazes, stunts, sen- 
sation-mongering, and produces yellow journals, 
and shilling-shockers like Mother India. Such 
orgies have always a peculiar fascination for Ame- 
rican crowds. But for utter joy let it be white 
versus black. 


The St: Louis Post-Despatch writer, continu- 
ing the grim tale of what he himself saw, 
graphically gives the following gruesome account: 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 125 


‘““A Negro, his head laid open by a great 
stonecut. had been dragged to the mouth ofan 
alley on Fourth Street and a small rope was being 
put about his neck. There was joking comment 
on the weakness of the rope and everyone was 
prepared for what happened when it was pulled 
over a projecting cable box, a short distance up 
the pole. It broke, letting the Negro tumble back 
to his knees and causing one of the men who was 
pulling on it to sprawl on the pavement. 


** An old man, with a cap, Jike those worn by 
street-car conductors but showing no badge of 
car service, came out of his house to protest. 
‘Don’t you hang that man.on this street. He 
shouted. ‘How dare you to?’ He was pushed 
angrily away, and a rope, obviously strong enough 
for its purpose, was brought. 


‘* Right here I saw the most sickening incident 
of the evening. »To put the rope around the. 
Negro’s neck one of the lynchers stuck his fingers 
inside the gaping scalp and lifted the Negro’ 8 
head by it, literally bathing his hand in the man’s 
blood. 


“* Get hold, all pull for East St. Louis,’ 
called-a man with a black coat and a new straw 
hat, as he seized the other end of the rope. The 

rope was long, but not too long for the number of 

hands that grasped it, and this time the Negro 
was lifted to a height of about seven feet from thé 
ground. The body was left hanging there.” 


There are numerous accounts as erreur as 
this quoted in the article in The Crisis, 


126 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Even women were not behindhand in this 
Savage saturnalia. Writes Mr. Hurd: 


‘“‘T saw Negro women, begging for mercy and 
pleading that they had harmed no one, set upon 
by white women of the baser sort, who laughed 
and answered the coarse sallies of men as they 
beat the Negresses’ faces and breasts with fists, 
stones and. sticks. I saw one of these furies fling 
herself at a militia man who was trying to protect 
a Negress and. wrestle with him for his bayoneted 
gun, while the other women attacked the refugee. 


“Let the girls have her,’ was the shout as 
the women attacked one. young Negress. The 
victim’s cry, ‘Please, please, I ain’t done nothing,’ 
was stopped by a blow in the mouth with a broom- 
stick, which one of the women swung like a base- 
ball: bat. Another woman seized the Negress’s 
hands, and the blow. was repeated as she struggled 
helplessly. Finger nails clawed her hair and the 
sleeves were torn from her waist, when some of 
the men called, ‘ Now let us see how fast she can 
run.’ The women did not readily leave off beating 
her, but they stopped short of murder, and the 
crying, hysterical girl ran down the street. 


“* An old Negress, a few moments later, came 
along with two or three militiamen, and the same 
women made for her. When one of the soldiers 
held his gun as a barrier, the woman with the 
broomstick seized it with both hands, and 
struggled to wrest it from him, while the other, 
striking at the Negress, in spite of the other 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 197 | 


militiamen, frightened her thorougly and -hurt 
her somewhat.” 


One wanted to ‘ cut the heart out’ of a Negro 
lying paralyzed from a bullet wound! 


When the mob were tired of mere Negro- 
beating, they added to it the excitement of incen- 
diarism. It was good fun seeing ‘ Negroes’ being 
burnt in their houses, or trying to escape from the 
flames only to fall victims to the fury of the mob. 
Even here women took a hand. ‘They pur- 
sued the women who were driven out of the burn- 
ing houses with the idea not of extinguishing their 
burning clothing, but of inflicting added pain, if 
possible. They stood around in groups, laughing 
and jeering, while they witnessed the final writh- 
ings of the terror and pain-wracked wretches who 
crawled to the streets-to die after their flesh had 
been cooked in their own houses.’ 


Dr. Du Bois and Miss Gruening collected 
testimonies of many people in the hospital. The 
victims .examined by them included a large 
number of. women. One of them, Narcis Gurley, 
in her seventy-first year, thirty years a room- 
keeper and laundress in East St. Louis, related that 
she did not stir out of her house—being afraid— 
till the blazing walls fell in. She got her arms 
burnt. ‘ 


Edward Spencer, a Negro worker, five years a 
resident of East St. Louis, had taken his family, 
seven children and his wife, to friends out from 
East St. Louis, and walked down the street with 


128 UNHAPPY INDIA 


a white man whom he thought to be a friend. 
When he passed this man’s gate, he was shot by 
this same man in both arms and back. 


We have not space .to,reproduce or summarize 
more statements and accounts of fancy cruelties 
at East St. Louis. The recital of facts in The Crisis 
is followed by this terse comment, to aid» the 
imagination of the reader in forming a vivid idea 
of what happened: .. 


* First the mob, always a frightful thing, 
lowering in dense cowardly ranks through the 
streets. Then the fleeing Negroes, hunted, des- 
pairing. A hoarse sullen cry, “Get the Nigger!’ 
A shower of. bullets, of bricks and stones. The 
flash of meat-cleavers and pickaxes. The merci- 
less flames. And everywhere bodies, blood, hate 
and terrible levity. 


** All our hunting-songs and descriptions deal 
with the glory of the chase as seen and felt by the 
hunters. No one has visualized the psychology of 
the quarry,.the driven, hunted. things. The 
Negroes_of East St. Louis have in their statements 
supplied the world with that lack.”’ 


And yet it must not be concluded that East 
St.Louis was the worst thing for these distressed 
folk. A worker in a tobacco factory whom the 
rioters hit with clubs and bricks and stamped 
upon the head, and who had his arm broken, 
stated : 


** I shall never return to the South, whatever 
may happen tome here, for in the South it is 


26—128 


Mrs. RAMABAI RANADE. 


The wife of late Justice Ranade, Ist President of the Seva Sadan 
Society, Poona. 


. Zee 
*AY1IDOG ayy Aq . 
peumo jou s8utpying uy payes0] CZ76| UA AI “SON $[91894 OM) OY] UI syuapNys |eoIpew udswWOM jo dnols V7 


‘ 


“VWNOOd “ALAIDOS NVGVS VAS 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH : 129 


always killing and burning some of our people. 
I shall stay in St. Louis.” 


That was the resolve of many other victims 
also. Asked a woman aged sixty-five, whom Miss 
Gruening saw poking almost in the desolate ruins 
of what had once been her home, she replied, 
“What are we todo? We can’t live South and 
they don’t want us North. What are we to do?” 


The abave facts have, we presume, given the 
reader some idea of the magnitude of the problem 
of the Negro in the United States. Both the 
parties to the question, the whites and the blacks, 
are conscious of the gravity of the situation. The 
whites themselves are divided into three classes: 
first those who have nothing but condemnation 
for the prejudice against the Negro; second, those 
who condemn the prejudice and yet condone it— 
in its milder forms—on the ground that there is 
such a difference between the white man and the 
Negro that it_is impossible for the former to treat. 
the latteras an equal. These people would dis- 
criminate in favour of the better class of Negroes, 
the educated and the cultured among them. Last, 
but not least, is the class which condemns the 
Negroes on racial grounds and would in no 
circumstances have any sort of social relations 
with them. This class believes that ‘no amount 
of education of any kind, industrial, classical, or 
religious, can make out of a Negro a white man or 
bridge the chasm which separates him from the 
white man in the evolution of human history.’ 

13 


130 UNHAPPY. INDIA 


The Negroes were brought to America as 
dejected and  expatriated individuals. The 
imported slaves represented the conquered and 
subdued, the despised and outcast of their own 
country and race. In America, during the period 
of slavery, they were denied freedom. of education, 
freedom of motion, means of inter-communication 
and the privilege of unrestrained assemblage. 
Generally speaking, everything which tends to 
civilize a man was denied to the Negro. The 
master was bound by no law or ethics in his treat- 
ment of the slave, manor woman, and to-day 
a large number of coloured men in America are 
the standing proof of the immoral lawlessness of 
their former white masters... Under the institution 
of slavery the Negro was suppressed below the 
level of self-respect. The black woman often felt 
a superior importance in becoming the mother of 
a tawny child. The white master or overseer felt 
no legal, social, or conscientious constraint in 
victimizing the female chattel. ‘* The Negro in 
this country,” says Dean Miller, ‘‘ is the sacrificial 
race. He is the burden bearer of the white race. 
He constitutes the meek sill of society and suffers 
the ills.of that lowly place. He performs the 
trough work of society. He suffers the affliction 
and even commits the crimes which always fall to 
‘the lot of his status!” 


In another place the same writer says : : 


“ The Negro woman has been made to bear 
‘the brunt of the evil passions of all the races of men 
living or sojourning in this country. Within the 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 131 


veins of the so-called Negro race there course traces 
of the blood of every known variety or sub-variety 
of the human family. Not only within the limits 
of the race itself, but even within the veins of the 
same individuals, the strains of blood are mingled 
and blended in inextricable confusion.” 


CHAPTER XI 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH—concluded. 


The Ku Klux Klan which bursts into front- 
page headlines several times in a year in every 
country, is a typically American product—not of 
the America that produced Whitman and Emer- 
-son, but of the America that has produced other 
types, Babbitt, and W. R. Hearst and_ Katherine 
Mayo. 
- The most important and sensational news that 
filter to all the countries about the Klan relate to 
Negro lynching. But in reality the Klan is not 
merely a lynching secret society—it is the embodi- 
ment of the exclusive jspirit in America. It is 
America’s Protestant Nationalism of a very aggres- 
sive type. It aims at showing the alien, the 
Catholic, the Jew and the Negro his place. Per- 
haps some readers will not readily understand the 
inclusion of-Catholics in this list of undesirables. 
It must, however, be remembered that the feeling 
against Catholics is not yet past history in 
America. In spite of their considerable numbers* 


*« According to the Year Book of Churches, 1924-25, there 
were, in the year 1923, 18,261,000 Catholic Communicants and 
28,366,000 Protestants, though the latter figure would be in- 
creased to almost 80,000,000 if we took account of the innumer- 
able adherents who are in sympathy with Protestant ideals, 
though not officially registered ‘as Communicants.” A. Siegfried 
in America Comes of Age (Jonathan Cape, 1927), p. 38. 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 133 


the Catholics have not so far been permitted to 
provide even one President in American history. 
Al Smith, the Catholic candidate finds it hard to 
overcome these prejudices in spite of his protesta- 
tions that he is a good Catholic as well as a good 
‘American. 


The Klan, in its present phase, was organized 
in 1915. But it is a direct lineal successor of the 
nineteenth century Secret Society of Know 
Nothings. The original aim of maintaining the 
‘supremacy of the white race inthe old slave 
States,’ the original ideals, the original methods, 
the original vocabulary have all survived to this 
day. So William Joseph Simmons—called 
‘Colonel’ Simmons because he had been a 
volunteer in the Spanish-American War—-the 
Protestant lay preacher who reorganized the-Klan 
in 1915, was trying no new experiment. 


The Klan is a secret society with a mysterious, 
grandiloquent, solemn, though ridiculous, ritual 
evolved with-a view to filling the ignorant Negro 
with awe. The mysterious letters of warning and 
anonymous threats, the white cowls, the silent 
and solemn torch-light processions, the skeleton 
hands which clutch at the Negroes, the lynchings 
and horse-whippings and executions, the defiance 
of all law and order—have lent the Klan uncanny 
powers. This secret society has office-bearers with 
gradiloquent titles. On top, the Grand Sorcerer 
commanding the Invisible Empire. Then a Grand 
Dragon for each Kingdom, a Grand Titan for 
each Dominion, a Grand Cyclop for each Cave. 


134 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Also the Grand Monk, the Grand Turk, the Grand 
Sentinel... 


The ritual of this queer but barbarous ‘free= 
masonry is contained in. the Kloran, re-written by 
Colonel Simmons ‘ to contain all the requisites of 
an anti-Catholic and anti-Jewish movement.’ The 
anti-Negro part of course needed no addition, being 
already sufficiently strong. 


The Klan is ‘consecrated as Protestant to the 
teaching of the Christian religion, and pledged as. 
white men to the eternal maintenance of white 
supremacy.’ Its numbers* are constantly increas- 
ing or decreasing, but it is by all account an organ- 
ization with considerable influence on politics. 
Politicians ‘ are careful to. watch their step where 
the Klan is concerned.’t 


The attitude of the Klan towards the Catholics 
is revealed by the following choice pearls culled 
by M. Siegfried from The American Standard, the 
fortnightly organ of the Klan.t The first is taken 
from its issue of August, 1925 : 


*Tn 1921 the New York World estimated its membership at 
half a.million; in 1922 a Congressional Committee of inquiry 
could not find more than 100,000; in 1928 The World’s Work, 
Suggested the figure of 2,500,000; in 1924 Mecklin, in his excellent 
book on the Klan, speaks of ‘millions.’ Decadence had however 
set in, first in the South and then in the Southwest. In Septem- 
ber, the Klan was still able to fill the streets of Washington with 
an immense procession, but in February 1926, an inquiry made 
by the New York Times reveals an ahsolute rout.’ America 
Comes of Age. 


+ Ibid., p. 185. 
Siegfried, op. cit., p. 188. 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 135 


‘**Do you know that Rome looks upon 
Washington as the future centre of her power and 
is filling our government departments with 
Papists, that the hierarchy for many years has 
been buying strategic sites in our capital, that in 
our Department of State at Washington, 61 per 
cent. of the employees are Roman Catholics, that 
in our Treasury Department, in which the duty of 
enforcing prohibition is vested, 70 per-cent. of the 
employees are Roman Catholics?” 


The next one is from its issue of October 
1, 1925: ‘3 


‘* We again take the occasion to attack the 
sinister purposes: and persistent efforts of the 
Roman Catholic hierarchy; to foist upon us the 
belief that Christopher Columbus was the dis- 
coverer of America,;,and through this fraudulent 
representation to Jay claim to inherent rights 
which solely belong to Nordic Christian peoples, 
through the discovery of this continent by Leif 
Eriscon in the year 1000.” 


M. Siegfried humorously suggests that there 
were no. Protestants in the year 1000, and there- 
fore Leif Eriscon must have been a Catholic! The 
reader will appreciate this reference to the Papal 
claims more readily when he is told that a false 
encyclical was once produced (towards the end of 
the last century) in which the Pope was made to: 
claim the entire American continent on the ground’ 
that Columbus was a Catholic. 


This controversy evokes much lively interest.. 
One may try to imagine whether if an alien third 


136 UNHAPPY INDIA 


party, like the British in India, were in power at 
Washington for a couple of decades, the Catholics 
and Klansmen of America would not be flying at 
each other’s throats even more furiously than the 
Hindus and Muslims of India? 


That is rather a digression. What however is 
very relevant to ask here is, ‘Is the unjustifiable 
and cruel attitude of the Brahman towards the 
pariah more unjustifiable and more cruel than 
that of the Klansmen of America towards the 
Negroes ?’ ; 


Yet another class of \America’s mercilessly 
ersecuted untouchables is that of the Red Indians. 
ver since the discovery of America by Euro- 

peans: they have been exterminated as ruthlessly 
as the bison and other wild animals of the land. 
The record of the government and of the citizen is 
equally black. 


Now they are not chased and hounded like 
wild animals. They have come up to the level 
of the African natives. Just as for the Masai in 
East Africa, special land reserves are set aside on 
which these people are herded. ‘As in East Africa 
the richest lands are under the white men, so the 
Red Indian gets the ‘ worst lands in which life 
could be sustained.at all” (Though, much to the 
discomfiture of the whites, some of this bad land 
had concealed within its bosom rich deposits of 
mineral oil, and they have added largely to the 
Red Indian wealth.) 


28—136 


LEl—6Z 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 137 


The Red Indians are made to live in insani- 
tary surroundings. Their death-rate is much 
higher than the white death-rate. Tuberculosis 
and trachoma are said to be specially prevalent 
among them. 


The United States Government is spending 
money on the education of the Red Indians... But 
the expenditure is made through unsympathetic 
agency and does not produce adequate results. 
The New York correspondent of the-Manchester 
Guardian recently quoted the testimony of Mr. 
H. L. Russell, construction chief at a Red Indian 
school, as to the inhuman treatment of Red Indian 
boys at school. Mr. Russell’s letter was placed 
before the Committee on Indian Affairs of the 
U.S. Senate, and part of it reads thus: 


“‘T have seen Indian boys chained to their 
beds at night for.punishment. I have seen them 
thrown in cellars under the building, which the 
superintendent called a gaol. I have seen their 
shoes taken away from them, and they then forced 
to walk through the snow to the barn to help milk. 
I have seen them whipped with a hemp rope, also 
a, water hose, (and) forced to do servant’s work for 
employees and superintendents without compensa- 
tion, under the guise of industrial employment 
and education.” 


In short, says the correspondent, the Dothe- 
boys Hall system is still alive and flourishing. 


In 1926 the Red Indians in the United States 
numbered 349,964. Citizenship is supposed to 


188 UNHAPPY INDIA 


have been conferred upon them. In reality, how- 
ever, they are not only absolutely without any 
political power, but even civic rights are also with- 
held from them. The Federal Indian Bureau of 
the United States Government—which provides 
employment to nearly 5,000 salaried white men— 
has complete control of the property of all.‘ in- 
competent’ Indians. The property of those 
directly under control of the Indian. Bureau is 
valued at £300,000,000, of which the money and 
securities amount to £14,000,000.- These ‘ incom- 
petents ® cannot take any legal step without the 
approval of the Indian Commissioner in Washing- 
ton. ‘They may not make a“ will, execute a 
lease, sell or give away their land unless he (the 
Commissioner) consents:..They are permitted to 
‘retain counsel to represent them, but there are 
numerous complaints that their choice is limited 
to certain attorneys known to'be amenable in 
general to the wishes of the federal authorities.’ 
This last sentence, used recently by a New York 
correspondent, is once again reminiscent of Miss 
Mayo’s observation that there are more ways than 
one of keeping the under-dog in its kennel. 


This is the country from which Miss Mayo 
hails.. For her to sit in judgment on us in the 
matter of the treatment of the ‘ depressed classes’ 
is like the pot calling the kettle black. Yet the 
United States of- America is considered to be the 
freest country in the world. Free indeed! Even 
now lynching of the Negroes goes on accompanied 
by unmentionable cruelties and barbarities worthy 
of the modern ‘civilization.’ 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 189 


Miss Mayo and the Anglo-Indians pose as the 
friends of the ‘depressed classes.’ It pays the 
Britisher to play off Hindu’ against Muslim, 
Brahman against non-Brahman, high caste 
against low caste. It pays him to show a political 
sympathy for the depressed classes, But the 
moral hollowness of his pretensions is exposed 
when one remembers what treatment the coloured 
races are receiving at his hands throughout the 
world. Leave aside his wars of extermination in 
furtherance of the imperialistic cause, even then 
you have the Massacre of Amritsar and the ‘crawl- 
ing order.’ In daily life the arrogance of the 
white man is seen wherever white and coloured 
people come together. The. Britisher pretends he 
is the ‘trustee’ of the Kafir interests in Africa. 
The trustee deprives his ward of his freedom as 
well as his land. The ward drudges and the 
trustee enjoys the fruit of his toil. The trustee 
treats the ward in-daily life much worse than the 
untouchable is treated in India. There is segre- 
gation not only in building houses but in every- 
thing in life’~ In many places the white man’s 
roads and.railway trains are closed to his ward.. 
In India.the colour arrogance in its more blatant 
forms is perhaps decreasing, but even now cases 
occur when Indians of culture and of the highest 
social standing are refused admittance into rail- 
way carriages by the arrogant whites. 


Before I close this chapter I wish to guard 
against being understood to have produced all this 
evidence as a defence or in extenuation of 
untouchability. I condemn untouchability in the 


140 UNHAPPY INDIA 


strongest terms possible as an absolutely in- 
defensible, inhuman and barbarous institution, 
unworthy of Hinduism and the Hindus. Itis a 
biot on what is otherwise one of the noblest of 
cultures—if not the noblest and most humane 
culture—the genius of man has evolved during 
the whole history of the race. 


We have not included in this description the 
treatment that the Jewish citizens of several 
States even now get. The mere mention of the 
two words ‘pogrom’ and ‘ghetto’.is indictment 
enough. 


We plead guilty to the charge that our social 
system developed caste enormities, and we are 
now trying to undo them. as best as we can. But 
certainly it does not lie in the mouths of the white 
people to tell us that.we are a ‘ world menace’ or 
that we treat a section of the humanity as ‘less 
than men.’ White imperialism is the greatest 
world menace known to history, and its racial 
arrogance rests on the assumption that those who 
are not ‘white’ are ‘less than men.’ It has de- 
prived. vast populations of political and civic 
liberties, and is ruthlessly exploiting them for 
economic ends. It has perpetrated vandalistic 
enormities; amongst the more recent of such acts 
one may cite the bombardment of Damascus, 
Queen of the East, by the French. Unless it is 
promptly and effectively brought under check it 
promises not merely to bomb out non-white civil- 
ization, but even to end all civilization in a death 
dance—a dress rehearsal of which we have had in 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH ‘141 


the World War of 1914—inspired by greed and 
jealousy. 


What are the caste cruelties of India put by 
the side of what the white man has done tothe 
non-white people? 


Indians are asked to be proud of the British 
Empire, but are treated as helots in all parts of 
the Empire. In Australia, Canada, South Africa, 
they have suffered under all sorts of handicaps, 
and been subjected to all sorts of humiliation. 
They may not be allowed access to the white 
people’s hotels, restaurants, cafés and other 
places. 


‘ But all this becomes a tame affair when one 
considers the treatment meted out to the ‘African 
natives whose trustees the white people pretend to 
be. You require-the pen of a Nevinson or a Morel 
to paint the horrible and blood-curdling picture. 
Mr. Morel who made a lifelong study of the sub- 
ject was forced to the conclusion :* 


** What the partial occupation of his soil by 
the white man ‘has failed to do; what the mapping 
out.of European political ‘ spheres of influence ’ 
has failed to do; what the maxim and the rifle, the 
slave gang, labour in the bowels of the earth and 
the lash, have failed to do; what imported measles, 
smallpox and syphilis have failed to do; what even 
the oversea slave trade failed to do, the power of 


*The Black Man’s Burden (London: National Labour Press, 
1920), pp. 7-8. ? 


142 UNHAPPY . INDIA 


.modern capitalistic exploitation, assisted by mod- 
ern engines of destruction, may yet succeed in 
accomplishing. 


_ For, from the evils of the latter, scientifically 
applied and enforced, there is no escape for the 
African. Its destructive effects are not spasmodic : 
they are permanent. In its permanence resides 

its fatal consequences. It kills not the body 
merely, but the soul. It breaks the spirit. It 
attacks the African at every turn from every point 
of vantage. It wrecks his polity, uproots him from 
the land, invades his family life, destroys his 
natural pursuits and occupations, claims his 
whole time, enslaves him in his own home.” 


A history of this exploitation, or of the misery 
of the native under it,.is beyond the scope of our 
book. But we may be permitted to give some 
incidents which will throw light on the ‘humane’ 
methods of white imperialism. Our selection will 
be confined to. the rubber plantations of Africa. 
Speaking of the plantation system of the Congo, 
Mr. Morel says :* 


“* We have now to record the operations of a 
system which Conan Doyle has described as the 
‘greatest crime in all history’; Sir Sidney Olivier 
as ‘an inversion of the old Slave-trade’; the British 
Primate as a matter ‘far transcending all ques- 
tions of contemporary politics’; and a British 
Foreign Secretary as ‘bondage under the most 


*7Tbid., p. 105. 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 143 


barbarous and inhuman conditions, maintained 
for mercenary motives of the most . selfish 
character’. These are quotations taken from a 
mass of similar utterances. It would be an easy 
matter to fill an entire volume with similar 
denunciations by men of many countries and of 
all classes and professions, which resounded in 
Legislative Chambers, from platform, pulpit, and 
throughout the world’s Press for. over a, decade. 
And itis undeniable that all the misdeeds of 
Europeans in Africa since the abolition of the 
oversea slave trade pale into insignificance when 
compared with the tragedy of the Congo. Indeed, 
no comparison is possible as regards scale, motive, 
and duration of time alike.’ 


Here is a comment on the ‘humane’ side of 
rubber made by an American missionary and 
quoted by Mr. Morel +t 


* It is blood-curdling to see them (the soldiers) 
returning with hands of the‘slain, and to find the 
hands of young children amongst the bigger ones 
evidencing their bravery... The rubber from. this 
district has cost hundreds of lives, and the scenes 
I have witnessed, while unable to help the 
oppressed, have been almost enough to make me 
wish I were dead... This rubber traffic is steeped 
in blood, and if the natives were to rise and sweep 
‘every white person on the Upper Congo into 
eternity, there would still be left a fearful balance 
to their credit.” 


t Ibid., pp. 121-22. 


144 UNHAPPY INDIA 


This felates to the Belgian Congo. But the 
French Congo was no better. In 1908 an American 
missionary recorded the following :* 


‘‘ Who is to blame for the annihilating condi- 
tions existing to-day in French Congo? Commerce 
is dead, towns, once prosperous and plentiful, are 
deserted and falling into decay, and whole tribes 
are being needlessly and ignominiously crushed 
for the aggrandizement of the few... Towns are 
sacked and plundered; fathers, brothers, 
husbands, are put in foul-smelling prisons until 
those at home can get together the taxes necessary 
to secure their relief. -France has_ granted 
exclusive rights to concessionaires who claim 
everything upon, above, in or about any hectare 
of land described in their ‘grant... To be hurled 
from active, prosperous freedom. into inactive and 
enforced poverty would demoralize even a civilized 
country: how farther reaching, then, is it with the 
savage !.. . As the French say, the entire country 
is bouleversé, i.e., overthrown, in confusion, 
subverted, agitated, unsettled. And the. French 
are right in so naming the result of their own 
misdeeds. All is desolation, demoralization, 
annihilation. Native customs are violated; native 
rights ignored... Great plains which not long 
since swarmed with the life and bustle of passing 
trade caravans are now silent and deserted... Ant- 
hills and arid grass and wind- mveee paths are the 
only signs of life upon them.” 


* Tbid., p. 145. 


“CZ6l WI pee] * 
ype | “soy setae We s[9ys0y ur AyR0g ay) £q pa brI—0E 
WNOOd “ALAIOOS NVdVS sa AJaiqqua Udo A\ 


Nee UL Lis. 
— 


Ssvi—le 


*AaRog OY JO JEON SOP] Ut Bury ¢7|Hy ur Burren JopuN SeAIMpIu pue sosiNnu JoUOyeGoId jo dnoid yy 


¥ 


“WNOOd ‘ALSIDOS NVAVS VAS 


- LESS THAN THE PARIAH 145 


If one were to make a collection of the most 
revolting examples of human cruelty, one. would 
do well to turn to Mr. Morel’s Red Rubber and 
open the chapter headed, ‘ Deeds.’ Some of the- 
most horrible things I have ever read, I came 
across in that chapter. An English traveller, 
E. J. Glave, is quoted by Mr. Morel as having 
stated :* 


** Up the Ikelemba away to Lake Mantumba, 
the State is perpetrating its fiendish policy in 
order to obtain profit... War has been waged all 
through the district of the Equator, and thousands 
of people have been killed and homes destroyed... 
Many women and children. were taken, and 
twenty-one heads were brought to Stanley Falls, 
and have been used by Captain Rom as a decora- 
tion round a flower-bed in front of his house.” 


Campbell, a Presbyterian missionary is also 
quoted by Mr. Morel at great length.t We make 
the following extracts from his statement :. 4 


“ Through the gross and wholesale im- 
morality, and forcing of women and girls into 
lives~of. shame, African family life and_ its 
sanctities have been violated, and the seeds of 
disease sown broadcast over the Congo State are 
producing their harvest already. Formerly native 
conditions put restrictions on the spread of 
disease, and localized it to small areas. But. the 


* Red Rubber, (London: National Labour Press, 1919), p. 42. 
t Ibid., p. 44. 


14 


146. UNHAPPY INDIA 


17,000 soldiers, nioved hither and thither to dis- 
tricts removed from their wives and relations to 
suit Congo policy, must have women wherever 
they go, and these must be provided from the 
district natives. Native institutions, rights and 
customs, which one would think ought to be the 
basis of good government, are ignored.” 


Here is an incident of the ‘ivory regime’ 
narrated by Mr. Campbell : 


“ After that Katoro, another very large chief 
living near the apex of the western and eastern 
Lualaba, was attacked. The crowds were fired 
into promiscuously, and fifteen were killed, 
including four women anda babe on its mother’s 
breast. The heads were cut off and brought to the 
officer in charge, who then sent men to cut off the 
hands also, and these-were pierced, strung, and 
dried over the camp fire. The heads, with many 
others, I saw myself. The town, prosperous once, 
was burnt, and what they could not carry off was 
destroyed. Crowds of people were caught, mostly 
old women. and young women,. and three fresh 
rope gangs were added. These poor ‘prisoner’ 
gangs were mere skeletons of skin and bone, and 
their bodies cut frightfully with the chicotte when 
I saw them. Chiyombo’s very large town was 
next attacked. A lot of people were killed, and 
heads and hands cut off and taken back to the 
officers... Shortly after the State caravans, with 
flags flying and bugles blowing, entered the 
mission station at.Luanza, on Lake Mweru, where 
T was then alone, and I shall not soon forget the 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 147 


sickening sight: of deep baskets of human heads. 
These baskets of “war trophies were used...for a 
big war-dance,. to which was added the State 
quota of powder and percussion-caps.’ ” 


Before we close this part of our evidence 
which depicts white civilization in its true colours 
we must give a few extracts which relate to the 
events of the twentieth century. On April 10, 
1900, the following confession was made by one, 
Lacroix, agent of the Anveroise Trust :* 


**T am going to appear before the Judge for 
having killed 150 men, cut off 60 hands; for 
having crucified women and children, for having 
mutilated many men and hung their sexual 
remains on the village-fence.” 


Mr. Morel relates many incidents about 
1903-05, and even of later dates, but considera- 
tions of space rule these out. It must not, 
however, be inferred that these things are mere 
ancient history: During and after the War much 
fuss was made of German cruelty in the Colonies. 
But that-was only propaganda carried on with the 
usual ethics of propaganda. For otherwise how 
do you account, for the fact that unmentionable 
cruelties have been perpetrated even in.the post- 
War years by the hypocritical mentors of 
Germany ?. 


A well-known French ' writer, M. André Gide, 
recently went ona pleasure trip to Africa. His 


| *Tbid., p. BA 


148 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Journal de Route was published by the Nouvelle 
Revue Francaise. M. Gide saw horrible things in 
the regions occupied by the rubber concessionary 
companies. Here is one of the choice bits which 
M. Gide culled from the diary of a white about the 
crimes of the French administrator, M. Pacha :* 


‘“M. Pacha announces that he has finished 
his repressions of the Bayas in the environs of 
Bodo. He estimates (his own avowal) the number 
of killed at one thousand of all_ages and both 
sexes. In order to prove the results, of the battle, 
the guards and partisans were commanded to 
bring to the commander the ears and genitals of 
the victims. The date of this affair was the 
month of July. 


“The cause of all this is the C. F.8.0. 
(Compagnie Forestiene_ Sangha Oubangui). With 
the monopoly of rubber and with the complicity of 
the local administration it reduces the natives to 
abject slavery.” 


The white exploiter combines ' callousness 
with resourcefulness. Against this. formidable 
combination the poor native is absolutely helpless. 
There-seems no exaggeration in Morel’s conclu- 
sion that—t 


“Thus the African is really helpless against 
the material gods of the white man, as embodied 


*See Vew Masses, (New York), Jan., 1928. 
t Red Rubber, p.9. 


LESS THAN THE PARIAH 149 
e 


in the trinity of imperialism, capitalistic exploita- 
tion, and militarism. If the white man retains 
these gods and if he insists upon making the 
African worship them as assiduously as he has 
done himself, the ‘African will go the way of the 
Red Indian, the Amerindian, the Carib, the 
Guanche, the aboriginal Australian, and many 
more. And this would be at once a crime of 
enormous magnitude, and a world disaster.” 


Liberal opinion in the ‘ civilized’ world re- 
ceived a shock when, a short time ago, two British 
judges in the British Protectorate of Sierra Leone 
upheld the continuance of_ slavery under native 
chiefs.. It is perhaps little realized that the native 
in Africa can be reduced toa virtual state of slavery 
even where slavery is said to be non-existent. In 
East Africa the British have set apart reserves of 
land for the Masai and other tribes which are not 
enough to support.them. Further they have im- 
posed taxes on them to find money for which they 
are forced to work on the white man’s plantations 
on the white-man’s terms. To what helplessness 
this system reduces the native is a story that has 
been well told by Dr. Norman Leys, for long a 
British officer of health in East Africa, in his book, 
Kenya. It has more recently been related again 
also by a British engineer, McGreggor Ross. 


The principle of native reservations is being 
introduced in South Africa as well. The Native 
‘Affairs Act promulgated by the Union Govern- 
ment last summer comes, as Dr. Norman Leys 
points out in a. Press article, as ‘ the coping stone 


150 ‘UNHAPPY INDIA 


of the policy which is embodied in the Colour Bar 
Act that prohibits natives from engaging in certain 
skilled trades, and in the measure that deprives 
the natives of the Cape Province of the restricted 
franchise they have hitherto enjoyed.’ Under the 
new South African Act the Governor-General may, 
‘ whenever he deems it expedient in the’ general 
public interest, order the removal of any tribe or 
portion thereof or any native from any place to any 
other place within the Union upon such conditions 
as he may determine, provided that in case of a 
tribe objecting to such removal no such order shall 
be given unless a resolution approving it has been 
adopted by both Houses. of Parliament.’ 


So the law has found a way of curbing the 
natives who had organised themselves into trade 
unions, and it may, if it is allowed to have its 
way, also find a way of depriving the natives of 
their lands. \By what consequences to the native 
such deprivation may be followed, can be easily 
imagined. 


CHAPTER XII 


WOMAN IN INDIA: A RETROSPECT* 


Vedic Period.t There can be no doubt that 
the position of woman in India has very much 
deteriorated since the Vedic times. There is a 
consensus of opinion that ‘ the position held by the 
Aryan woman in the Vedic Punjab was a most 
honourable, nay, an exalted one, which later in- 
fluence and development changed by no means for 
the better, but rather, and very much, for the 
worse.’} The Vedic literature contains no discus- 
sion as to the relative positions.of man and woman 
in an abstract sense. In the Rigveda woman is 
mentioned as maiden, wife, and mother, and her 
rights and obligations as) such are very briefly 
alluded to. As a maiden she had the same rights 
of protection, maintenance and education as a boy 
had. In the choice of a mate she appears as free 
as the other sex. The Vedas presuppose some 
love-making on the part of boys and girls before 
marriage. \ There are many references to ‘ the love 
of the youth for the maiden ’ and his seeking her, 
as also ‘ to their mutual affection.’ In support of 
this, see Rv. X, 85, where Soma is supposed to 


*The contents of this chapter are drawn from two articles 
by me which appeared in June and July, 1918 in Young India, a 
monthly Journal I, was editing in New York. 

t Vedic period, from 1500 B.C. backward. Epic period, 1500 
B. C. to 500 B. C. Sutra period about 500 B. C. 


tSee Ragozin: Vedic India (Story of Nations), 1st edition. 


152 UNHAPPY INDIA 


have wooed Surya, the maiden daughter of the 
Sun-god, Savitar. Surya is called a ‘willing 
bride ’ and immediately after marriage she is taken 
by the bridegroom in great ceremony to his home, 
where the marriage is consummated. . 


Verse 36 prescribes the marriage formula 
which is, to this day, repeated by every Hindu 
bride and groom at the marriage ceremony. ‘B 
the right-hand, for happiness I take thee, that 
thou mayst reach old age with me, thy husband, 
Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Paramodi* gave thee to 
me, to. rule our house together,’ 


On arrival at her husband’s home, the bride is 
welcomed thus: 


‘* Here may delight be thine, through wealth 
and progeny. Give this house thy watchful care. 
Live with thy husband, and in old age mayst thou 
still rule thy household. Here now remain nor 
ever part; enjoy the full measure of thy years; with 
sons and grandsons sporting, be glad in heart 
within thy house.” 


Then-comes the final benediction, first by the 
husband and then by the rest of the assembly. 
Says the husband : 


“ Children and children’s children may Praja- 
pati gives us. May Aryaman bless us with wealth 
unto old age. Enter thy husband’s homestead. 
Within the house may man and beast increase and 
thrive. Free from the evil. eye, not lacking 


*Names of Vedic deities. 


WOMAN IN INDIA 153 


wedded love, bring good luck even to the beasts; 
gentle of mind, bright of countenance, bearing 
heroes, honouring the gods, dispensing joy.” 
[Italics are ours. ] 


Referring to this Mr. Ragozin* remarks: 
‘Might not the passage in italics be labelled-for 
all times ‘ The whole duty of woman?’ He also 
adds: ‘How absolute the wife’s and mother’s 
supremacy is here proclaimed and consecrated by 
the husband... Even the popular life of modern 
nations—especially the Slavs and Germans, where 
the son’s bride enters her husband’s family in an 
avowedly subordinate capacity, and becomes al- 
most the bond slave of his. parents, his sister’s 
servant and scapegoat—fall far short of the ideal 
of domestic life set up. by our so-called barbarian 
ancestors, —meaning thereby the Aryans who 
composed the Vedic hymn referred to above. 


The hymn presupposes a society in which— 


(2) The. parties to marriage were grown-u 
persons competent to woo and be wooed, qualifie 
to give consent and make choice. 


(6) The bridegroom was supposed to have a 
home.where his wife could be mistress, even in 
case his parents and brothers and sisters, for some 
reason, happened to live with him, thus giving her 
the position of supremacy in the household. 


(c) The object of marriage was the mutual 
happiness of the parties, the raising of children, 


*Vedic India, p. 372. 


154 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the service of the gods and the accumulation of all 
kinds of wealth. 


It should be noted, that, unlike the Christian 
ceremony of marriage, the Hindu marriage rites 
do not require the wife to pledge obedience to the 
husband. 


In this society, monogamy was the rule, 
though polygamy existed among, the highest 
classes, as an exception;* on the .other hand 
polyandry was not known to the Vedas. 


Marital infidelity was, of course, disapproved, 
though cases of illegitimate love were not un- 
known, as they have never been in any age in any 
part. of the world.. The marriage ceremony was, 
in essence, the same as prevails throughout the 
length and breadth of India to-day. 


There is little information about the rights the 
wife enjoyed in the property of her husband. As 
to the wife’s right to her own property—the dowry 
and presents which she got from her parents and 
friends, etc.—there is nothing to indicate that she 
had not absolute control over it then as now. In 
this respect the position of the Hindu woman has 
always been much superior to that of her Europ- 
ean sister. The poetical ideal of the family was 
decidedly high, and ‘ we have no reason to doubt,’ 
remark Macdonnell and Keith, ‘ that it was often 
actually fulfilled.” The complete supremacy of the 


* Ragozin’s Vedic India, p. 373. Vedic Index by Macdonnell 
and Keith, p. 478. As oS 


WOMAN: IN INDIA 155 


wife as the mistress of the household has already 
been evidenced by the hymn quoted above. More- 
over, we notice that the wife was a regular parti- 
cipator in the religious duties of her husband. No 
religious ceremony could be considered complete 
and efficacious unless both joined in it. The 
words, ‘ pati’ (master), ‘ patni’ (mistress) signify 
equality of position in the household. The widow 
had as much right to take another husband as the 
widower had to take another wife. Rigveda does 
not contemplate the custom of suttee anywhere*, 
though it is said that there is a reference to the 
custom in the Atharva Veda. 


There is no trace of the seclusion of women in 
the Vedic literature, and the whole weight of evi- 
dence is in favour of supposing that women en- 
joyed full freedom of movement. 


As regards the.education of women, not only 
was there no restriction, but there is evidence 
to show that.women attained positions of highest 
distinction, as scholars and teachers. 


Epic. Period. Coming to the Epic period we 
notice that the position of woman has not in any 
way deteriorated. There is the same freedom in 
the matter of marriage. Nay, even more: the 
Epic period expressly recognizes marriages of love 
contracted otherwise than with the consent of 
parents, for example, that of Arjuna and 
Subhadra, two of the principal characters in the 


* Macdonneli and Keith: Vedic Index, p. 488. 


156 UNHAPPY INDIA 


story of the Mahabharata. The tendency of the 
Epic period seems to have been to confer the status 
of marriage on all permanent unions, however 
effected—permanent in the intention of the parties 
at the time of union. In fact forms of marriage 
are recognized which validate even irregular 
unions, so that the issue of such unions may not 
suffer from the stigma of illegitimacy. There are 
no caste restrictions at all. There is a clear 
development of the wife’s right to, and power over 
her own property, called stridhana, though it 
would be wrong to say that either the Vedic or the 
Epic period contemplated the economic independ- 
ence of woman as it is understood to-day, in the 
West. It is said that the custom of secluding the 
women originated in the Epic period, but this opi- 
nion is based on very slender data and ignores the 
weight of evidence-on the other side. There are 
numerous references to women going to witness 
tournaments, accompanying their husbands in 
wars, on journeys, and otherwise moving about 
freely. Whatever authority there is to the con- 
trary refers only to the warrior class. The Epics, 
it is admitted, have been freely added to, even 
during recent times, and the probability is that 
whatever references there are must be of later date, 
when seclusion of women had come to be looked 
upon as a mark of respectability. 


In no other respect was the position of woman 
lowered in the Epic period. In fact, I am inclined 
to think that the position of woman in the Epic 
period was at its high-water mark in India. Since 
then it has declined steadily. Singing and danc- 


WOMAN IN INDIA 157 


ing and dancing and riding were considered 
accomplishments and the sex relations were per- 
haps of the best kind. 


Sutra Period. From the Epic period we come 
to the Sutra period. The Sutra period of Sanskrit 
literature, stands by itself. Sutra literally means 
string. The Sutra period literature is embodied 
in aphorisms. Religion, philosophy, law and 
science all were reduced to Sutras. This is the 
period to which most of the ‘sacred laws of the 
Aryans’ and the Smritis belong.. Their ground- 
work was decidedly old, but the form belonged to 
a later day. These were evidently the first 
attempts of the Hindu Aryans at scientific codi- 
fication and in their codes we notice a curious 
mixture of narrowness. and liberalism, freedom 
and restriction in the rules concerning sex rela- 
tions. It is difficult to.fix the period of these laws. 
European scholars’ think that they are _post- 
Buddhistic, i.e., subsequent to 500 B.C. Hindus 
claim a greater antiquity for them. The truth 
perhaps lies. between the two extremes. The 
originals of these codes were pre-Buddhistic but 
the codes, as they stand to-day, are post-Buddhistic 
compilations, to which the compilers added many 
a rule of their liking or such as they found had 
already been adopted in practice. The outstand- 
ing features of these codes regarding the position 
of woman may be briefly stated— 

(a) They lay emphasis on the necessity of a 
girl being married on the first signs of puberty 
becoming manifest or within three years of the 
event and Jook with approval on marriages even 
earlier. 


158 UNHAPPY. INDIA 


(b) As such, any consent on the part of the 
parties becomes out of the question; nor is there 
any scope for love-making or wooing. 


(c) But where guardians neglect the marriage 
of their female wards and let the three-year limit 
elapse, the girls are allowed to choose their own 
husbands, regardless of the consent or approval of 
their parents. The duty, however, of arranging 
the marriages of girls at an early age, is laid down 
in such stringent and awe-inspiring terms as to 
preclude the idea of parents daring to incur the 
penalties of neglect in this respect, so that the 
institution became ultimately universal. 


We are not quite sure whether the institution 
was so universal as it afterwards became at the 
time when the Muhammadan dominance in India 
began, because instances of girls marrying at an 
advanced age and-choosing their own husbands 
are not unknown in the first centuries: of the 
Muhammadan rule. The daughters of Raja Dahir 
made captives in the eighth century A.D. were 
grown-up. maidens, who, by a very ingenious 
stratagem revenged themselves on their captor. 
‘Samjogta, the princess of Kanauj, who chose 
Prithi Raj of Delhi as her husband in defiance of 
the wishes of her father, was also a grown-up 
maiden. These are by no means solitary 
‘instances, as the dramatic literature of the period 
immediately preceding Moslem invasion is full of 
instances of such grown-up girls falling in love 
with persons of their liking and marrying them 
vy choice. Kalidasa, the greatest of Indian play- 


WOMAN IN INDIA 159 


wrights; flourished in the fifth century A.D. 
Sakuntala, the greatest of his creations, was a 
grown-up maiden who accepted the love of 
Dushyanta without waiting for the consent of her 
father. Her friends and companions were also 
grown-up maidens. Hiuen Tsang, the Chinese 
traveller, mentions a case of marriage between a 
grown-up Brahman young man and a girl with 
whom: he at once began to live and who gave birth 
to a child of his after one year. _This was in the 
sixth century. The eleventh century Moslem 
writer, Alberuni, says, ‘the Hindus marry at a very 
young age; therefore the parents arrange the 
marriage for their sons.’ We think it will be fair 
to conclude that the custom was in the making 
when the Moslem advent began, and that advent 
gave it a further point. The reason was that the 
Muhammadan religion prohibited the carrying 
away of married women as slaves. 


To return to the provisions of the Sutras and 
the Smritis, the very conception of infant marriage 
pre-supposes the assumption of great powers on 
the part of the parents over the person of their 
sons and daughters. The Hindu law-givers had 
no. difficulty in recognizing this power, but when 
they came to enunciate the principles which 
should guide men in their treatment of women, 
they found a strange conflict of views among -the 
different strata of society. On one hand was the 
Aryan feeling of high respect for woman; on the 
other was a notion that she should never be 


160 UNHAPPY INDIA 


independent. On one side we find Manu laying 
down that—* 


** Women are to be honoured and adoted ‘by 
fathers and brothers, by husbands as also by 
brothers-in-law who desire much prosperity. 


“ ‘Where women are honoured (or worshipped) 
there the gods rejoice; but when they are not 
honoured. then all rites are fruitless. 


“ Where women grieve, that family quickly 
perishes; but where they do not grieve that (family) 
ever prospers. 


“ Houses, which women, not honoured, curse, 
as if blighted by magic, perish utterly. 


‘* Therefore, they are ever to be honoured at 
ceremonies and festivals, with ornaments, clothes, 
and food. by men who desire wealth (or pros- 


perity).” 


Once.more it is repeated that ‘ if the wife be 
happy all-the house is happy and if she is not 
happy, all are unhappy.’t 


Compare this with the following general dis- 
qualifications stated by Manu in chapter V: 


** In her childhood (a girl) should be under the 
. will of her father; in her youth of (her) husband; 


*Manu, ITI, 55-59. 
+ Manu, V, 148-150 


All India Women’s Conference, Poona, 1927. 


Shrimati Saubhagyavati Sarasvatibai Patvardhan, Rani Saheba of 
Sangli, Chairwoman of the Reception Committee. 


32—160 


. SOURIS a4uL 


‘£261 “VNOOd “SDNAYSAANOD S.NAINOAA VIGNI TTY 


WOMAN IN INDIA 161 


her husband being dead, of her son; a woman. 
should never have freedom of action. 


*‘She must never wish separation of herself 
from her father, husband or sons, for by separa- 
tion from them a woman would make both families 
contemptible. 


‘* She must always be cheerful andclever in 
household businesses, with the furniture well 
cleaned and with a not free hand in expenditure.” t 


Again in chapter IX, verses 2-and 3 it is re- 
peated that— 


“Day and night they should be kept by the 
male members of the family in a state of depend- 
ence. The father guards them in childhood, the 
husband guards them in youth and in old age sons 
guard them.” 


In verse 7, the husband is enjoined to ‘ guard 
his wife with diligence as by guarding her he 
guards his posterity, his ancestral usages (kwla 
dharma), his family, himself and his own duty 
(dharma). The next two verses explain what is 
meant by ‘ guarding.’ No man, itis said, can 
guard a woman by force or by secluding her; only 
those women are well-guarded, who guard them- 
Selves, through themselves, though some sugges- 
tions are offered as to how to keep them employed. 
In these laws the one point constantly kept in 
view is the-purity of the offspring. It is to be 


t Ibid., III, 62. 
16 


162 UNHAPPY INDIA 


secured (a) by a careful selection of the parties to 
the marriage, (0) by insisting on marriages within 
the caste, (c) by laying down a very high ideal of 
womanly fidelity, (@) by giving the husband full 
control over his wife, (e) by pointing out in strong 
language the evil consequences of marriage out of 
caste, and (f) by assigning a low social position to 
the issue of mixed marriages. 


In the earlier literature, we notice an anxiety 
to legalize almost all permanent unions, whether 
the result of love, chance or caprice, in order to 
legitimize the offspring. It was expressly stated 
that in the case of marriages out of caste, the caste 
of the offspring shall be that-of the father. The 
sons of maidens were declared to be legitimate sons 
of their fathers as well as the sons begotten on 
another’s wife when such person had left the wife 
without her fault or when he was impotent or con- 
sumptive and soon. In the later literature the 
offspring of all unions out of caste are held as 
degraded; with a few exceptions the same fate is 
assigned to the issue of illicit intercourse. It will 
be interesting at this stage to enumerate the 
different kinds of marriages recognized by Hindu 
law. 


~Hindu law recognizes marriages of eight 
kinds. Of these four are approved, one is 
tolerated, the. remaining three are disapproved. 
The fact, however, that they are acknowledged as 
_marriages show that they were at one. time legal. 
The approved forms are those in which the maiden 
is given away by her guardian, according to rites. 


WOMAN IN INDIA 163 


The tolerated one is the union of mutual love 
apparently without or against the consent of the 
guardian. The three disapproved ones are those 
(2) in which a price is demanded and taken by the 
father, (b) in which the maiden has been forcibly 
abducted, presumably against her will, (c).in 
which a man indulges in sexual intercourse with a 
woman when she is sleeping or otherwise un- 
conscious. This was considered to be the basest 
act, but the act having been done, it was legalized 
in the interests of all concerned.* 


Hindu Eugenics. Hindus -had developed a 
high idea of the laws of eugenics, as is clear from 
the oe rules which we take from the law 
books : 


Says Narada: ‘‘ The man must undergo an 
examination with regard to his virility; when the 
fact of his virility. has been established beyond 
doubt, he shall obtain the maiden (but not other- 
wise). 


“Tf his collar-bone, his knee, and his bones 
{in general) are strongly made; if his shoulders 
and his hair are (also) strongly made; if the nape 
of his neck is stout, and his thigh and his skin 
delicate; if his gait and his voice is vigorous... 
By these tokens may a virile man be known; and 
one not virile-by the opposite characteristics.” t 


The fact that Narada lays emphasis on the 
competency of thé. man, and Manu on the 


.‘*BSee Narada, XII, 38-44. _ 
+ Narada, XII, 8-13. 


164 UNHAPPY INDIA 


eligibility of the woman, also shows what a change 
came about in the ideas of the Hindus from the 
days of Narada’s book to the days of the code 
which is now extant by the name of Manu. 


Says Manu: “‘ Let him (the young man), who 
has completed his studies and is desirous of 
becoming a householder avoid for marriage ties 
these ten families: That by which rites are 
neglected, which has no males, which possess not 
the Vedas, the members of which are hairy or 
have piles: also families afflicted with consump- 
tion, dyspepsia (chronic), epilepsy and leprosy. 


“* Let him not marry a tawny maiden, or one 
with superfluous members, or a sickly (maiden), 
or one without hair-or with excessive hair, or a 
chatterbox, or one red (-eyed), or one called after 
a star, a tree (or) a.river; or one called after a bird, 
snake, or slave; or one with a terrifying name. 


“Let him marry a woman not malformed, 
with a prosperous name, that walks like a hans 
(swan) or.elephant, with slender hair locks, and 
‘teeth, (and) soft-bodied.” 


‘All the lawgivers are agreed that the most 
approved form of marriage.is the one within the 
caste, though they allow a man of a superior caste 
to marry a woman of inferior caste. In the case 
of marriages out of caste but approved, the ten- 
dency of the earlier authorities is in favour of the 
issue getting the status of their fathers, but that. 
of the later ones is against it. Such mixed marri- 
ages explain the numerous castes and sub-castes 


WOMAN IN INDIA: 165 


that are to be found among the Hindus to-day be- 
yond the original four. 


A careful study of all the provisions of the 
present code pf Manu makes one think that at the 
time when this edition was compiled there was.a 
strange conflict of opinion between jurists. and 
lawyers about the rights and position of women. 
Some were in favour of maintaining the old ideals, 
while others were inclined to give to men a com- 
plete mastery over women. 


So far we have considered the position of 
woman in general, or of woman.as wife, but when 
we come to look into her position as mother we find 
that she is at once placed on a higher pedestal, a 
view in which all the authorities agree. In chapter 
II, 145, Manu lays down that the acharya (mean- 
ing a spiritual teacher) exceedeth ten upadhyayas 
(meaning an ordinary teacher) in the claim to 
honour; the father exceedeth a hundred acharyas; 
but the mother exceedeth a thousand fathers in the 
right to reverence and in the function of educator.’ 
Motherhood, among the Hindus, is the most sacred 
function. They respect it all through nature. On 
her merits as a woman, every woman is a potential 
mother. So every woman, other than one’s own 
wife, or one’s own daughter or sister is addressed 
as mother. When talking to stranger women a 
Hindu always accosts them as ‘ mother,’ some- 
times even as ‘sister’ but more often the former 
than the latter. The mothers among the goddesses 
receive the highest homage and are sometimes 
“placed even above the gods. Similarly, the native 


166 |‘ UNHAPPY INDIA 


land is also worshipped as the motherland—Maztri- 
bhumi—whence the ironical title of Miss Mayo’s 
. book. 


' The Hindus are generally very tender towards 
their children. There are, of course, exceptions to 
the rule. In the darkest period of Indian history 
certain customs sprang up, which though confined 
to certain sections of the population_reflect the 
highest discredit on the originators and followers 
thereof; such as suttee,: infanticide, the ill-treat- 
ment of widows, infant marriage, polygamy, the 
selling of girls and dedicating of girls to the ser- 
vices of the gods. Missionary zeal sometimes 
paints them thick, and gives them out as universal 
customs in India. They are sufficiently bad, and 
one at least, pretty general, namely, child marri- 
age, but certainly not so bad or so general as they 
are represented to’ be. Suttee and infanticide 
were never general... They were confined mostly to 
royal families or the highest castes. Swttee was 
originally entirely voluntary. Some of these cus- 
toms have already disappeared. Others are in 
the process. of change and dissolution. All modern 
reforming agencies are pledged to the restoration 
of woman to her original high position in society. 


Legal Status. Hindu law has always recog- 
nized the right of the wife to possess property of 
her own. In chapter IX, 194-195, Manu says: 


“ That which is given over the marriage fire, 
that which is given in the bridal procession, 
that (which is given over) for an act of love, and 


WOMAN IN INDIA 167 


that (which is) received from brother, mother, 
father, (all this) is called the sixfold property of 
woman. That which is received as a gilt (by a 
married woman) after her marriage from the family 
of her husband or of her connections, and that 
which has been given her by her beloved husband, 
shall become the property of her children should 
she die while her husband is alive.” 


In a joint Hindu family, no one, male or 
female, is entitled to a definite. share of property. 
The property is managed by the head of the family, 
in the interests of all the members of the family, 
male and female. A daughter of the family re- 
mains a member of the family as long as she is not 
married, but when married she joins another 
family. In divided. families, widows, mothers, 
daughters and sisters-are recognized as heirs under 
certain circumstances. An unmarried daughter; 
according to some authorities, inherits a share of 
her father’s property along with her brother. Ordi- 
narily when~sons survive they take the whole 
estate of the father, with a legal liability to main- 
tain the women members of the family out of the 
father’s estate. In case of their neglecting to do. 
so and the property being sold, the right of the 
women members to be maintained out of that pro- 
perty is supposed to follow the property, whoso-- 
ever may be in possession thereof. If no son sur- 
vives, a widow inherits the property of her hus- 
‘band with full rights as to the use of the income 
thereof, but with restricted rights as to the aliena- 
tion of it. She can only alienate for legal necessity 
or with the consent of the next heir. On her death 


- 168 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the property goes to the daughters of the family 
with the same rights as were possessed by their 
mother. Similarly, the mother is also an heir in 
the absence of brothers. 


The special property - ‘of a woman is inherited 
by her children (sons and daughters) in the. first 
instance, or in their absence by. the husband in 
Site cases, and py her father’s family in certain 
others. 


Rights of Adopting a Child. A Hindu woman 
has full rights of adoption. She can even adopt 
a son to her husband after his death, if he, in his 
lifetime, authorized her to do so for him, or if his 
blood relations consent. 


Right to Guardianship of Children. In 
certain circumstances,-a mother has the right of 
guardianship over her children of both sexes. 
She is also counted as one of the guardians for 
the purposes. of giving away daughters in 
marriage. 


Rights over Issue. Hindu law books contain 
very elaborate rules as to the raising of issue, and 
as.to-whom the issue should belong after birth. 
These rules will seem to be very curious to people 
brought up in conventional Christian theology, 
but when readin the light of modern advanced 
thought as to parentage and eugenics they will 
not be devoid.of interest. Manu* likens woman 


*Chapter IX, 32. 


*2a}]WIWO7) woydas2 yy ay) JO sloquiayAl 


‘L761 “VWNOOd ‘SJONAYSANOSD S.NAWOAN VIGNI TIV 


‘L761 


*soyeB9[9C] 
“VNOOd “HONAYAANOOD S.NAIWWOAA VIGNI TIV 


‘WOMAN IN INDIA 169 


to land and man to seed. In some places the 
seed is the principal factor; in-others, the womb 
of the woman; when both are good the offspring is 
considered the best. In .a° general comparison 
between seed and womb, the ‘seed is called 
weightier, for the offspring of every created. being 
is characterized by the characteristics of the seed. 
Whatever qualities the seed possesses, the same 
will be found in the produce, ‘ For (though) this 
earth is declared to be the eternal womb of created 
beings, (vet) the seed exhibits in-the things pro- 
duced from it, not a single one of the qualities of 
the womb. In the earth, even in one and the 
same (kind of) land, the seeds which spring up 
after being sown by husbandmen at the (proper) 
time are of various appearances, each according 
to its own natural qualities. Rice, sadi (a kind of 
Tice), mudga, sesame, beans, and barley sprout 
forth according to their seed, and so do leeks and 
sugar-canes. Hence a well-instructed man, aware 
of this law and understanding wisdom and science, 
should never sow seed in the wife of another man.’ 


Dissolution of Marriage. Marriage, according 
to the Hindu law, is a sacrament, and in theory, 
the tie is indissoluble. Once married always 
married, is the formula. This theory discounten- 
ances the remarriage of widows, though it has 
not in practice operated so strictly ‘against the 
widowers. The earlier law books, however, show 
that in those days not only was the remarriage of 
widows common, but that in certain circumstances 
both the wife and the husband were allowed to 
remarry in the lifetime of.their former mates. We 


170 UNHAPPY INDIA 


shall revert to the question of widows in another 
chapter. 


_ Remarriage. First, in the case of the woman. 
Says Narada :* 


‘* When her husband is lost or dead, when he 
has become a religious ascetic, when he is impotent. 
' and when he has been expelled from, caste—these: 
are the five cases of legal necessity in which a 
woman may be justified in taking another 
husband.” - 


Narada prescribes different periods of waiting 
for married women of different castes, in case of 
absent husbands, and says-that no offence is 
imputed to a woman if she goes to live with another 
man after the fixed the has elapsed. To the 
males, presumably, Narada allows greater free- 
dom. Starting witha general injunction that 
‘husband and wife must not lodge a plaint against 
one another, with their relations or the king, when 
a quarrel has arisen through passion, which. has. 
its root in the jealousy or scorn,’ he adds that when 
husband _ and wife leave one another from mutual 
dislike they commit a sin. 


Narada prescribes severe penalties for an 
adulteress but does not omit to say that ‘‘ if a man 
leaves a wife who is obedient, pleasant of speech, 
skilful, virtuous, and the mother of issue, the king 
shall make him mindful of his duty by inflicting 
severe punishment on him.’ 


*Chapter XITI,. 97-101. 


WOMAN IN INDIA 171 


Manu lays down elaborate rules regulating the 
degree af guilt attachable to a husband in case of 
tarnsgression of marriage vows in different circum- 
stances; for instance, it is laid down that ‘ the 
husband should wait one year for a wife who hates 
him; at the end of the year he should take away 
what (he) has given her and not live with her (any 
more).* In the case of a wife taking to adultery, 
Manu excuses her if she hates the husband because 
he is crazy, degraded, castrated, impotent or 
afflicted with an evil disease, but not so if he only 
neglects her, or is a drunkard or troubled with an 
ordinary disease. Even in the latter case, the 
wife’s guilt affords no ground for his setting her 
aside for good. She may \be neglected for three 
months. Manu allows.a man to ‘ over-marry in 
case his wife indulges in. intoxicating liquors, or 
does sinful things, or (always) opposes her husband, 
or is diseased, or plagues her husband, or is always. 
wasting his money... In the case of sterile women, 
however, a man has to wait for eight years. But 
if the wife is of a lovable disposition and endowed 
with virtue though sterile, the husband can only 
remarrywith the permission of the former. 


By the time of the present code of Manu, opi- 
nion had swung to condemn the remarriage of 
widows. I do not think even the present code of 
Manu makes it illegal, but certainly it does not 
approve of it. The ideal of marriage set up by 
the present code of Manu is high from the ordinary 
conventional point of view, but rigid and illiberal 


* Manu, IX, 77. 


172 UNHAPPY INDIA 


from the point of view of modern thought. In the 
opinion of Manu, the whole duty, in brief, of hus- 
band and wife towards each other is that they cross 
not each other, in thought, word or deed till death. 
And the promise is that they, who righteously dis- 
charge this duty here, shall not be parted hereafter 
even by the death of the body, but shall be 
together in the world beyond.* 


The idea was one of complete blending 
of the two personalities into one. “It is said 
that ‘as the quality of the husband is, such 
becometh the quality of the faithful wife, 
even as the quality of the waters of the 
river becometh as thé quality of the ocean 
into which she merges..t The husband here is 
likened to an ocean and his superiority is pre- 
sumed. In another place in the same chapter,} 
it is said that ‘ the man is not the man alone; he 
is the man, the woman, and the progeny.’ The 
sages have declared that ‘ the husband is the same 
as the woman,’ as it is expressly stated elsewhere§ 
that ‘ if the wife be of noble soul and the hushand 
sinful and she determines to follow him in death 
unwidowed, then, even as the strong snake hunter 
grasps.the serpent and drags it out to light from 
the deepest crevice, even so shall her love and 
sacrifice grip the husband’s soul and drag it from | 
its depths of sin and darkness into the realms of 


*Manu, IX, 101; V, 165. 
{¢ Manu, IX, 22. 

t Ibid., IX, 45. 

§ Ibid., IX, 23. | 


WOMAN IN INDIA 173 


light above.’ Here the love of the wife is assigned 
a higher position than the wisdom of the husband. 
The whole idea is poetically put ina book of 
mythology,* where it is said: 


“ He is Vishnu, she is Shri. She is langugee, 
he is thought. She is prudence, he is law.. He-is 
reason, she is sense. She is duty, he is right. He 
is author, she is work. He is patience, she is 
peace. He is will, and she is wish. He is pity, 
she is gift. He is chant, and she is note. She is 
fuel, he is fire. She is glory, he is sun. She is 
orb, he is space. She is motion, he is wind. He 
is ocean, she is shore. He is owner, she is wealth. 
He is battle, she is might:.Heis lamp, she is 
light. He is day, and she is night. He is tree, 
and she is vine. Heis music, she is words. He 
is justice, she is truth: Heis channel, she is 
stream. He is flagstaff, she is flag. She is pany 
he is strength. She is body, he is soul.” 


It will be observed that in this description 
she is superior in certain respects and he in 
certain others. Both are ‘equally important and 
indispensable and inseparable; that each has 
distinct psycho-physical attributes and functions 
which supplement each other; that both are 
present in each individual life; but that in certain 
epochs one with its set of forms and the other 
with its differentia and progress, in another set of 
forms.’t 


* Vishnu Purana, I, 8 Vishnu Bhagavata, VI, 19. 
+ The Science of Social Organization, Bhagwan Das (Adyar : 
Theosophical Society), p- 222. 


174 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The English expression ‘ better half’ has an 
equivalent in Sanskrit (ardhangini) which means 
only ‘one half of the body.’ The idea is probably 
based on Manu I, 32, in which it.is said «that 
Brahma, the Creator, having divided his own body 
into two, became male by one half, and female by 
the other. So divided, aman and woman only 
become a ‘perfect person when again joined in 
wedlock, and only as one perfectedperson can 
they perform effective religious ceremonies. 


CHAPTER XIII 


WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE 


Miss Mayo has made some extremely revolt- 
ing statements about the morals of Indian women, 
and their position in Indian society. She has very 
skilfully (from her point of view) but most dis- 
honestly mixed up truth with untruth. The pic- 
ture she has drawn is not only misleading and 
out of proportion, but a blatant.and~ downright 
denial. of the truth. If she had-merely attacked 
the practice of child marriage and the ban on 
widow remarriage no one would have taken excep- 
tion to her attitude. But she goes out of her way 
to damn Indian manhood and Indian womanhood 
in, a most sweeping fashion by generalizations 
which are entirely untenable. I will take up the 
different questions. dealt with by her one by one. 


The general position of Indian women is 
deplorable enough in certain respects. The Indian 
woman is the victim of her environments. In a 
country.where the political and social position of 
men-is on the whole that of helots or slaves, the 
position of women could not be any better. The 
present position of Indian women as compared 
with that of the Western women is as bad as that 
of Indian men as compared with Western men. 
Miss Mayo’s book gives you the impression that the 
position of Indian women has always been as bad 
as itis to-day. But thatis not true. Our ‘ Re- 


176 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


trospect ’ preceding this chapter must have made it 
¢lear to the reader how erroneous such a conclusion 
would be. During all periods of the history of real 
Hindu India woman enjoyed a better position in 
society than that enjoyed her European sister at 
any time before the mid-Victorian era. 


In Vedic times the woman was an equal of man 
in all that matters. She chose her husband after 
she had attained the age of discretion and under- 
steod her interests. There were no restrictions to 
widow remarriage. This view~is accepted by 
scholars like Sir Herbert Risley.* In certain re- 
spects the woman of Vedic India was freer than the 
European woman even of to-day. 


In Europe the emancipation of woman is a very 
recent event. Not long ago nobody heard of ‘ votes 
for women.’ Even‘ souls for women’ was at one 
time in Europe a heresy confined to a very few. 


The most. prosperous period of Europe before 
the advent of modern science was the one in which 
the Romans were at the helm of affairs. In the 
Europe of the Romans, woman was treated like 
chattel to be disposed of by man at his pleasure. 
Under Roman law the position of woman was in 
certain respects similar, in others inferior to that 
which was occupied by her in Medieval India. In 
India this status was the result of political de- 


_*Sir Herbert Risley was a pioneer in Indian Ethnography. 
His chief book on this subject is The People of India (Calcutta: 
Thacker, Spink). He served as Census Commissioner to the 
Indian Government. 


Mrs. BRIJ LAL NEHRU. 


Secretary, All India Women’s League, Delhi. 
Member of the Government Committee on the Age of Consent Bill. 


36—176 


SHRIMATI LILA DEVI. 


An orthodox Bengalee Lady engaged in the work of social and educational 
propaganda. She has made valuable contributions to Bengali literature. 


37—177 


‘padser Area ut uonisod syne | 9LI—9E 


oy} BeoipurA jou pjnom Yor astuordui0d B 0} BSIDAR oIe OYM pRIeA jo sioqy3y UsUIOM jo Awe afoym V7 
‘TWOauvg LY SYANNOA, NAWOA\—2?|38nNg Yopreg 


rab CS 


wane = son _ 
Lk ba 
RY gs “4 ; 
hee 


* 


NEE 


Z£er oe 
"yealney jo SeIpey oy wWSucwe ONSZOA Ul YonUI VoUepP jo 


wos jermods Be st sly aemiyieyy szedeuacyg uw A\a100G a\doo.y Sy) jo syuvAIaS ayy Jo Joquiow ev Aq payonpuos 


(J2242S ysipy S]atp) vAveApiA, BpyeyA Jeseuaeyg ay) JO syuepnys ou} Aq peuojied *aourcq] eApery 2 


ot \* \ St¢ 
wee Van 
OP |) oon tee 


waar ee 


WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE 177 


generacy. In Europe it was so when the Romans 
were at the zenith of their political supremacy. 


** Throughout her life,” says a woman writer* 
discussing the position of her sex in the days of 
Rome’s supremacy, ‘“‘a woman was supposed to 
remain absolutely under the power of father,.hus- 
band; or guardian, and to do nothing without their 
consent. In ancient times, indeed, this authority 
was so great that the father and husband: could, . 
after calling, a family council, put the woman to 
death without public trial. That women were 
so subjected to guardianship’ was ‘on account 
of their unsteadiness of character,’ ‘ the weakness 
of the sex,’ and their ‘ ignorance of legal matters.’ ”’ 


About laws of marriage under the Romans we 
read in the same author’s book :t 


** As in all Southern countries where women 
mature early, the Roman girl usually married 
young; twelve years were required by custom for 
her to reach the marriageable age. In the earlier 
period a woman was acquired as wife in three 
different.ways: (2) by coemptio—a mock sale to 
her husband; (#%) by confarreatio—a solemn 
marriage with peculiar sacred rites to qualify men 
and. women and their children for certain priest- 
hoods; (zit) by usus, or acquisition by prescription. 
A woman became a man’s legal wife by wsus if he 
had lived with her one full year and if, during 


*Eugene A Hecker: A Short History of Woman's Rights, 
with Special Heleronee. to England and the United’ States 
(Putnam, 1911), p. 2. 


t Lbid., pp. 8-9. 
16 


178 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


that time, she had not been absent from him for 
more than three successive nights.” 


A slight change came in the second century. 
A man could marry even if not present personally; 
@ woman could not. The woman’s parents \or 
guardians were accustomed to arrange a. Match 
for her, as they still do in many parts of Europe. 
The consent of the daughter’s marriage. was also 
necessary, though his power to coerce his daughter 
was limited.* ! 


Christian thought in Europe did not help in 
raising woman’s status. According to Genesis, 
Miss Hecker points out, a woman is the cause of 
the fall of mankind.t St. Jerome held that all 
evils sprang from woman. St. Augustine argued 
that man was made in the image of God, but not 
so woman. He adds that ‘a woman is not 
permitted to have dominion over her husband,’ 
nor can she be a witness, nor give security, nor 
act in court}. The Fathers insist that marriage 
without the paternal parent’s consent is fornica- 
tion. | - 


Among Germanic peoples marriage was 
always controlled by guardianship, the feeling of 
caste was very strong; a woman must marry below 
her station, and was never allowed to be 
independent. On marrying woman passed into 


*Jbid., p. 10. 

¢ Zbid., p. 53. 

t Zbid., pp. 58-59. 

§ Zbid., pp. 79, et. seg. 


Miss SHIAM KUMARI NEHRU, B.A., LL. B., 


Daughter of Pt. Shiam Lal Nehru, Ex. M. L. A., stood first in the whole 
of Allahabad University in B. A., and LL. B., both. The first Lady 
who has been granted permission to practice at the Allahabad 
High Court of Judicature and is being trained by 
Dr. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru. 


Miss CHANDRA KUMARI ZUTSHI, M. A, 


WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE 179 


the power of her husband ‘according to the sacred 
scriptures,’ and the husband therefore medal 
the lordship to all her property.* 


Coming to England, Blackstone who wrote in 
1763, says: 


‘“The husband also, by the old law, might 
give his wife moderate correction. For, as he is 
to answer for her misbehaviour, the. law thought 
it reasonable to intrust him with this power of 
restraining her, by domestic _ chastisement, 
apprentices or children, for whom. the master or 
parent is also liable in some cases to answer...” t 


This was about the time the Abbé Dubois was 
conducting his infamous\researches in Hindu 
customs. Blackstone continues: 


“ The civil law in England gave the husband 
the same, or alarger. authority over his wife, 
allowing him for’some misdemeanours flagellis et 
fustibus acriter verberare uxorem (to give his 
wife a severe beating with whips and clubs) ; for 
others, only modicam castigationem adhibere (to 
apply moderate correction).” 


In the reign of of George III a woman guilty 
of murder was drawn and burnt alive.t ‘ The 
right of a husband to restrain a wife’s liberty,’ 
says Miss Hecker, ‘may not be said to have become 
completely obsolete until the case of Reg. v. 


* Ibid., p. 84. . 
t Quoted by Miss Hecker) op. ee +> P. 125. 
+ Miss Hecker, op. ctt., p. 126. 


180 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


Jackson in 1891.’  ‘Wife-beating is still a 
flagrantly common offence in England.* This was 
in the year of grace 1911. 


As to woman’s rights of property, until about 
the third quarter of the nineteenth century, the 
wife during marriage had no power to alienate 
her land without her husband’s concurrence... The 
widow was entitled to enjoy for her life, under the 
name of dower, one-third of any land of which 
the husband was seised in fee at any time during 
the marriage : 


_ “Our law institutes no community, even of 
movables, between husband and wife. Whatever 
movables the wife has at the date of the marriage 
become the husband’s and the husband is entitled 
to take possession of and thereby to make his own 
whatever movables she becomes entitled to during 
the marriage, and.without her concurrence he can 
sue for all debts that are due her.” t 


During the marriage the wife could not con- 
tract on her own behalf. The Married Woman’s 
Property Act, which finally abrogated the right of 
the husband to the full ownership of his wife’s 
property, was passed in England only in 1882.+ 


Even more worthy of note is what Miss 
Hecker says about the age of consent : 


* Ibid., p. 197. 
- Pollock and Maitland, quoted by Miss Hecker, op. cit., 
p. 129. 
{t Miss Hecker, op. cit., p. 132. 


ochin Ruling Family to take up teaching as a 
profession. , 


'* 


WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE 181 


‘“‘ The saddest blot on a presumably Christian 
civilization connected with this matter is the so- 
called ‘age of legal consent.’ Under the older 
Common Law this was fen or twelve; in 1885 it 
was thirteen, at which period a girl was supposed 
to be at an age to know what she was doing..But 
in the year 1885 Mr. Stead told the London public 
very plainly those hideous truths about. crimes 
against young girls which everybody knew very 
well had been going on for centuries, but which 
no one ever before had dared to assert. The 
result was that Parliament raised the ‘age of legal 
consent’ to sixteen, where it now stands.’’* 


Higher education for. women in England, as 
is well known, is distinctly a movement of the last 
half of the nineteenth century. The suffrage 
movement is all too, recent a thing to require a 
discussion here. 


In Miss Mayo’s Country. 


As late as 1880 there were in America people 
like Rev. Knox-Little, who said, speaking in a 
Philadelphia Church, that ‘wifehood is the crown- 
ing glory of a woman... To her husband she owed 
the duty of unqualified obedience. There is no 
crime which a man can commit which justifies his 
wife in leaving him or applying for that mons- 
trous thing, divorce.’t ‘ Lords on Earth,’ in India 
or anywhere else, could not claim more. 


* Tbid., p. 138 
+ Ibid., p. 151. 


182 UNHAPPPY INDIA - 


Miss Mayo makes much of the speeches of 
some ultra-orthodox members of the Assembly on 
a non-official Bill to raise. the Age of Consent. 
This Bill was introduced by a Hindu member, but 
was defeated because of opposition from the 
official benches. Another Bill fixing the minimum 
age for marriage, brought forward by R. B. Har 
Bilas Sarda, a Hindu member’of the Legislative 
Assembly. was very strongly opposed by the 
official members. It is now in the Select Com- 
mittee stage. What is significant is that the 
progressive element is gaining strength so rapidly 
in spite of opposition from the,’ British Govern- 
ment. That there will always be opposition from 
some- cnservative people goes without saying. 
This trait is by no means peculiar in India. In 
1852 the British Parliament considered a Bill 
against the construction of the first railway! 
Napier opposed in. the Commons the introduction 
of steam power in the navy. Scott denounced gas 
for lighting,..Byron satirized it in verse. Miss 
Mayo’s Boston beat all when (in the year of grace 
1845) it passed a municipal ordinance declaring 
bath tubs illegal except under medical advice! 


More relevant here is the following account of 
the history of the Age of Consent legislation in the 
United States, given by Miss Hecker :* 


“In 1890 a bill was introduced in the New 


York Senate to lower the ‘age of consent’—the age 
in which a girl may légally consent to sexual inter- 


* Ibid., pp. 155-56. 


aj Shrimati NAINA DEVI, B. A., 
oS has been granted State Scholarship by the Behar Government 


and has proceeded England for higher education. 


She has also been elected Indian Representative for the International 
Women’s Conferance. 


Shrimati IRAVATI MEHTA. 


(Kaisar-i-Hind Gold Medalist ) 
Wife of Mr. V. N. Mehta, I. C. S., Collector, 


Benares. 


‘ WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE. 183 


course, from 16 to 14. It failed. In 1892 the 
brothel keepers tried again in the Assembly. The 
bill was about to be carried by universal consent 
when the chairman of the measure, called for the 
individual yeas and nays. In order that the 
constituents of the representatives might know 
how their legislators voted. The bill thereupon 
collapsed. In 1889 a motion was made in the 
Kansas Senate to lower the age of consent from 18 
to 12. But the public heard of it; protests flowed 
in and under the pressure of these the law was 
allowed to remain as it was.” 


American tourists who take stock of woman’s 
disabilities in India would. do well not to forget 
that in their own country woman’s emancipation 
is such a recent thing. The American woman’s 
movement became a force only towards the end of 
the last century. The first Women’s Rights Con- 
vention in America was held at Seneca Falls, New 
York, in 1848, and was ridiculed by the American 
journals as a gathering organized by ‘ divorced 
wives, childless women,-and some old maids.’ 
Who has been in charge of affairs in India—the 
Indians or the British—during the time that the 
American woman has been getting her rights? 


In no period of Hindu history has the position 
of Indian women been worse than, or inferior to 
the one held by the women in Europe and 
America up to the middle of the last century. 
We have already seen that in the Vedic period 
Indian woman occupied a position of equality 
with man. Her position began to deteriorate 


184 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


under Buddhism, but even then legally her posi- 
tion remained the same as before. It is curious 
that during the period of Hindu history parallel to 
the Roman in Europe the restrictions placed on 
woman’s freedom were in certain respects similar. 
For example, a woman required a constant 
guardianship of her male relatives. But in India 
that was the opinion of only a few commentators 
and was never enforced. In no period of Hindu 
history was woman denied the right to make 
contracts, to dispose of her property, to inherit 
the property of her husband in~certain contin- 
gencies (though on a life tenure), to be a guardian 
of her children and to inherit in certain contin- 
gencies as a mother, as a daughter and a sister. 
_ She had, and even now has, the first lien on her 

husband’s estate for-being maintained and housed 
according to her husband’s station in life. Her 
right to receive education and take part in religious 
‘ ceremonies was never denied. 


The present position of woman in the West is 
entirely the growth of the last 75 years. Before 
that in Europe and America, legally, civilly, 
morally and socially, she was under handicaps 
greater than those of the Indian woman to-day. 
Had India been politically free during the same 
period the position of her women would have been 
no doubt much better to-day. If Miss Mayo were 
really a friend of her sex in other countries, the 
opposition by the officials to the private Bills to 
raise the age of consent and to fix the minimum 
marriageable age would be argument enough for 


Burma's First Lady Judge. 


Miss Daw Hme Hmee Khin, B.A., B.L., The Asst. Registrar of the 
Rangoon High Court, has been appointed as Judge of the same Court. 


44184 


Mrs. GOURI PAVITHRAM, B.A., L.T. 
The newly nominated lady member of the Cochin Legislative Council. 


‘WOMAN AND THE NEW AGE 7 185 


her to refrain from eulogizing the present adminis- 
tration. . 


Under the present Indian constitution the 
members of the different legislatures have the 
right to extend the franchise to women. Though 
the right has been acquired. only recently it has 
already been used by most of the major legisla- 
tures, so that women in many of the provinces are 
entitled to vote or seek election for the central and 
local legislatures. Miss Mayo is right when she 
says that we have not many women legislators; 
but may we know how many women there are on 
the American Senate? Woman’s~ vote is a new 
thing and it will take time to work out its 
possibilities. The British House’ of Commons. 
with its seven hundred members contains just 
four women M.P.’s. -In. India, however, some 
very high honours have been conferred on 
educated women. Dr. Muthulakshmi Reddi is 
the elected Deputy President of the Madras 
Legislature, and she is a woman. The President- 
ship of the Indian National Congress is the highest 
distinction that unofficial India can confer on any- 
body—and women have not been precluded from 
it: the Congress counts two women among its ex- 
Presidents—Mrs. Annie Besant and Mrs. Sarojini 
Naidu. That is a sure indication of the proges- 
sive outlook of the Indian Nationalist on this 
question. _ 


CHAPTER XIV 


EARLY TO MARRY AND EARLY TO DIE 


Child marriage is beyond doubt having perni- 
cious effects on the physique of Indians... It.is by 
no means an ancient institution in India.” Messrs. 
Macdonnell and Keith, Sir Herbert Risley and 
other scholars, who have studied the question, all 
agree that the Hindus of the real.Hindu India 
married not as children but as adults. It seems 
safe to say that child marriage was not common 
in India before the Mussulman invasion. Exactly 
how and when this evil system became prevalent 
may be uncertain, but there can be no doubt that 
it is to-day eating into the vitals of the nation. 


However, itis.one thing to admit child 
marriage to be one of the factors responsible for 
the material and spiritual ills of the present-day 
India and quite another to make its existence a 
pretext for ignoring the still more important 
factors. ‘Give the dog a bad name and hang it’ 
is a recognized maxim in political propaganda, 
and Miss Mayo’s observations on early marriage 
in India do not ignore it. 


Child marriage was prevalent among. several 
of the peoples that produced great civilizations in 
antiquity. The Greeks, who still inspire models 
in the harmonious development of the whole 
man—physical, mental and moral—-married very 


Shrimati PATVARDHAN, B.A., 


She has been appointed Honorary Magistrate 
at Madras by the Provincial Government. 


Shrimati K. KRISHNAVANAMMA 


She has been appointed President of the District Educational 
Conference of East Godavari, She is member of the 
Cocoanada Municipality and Secretary of the 
Red-Cross Society and President of 
Local Vidya Vardhani Sabhanam. 


EARLY TO MARRY AND EARLY TO DIE 187 


early. The Romans, who made good soldiers 
and administrators, married as children. So also 
did the Hebrews. In England, down to the time 
of the Stuarts, child marriage was common. 


If child marriage were enough to make a 
nation effete, the Greeks and the Romans and the 
Hebrews would not have left such a lasting 
impress on history. 


The fact is that a devastating factor like child 
marriage is seldom allowed by society to go 
altogether without counterbalancing safeguards. 
In India this safeguard is provided in many of 
the child-marrying castes.by postponing the 
consummation of marriage till a considerable 
period after the marriage ceremony. Marriage 
thus becomes a sort of betrothal, and child 
marriage means only child betrothal. 


Not all Hindus‘marry too early. The lower 
castes for the most part marry comparatively late. 
Among the higher castes too the system is not 
without safeguards in most cases. This fact of 
safeguards» has been noticed by all competent 
observers, among them being Sir Herbert Risley 
and. Sir Edward Gait, both of whom had ample 
opportunities of studying this question in their 
official capacity as Census Commissioners. 


Observe Risley and Gait in the Census Report 
of 1901 (p. 483) :_ 


“Nor one who has seen a Punjabi regiment 
march past, or has watched the sturdy Jat women 


188 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


lift their heavy water-jars at the village well is 
likely to have any misgivings as to the effect of 
their marriage system on the physique of the 
race.” : 


Sir Denzil Ibbetson pointed out earlier in ‘his 
Report on the Punjab Census that the Rajputs in 
the Punjab marry when about 16 years old and 
begin to co-habit immediately, the Jats on the 
other hand marry between 5 and 6 years generally 
—but the bride does not go to the groom’s house 
for several years with the result that for all 
practical purposes the Jats begin married life 
sometimes even later than the Rajputs do. 


Miss Mayo entirely ignores these facts, and 
with her usual ‘courage’ generalizes that every, or 
almost every, Indian girl becomes a mother soon 
after puberty. Says she on page 30: 


_ ** The Indian. girl, in common practice, looks 
for motherhood nine months after reaching puberty 
or anywhere between the age of fourteen and 
eight. The latter age is extreme, although in 
some sections not exceptional; the former is well 
above.the average.” - 


Miss Mayo produces no evidence in her 
support. On the other hand her conclusion has 
been challenged by a woman doctor of Bombay, 
M. I. Balfour, who, writing in the Times of India, 
the leading Anglo-Indian paper in Bombay, on 
October 11, 1927, says: 


* T have notes of 304 Hindu mothers delivered 
of their first babies in Bombay hospitals. The 


“‘aivsisem Are1ouoy] ue ‘oyurjsiseyy Are1ouoy ue 
pejaiodde = useq ApUeeI SPY zapuraiay ‘SIjt rey peyuiodde Apjuader sey aye}Q UIPOD oy, 


zopuemiey esstuoay ‘siyK woud VUYsUyeg “sIyy 


SU i. 


SOOT ai 
> = 


4 


Miss Seeta Devodoss, B.A., Bar-at-law, 


Miss Devodoss, daughter of the Hon. Mr. Justice 
Devodoss of the Madras High Court, has been en- 
rolled as an advocate. Her mother Mrs. Devodoss 
16 a prominent social worker in the Madras Presi- 


dency and a sitting councillor of the Madras 
Municipal Corporation. 


Miss Chandrabai Ponkshu, B.A., LL.B. 


iss Ponkshu, uiece of the late Mr. Gopal 
Krish, Gokhale been enrolled as a pleader at 
Poona (Bombay Presidency), 


EARLY TO MARRY AND EARLY TO DIE =18% 


average age was 18.7 years. 85.6.per cent. were 
17 years or over, 14.4 per cent. were. below 17. 
14 was the youngest and there were 3 of that age. 


““I have compared these figures with the 
reports of the Madras Maternity Hospital for the 
years 1922-24. 2,312 mothers were delivered of 
their first babies. The average age was 19.4 years. 
86.2 per cent. were 17 years or over and 13.8 per 
cent. were below 17. 13 was the youngest age. 
There were 7 mdthers aged 13 and 22 mothers 
aged 14. The Madras figures included not only 
Hindus but women of other communities also. 


**T have reports of 3,964 cases of childbirth 
from other parts of India including the North. Of 
these only 10 were below 15 years of age. 13 
was the youngest age.” ; 


Dr. Balfour concludes : 


** There is no doubt that childbirth sometimes 
takes place too early in India and even more so 
that co-habitation commences too early. Legisla- 
tion, is badly needed. But...the figures I have 
given prove that the cases instanced by Miss Mayo 
do not in the least represent the common customs 
of the country.”’ 


It must also be remembered that for the 
Indian girl almost invariably sexual life com- 
mences after marriage. We shall revert to this 
subject in another chapter, and make a comparison 
with the conditions in the West. 


190 UNHAPPPY INDIA 


If it is true, as is held by several scholars, that 
child marriage in India became prevalent during a 
period of foreign invasions, when the unmarried 
girls stood the risk of being enslaved by the invad- 
ing hordes, it is reasonable to suppose that with 
the disappearance of those political conditions. the 
marriage age ought again to go up. But this is 
prevented by artificial factors brought in by foreign 
rule. The natural inertia that helps,a.custom to 
linger on, even when it has outlived its utility, is 
helped in the present case by the -super-imposed 
State, indirectly by its policies that prevent the 
spread of education and do not raise the standard 
of living, and directly by its opposition to the 
reformers in the legislature. 


En Europe during recent centuries the marriage 
age has risen largely owing to the spread of educa- 
tion and the risein the standard of living. There 
is no reason to suppose that in a free India the 
same factors. would not help in banishing child 
marriage. That these factors, so far as they are 
allowed_to operate, are working against child 
marriage is admitted in the census reports. The 
figures show clearly that in the educated class, 
particularly amongst the Hindus, the marriage age 
is going up. The Census Commissioners admit 
this fact. The spread of education on a nation- 
wide scale is nota problem to be satisfactorily 
tackled by private effort, and so it is stepmother 
Britain that by denying education to the masses is 
responsible for granting a fresh lease of life to the 
old and disappearing order of things. 


Shrimati JAMUNA BAI DEVI SINGH RATHOD, B. A., 
She has been appointed Secretary to His Highness Maharaja Bahadur 
of Gondal (Kathiawar). 


Shrimati S. LAKSHMI. 


She has been appointed Municipal Commissioner of the Vellore 
Municipality by the Madras Government. 


E See TS 


@ ALLAHABAD 
ea 32 


EARLY TO MARRY AND EARLY TO DIE 191 


The Indian reformers pressed for a higher age 
of consent, and legislation raising it from 10 to 12 
was enacted because of their vigorous effort. Sir 
Hari Singh Gour’s more recent Bill aims at raising 
it to 14 in the case of married girls and to 16-for | 
others, but the officials in the Assembly are 
opposed to it. Mr. H. B. Sarda’s Bill for ~ 
minimum marriageable age for boys and girls was 
referred to a Select Committee at the summer 
session of the Legislative Assembly.in 1927 in the - 
teeth of official opposition. The measure still hangs 
fire. Several progressive Indian -States—Baroda, 
Mysore, Kotah and a few others—the rulers of all 
of which are followers of orthodox Hinduism, 
have anticipated the Sarda Bill: Baroda first 
passed the law fixing the minimum marriage age 
more than two decades ago, but the authorities in 
British India are:still hostile to such legislation. 


CHAPTER XV 


THE HINDU WIDOW 


_ Prohibition of widow remarriage is also-one of 
those evil-customs which cannot be justified... The 
lot of the Hindu widow is bad indeed, but the wild 
statements made about the morality of the Hindu 
widows can only’ be described. as products of an 
evil mind. In general Hindu widows lead a life 
of sacrifice and service. Their morality stands on 
a higher pedestal than Miss Mayo’s mind can con- 
ceive of. In making her sweeping statements she 
has only shown her ignorance of the real condition 
and her readiness to generalize on very meagre 
data. 


Firstly, the-prohibition against widow re- 
marriage is not universal. The vast majority of 
Hindus remarry their widows as arule. This is 
the practice,in all classes considered pastoral or 
military... This is also the practice among what 
are known as the low castes. ‘‘ At the bottom of 
society, as understood by the average Hindu, we 
find.a large group of castes and tribes practising 
adult marriage and widow marriage.”* The. 
restrictions are generally confined to people of 
higher castes whose number can in no case 


* Risley, op. cit., p. 178. 


u oe fae D 
isi 


Mrs. CHANDRA VILASA. 
A great social worker of Bangalore (South), 


Mrs. Saraswati NARASINGHA RAO PuRNEAH, of the famous Purneah 
Family of Mysore, has been appointed a member of the Bangalore 


District Board. 


55—193 


Doctor Kumari M. J. SIRAJUDDIN, M. A.. (Punjab), 
Ph. D. (Edinburg) 


Daughter of Prof. Sirajuddin of the Foreman College, Lahore 
She has been appointed Industrial Instructress by the 
Punjab Government. 


Miss APARNA DEVI, B A., (Hon.) 


Daughter of Professor Surendra Das Gupta of the Foreman Christian 
College. She is the fortunate recipient of State Scholarship 
by the Punjab Government. 


B) : 
\FINE ART PRINTING 
$ 


EARLY TO MARRY EARLY TO DIE 193 


exceed 30 per cent. of the total Hindu popula- 
tion.* 


1 


Simply absurd is Miss Mayo’s statement that 
remarriage in orthodox Hinduism is impossible. 
Why, there is orthodoxy. and orthodoxy. I know 
of many orthodox Hindus who have allowed-the 
remarriage of their widowed girls or daughters-in- 
law. The statement on page 86 of Mother India 
that the remarriage of a Hindu widowed wife is 
still held to be ‘ inconceivable ’ is nothing short of 
a, lie. ; : 


Secondly, the rules prescribed for a widow’s 
life are not the same in all provinces or among all 
castes. I have never seen a Hindu widow’s head. 


*« According to the Census Returns [in the Punjab] there 
were only 134,645 widows below 30 years of age, namely, 1,208 child- 
widows between 0 and 9; 6,778 between 10 and 14; 19,346 between 
15 and 19: 41,686 between 20-24, and 65,627 between 25-29 (of these, 
at least three-fourths can remarry). There then remain those 
between 30 and 60 or upwards who have mostly grown-up children, 
and who practically preside over their households. The propor- 
tion, therefore, of marriageable widows is only 1 in 59.43 in a 
female population of 8,015,210 and, as not a fourth of these are 
condemned_to celibacy, the hardship is not so universal as is 
alleged.’ History of Indigenous Education in the Punjab by 
= Le Leitner, LL.D. (Calcutta: Govt. Press, 1882), p. 101, 
ootnote. : 


Again in the same work: 


“There were only 675 Hindu child-widows between 0-9 years 
of age and 4,070 between 10 and 14. Of these, at least two-thirds 
belong to the re-marrying castes. There were altogether 73,390 
Hindu widows in 1881 below 30 years of age, of whom about 
a third are prevented from re-marrying. There were also 53,382 
Muhammadan widows below thirty, most of whom will, no doubt, 
re-marry and only 8,035 Sikh widows of corresponding:-ages. - 
Where is the country in Europe in which practically more widows 
have a better chance of re-marrying than in India?” 


17 ; 


194 UNHAPPY INDIA 
shaved anywhere in the N.-W. F. Province, or the 
Punjab, or the U. P., or Rajputana. 


Thirdly, hard as her lot is in the. matter of 
marriage, in other respects the Hindu widow’s 
life is not so hatd as has been made out by Miss 
Mayo. Professor Pratt, a New England «gentle- 
man from the United States takes a very.judicious 
view of the matter when he says :* 


“The position and life of the Indian widow 
varies, of course, with the personality of the 
woman and with the family in which her lot is 
cast. From writers like Dubois one would judge 
that she is always an object-of heartless persecu- 
tion, asad and unwilling. drudge; while Sister 
Nivedita and her school would have one suppose 
that the Hindu widow is ever loved and fondly 
cared for, and that she becomes a nun given over 
to good works, which spring spontaneously from 
her sorrow-crowned character. Both views are 
doubtless true in their limited way, and neither 
should be accepted without modification from the 
other. Certainly the widow’s lot is a sad one at 
best; and stern Hindu theory believes that it 
should be sad, that for the widow sadness is better 
than. joy. And doubtless those widows who 
acquiesce in this judgment and give themselves 
up willingly to a life of utter self-abnegation and 
‘service shine at the end as gold purified by fire... 
The widowed mother of the head of the house has 
a position not only of respect and affection, but of 


- *India and its Faiths by J. B. Pratt (New York: Houghton 
‘Mifflin, 1915), pp. 130-31. oo 


Late Sir Ganga Ram of Lahore 


A fighter in the cause of social upliftment whose untiring efforts and unstinted 
Charity have made widow-remarriage an established social institution in India. 
umberless young widows bless his memory all over India to-day. 


Prof. D. K. Karve 
Whose devotion and sacrifice in the cause of 
women’s education in India have been exemplary. 
With characteristic zeal and enthusiasm he founded 
twelve years ago “Home for Hindu Widows” in 
a small hut, which institution has now developed 
into the to Indian Shreemati Nathibai Damodher 


Thackersay Indian Women’s University. 


THE HINDU WIDOW 195 


authority and power. Younger widows, of course, 
have no such authority, but they have nearly as 
much work, and if the service be not willing much 
of it must be performed none the less, and for the 
young woman who has no ambition to be a martyr 
ora nun the fate of widowhood in India is very 
hard indeed. 


“On the whole, the Indian home is a very 
narrow and limited place, but it may. be a very 
sweet and holy place as well; and it has poduced 
a type of woman who knows how to love and how 
to suffer and be faithful and lose herself in those 
she loves: a type that has great limitations, but 
which is not without a certain lofty beauty—even 
though at the antipodes from that of the modern 
militant suffragette.” 


Fourthly, the Hindu widow, if she is a mother, 
is simply worshipped. “ Perhaps nowhere in the 
world,” says Mr. Pratt,* “is there more profound 
reverence for the mother than in India.” 


“The wife becomes regent,” says Sister 
Nivedita,t.“" when a man dies during the minority 
of his son; and even if the latter be already of age, 
his ownership of an estate is by no means free and 
complete during the lifetime of his mother. The 
whole world would cry shame if he acted without 
her occasional advice, and, indeed, the Indian 
woman’s reputation for business capacity is so like 


* Ibid., p. 130. 


t Web of Indian Life, by the er Nivedita (Miss Margaret. 
E. Noble), London: Heinemann, p 5 


196 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the French. that it is commonly said of encumbered 
-. property that it needs a widow’s nursing.” 


Dr. G. W. Leitner, first Principal of the 
Lahore Government College, who studied the 
Punjab life during the last quarter of the last 
century very intimately, wrote thus of the-lofty 
conception of marriage and of the state of widows 
among the Hindus :* 


“ The lot of a poor widow is sad enough in all 
countries. to deserve sympathy, but-it is minimized 
in India by the following considerations : 


1. The widows of Muhammadans, of Sikhs, 
of most of the hill tribes, and of nearly all the 
lower Hindu castes do marry, and the widows 
of Jats are bound to marry their deceased 
husband’s brother, for the protection of the 
inheritance. ‘ 


2. The widows who have grown-up sons or 
whose age entitles them to have a voice in the 
management.of the household, practically, and, 
in numerous cases admittedly, rule it. 


3. There, therefore, only remains a compara- 
tively.small number of widows in the higher and 
middle Hindu castes, and among them only those 
are to be pitied who are poor or who have unfeel- 
ing or no relatives, a rare circumstance. 


4. The- misfortune of these, however, is 
alleviated— ne 


* History of Indigenous Education in the Punjab, p. 100. 


Shrimati N. LAKSHMI DEVI AMMA: B. A. 
She is the first Lady who has graduated from the Maharani College Mysore and 
received a Gold-Medal for her brilliant career. 


Kumari V. K. DRAUPADI AMMA, B.A., L. T. 
She has been appointed a Municipal Commissioner of the Trichur Municipality 
by the Madras Government. 


(? i 
ALLAHABAD 
se, 


. 2 


THE HINDU WIDOW 197 


(a2) by the ideal of the sacredness of the 
marriage tie; the hope of rejoining 
the husband and being made worthy 
of his regard in proportion to her, 
generally, self-inflicted privations, 
such as sleeping on the floor instead 
of on a charpoy. It is here where 
religion strengthens and raises the 
character of a ‘noble-minded Hindu 
widow ; 

(b) the social consideration. which is given 
to a widow who, by her acts, shows’ 
her underlying grief for her deceased 
husband; 


(c) the sympathy of her own family to’ 
which -she, in many instances, 
returns; 


(d) the generally liberal provision for life 
that has been made for her on the 
thirteenth day, which relieves her, at 
any rate, from the most. gnawing 
cares and allows her to address her- 
self to the education of her children, 
if any.” 


This is a true account, as I can myself testify 
from my own personal experience of the numerous 
cases that have come to my notice privately, or in 
my professional capacity when I practised at the 
Bar. The following statement by Miss Mayo 
bristles with diabolic exaggeration :* pe 


* Mother India, p. 84. 


198 UNHAPPY INDIA 


‘An inmate of her husband’s home at the 
time of his death, the widow, although she has no 
legal claim for protection, may be retained there 
on the terms above described, or she may be 
turned adrift. Then she must live by charity—or 
by prostitution, into which she not seldom falls. 
And her dingy, ragged figure, her bristly, shaven 
head, even though its stubble be white over the 
haggard face of unhappy age, is often to be seen 
in temple crowds or in the streets of pilgrimage 
cities, where sometimes niggard. piety doles her a 
handful of rice.” ' 


Miss Mayo only shows her ignorance of Hindu 
law when she says that ‘a widow has no legal claim 
for protection.’ A widow has the first lien on a 
deceased Hindu’s estate for her maintenance and 
housing. This has tobe arranged according to 
the social position-of her deceased husband. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE DEVADASI 


Another of the evils to which Miss Mayo 
draws attention is the existence of ‘ Devadasis.’ 
This institution is a rotten one, no doubt. » But 
even here Miss Mayo has supplied some details , 
and explanations from her own fertile imagina- 
tion. On pages 51 and 52 of her book we read : 


“In some parts of the country, more parti- 
cularly in the Presidency of Madras and in Orissa, 
a custom obtains among the.Hindus whereby the 
parents, to persuade some favour from the gods, 
may vow their next born child, if it be a girl, to 
the gods. Or, a particularly lovely child, for one 
reason or another held superfiuous in her natural 
surroundings, is.presented to the temple. The 
little creature, accordingly is delivered to the 
temple women, her predecessors along: the route, 

for teaching.in dancing and singing. Often by the. 
age of five, when she is considered most. desirable, 
she becomes the priest’s own prostitute. 


_. ‘Tf she survives to later years she serves as a 
dancer and singer before the shrine in the daily 
temple worship; and in the houses around the 
temple she is held always ready, at a price, for 
the use of men pilgrims during their devotional 
sojourns in the temple precincts. She now goes 
beautifully attired, often loaded with the jewels 
of the gods, and leads an active life until her 


200 UNHAPPY INDIA 


charms fade. Then stamped with the mark of 
the god under whose egis she has lived, she is 
turned out upon the public, with a small allow- 
ance and with the acknowledged right to a beggar’s 
livelihood. Her parents, who may be well-to-do 
persons of rank and caste, have lost no face at all 
by the manner of their disposal of her. Their 
proceeding, it is held, was entirely reputable. 
And she and her like form a sort of caste of their 
own, are called Devadasis, or ‘prostitutes of the 
gods,’ and are a recognized essential of temple 
equipment.” [Italics are ours. ] 


We do not know if the institution of Deva- 
dasi was one of the subjects. for personal research 
by Miss Mayo. Her researches did no doubt for 
the most part pertain to kindred subjects. But 
here the reader is referred to Sir James Frazer’s 
Golden Bough.* Frazer’s account, however, does 
not ed out all that Miss Mayo says. In his book 
we read : 


‘“In India the dancing-girls dedicated to the 
service of the Tamil temples take the name of 
deva-dasis, ‘ servants of the gods,’ but in common 
parlance they are spoken of simply as_harlots. 
Every Tamil temple of note in Southern India has 
its troop of these sacred women. Their official 
duties are to dance twice a day, ‘morning and 
evening, in the temple, to fan the idol with 
Tibetan ox-tails, to dance and sing before it when 
it is borne in procession and to carry the holy 


*Vol, I, entitled, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, (Macmillan, 1914), 
pp. 61-65. 


Shrimati K. K. KURUVILLA, B. A.» Hon. 
She has been appointed a Member of the Travancore Council- 


———* haan — 


Dr. GANGA DEVI ASTHANA, Ph. D. (Lond.) M. R. A. S. 


oh AAA 
a bi 44, 


ae 


Shrimati PHULWATI SHUKLA;: B. A. 
She is the daughter of Pt. Gokaran Nath Misra, Judge of the Oudh Chief Court, 
Lucknow. She is a born orator and is always interested in matters 
of Social Reform. 


Kumari SUDHANSHUBALA Hazra, 
B. A. B. L., Vakil, Patna High Court. 


THE DEVADASI 201 


light called Kumbarti. In order to obtain a safe 
delivery expectant mothers will often vow to 
dedicate their child if she should prove to be a girl 
to the service of God. Among the weavers of 
Tirukullikundram, a little town in the Madras 
Presidency, the eldest daughter of every family is 
devoted to the temple. Girls thus made over to 
the deity are formally married, sometimes to the 
idol, sometimes to a sword, before, they enter on 
their duties; from which it a Sade that they are 
often, if not regularly, regarded. as the wives of 
the god. 


‘* Among the Kaikolans, a large caste of Tamil 
weavers who are spread allover Southern India 
at least one girlin every family should be dedi- 
cated to the temple -service. The ritual, as it is 
observed at the initiation of one of these girls in 
Coimbatore, includes.‘ a form of nuptial cere- 
mony.’ 


“In Travancore a dancing-girl attached to a 
temple is known as a ‘servant of. god.’ The 
following \account of her dedication and way of 
life deserves to be quoted because, while it ignores 
the. baser side of her vocation, it brings clearly out 
the idea of her marriage to the deity. Marriage 
in the case of a Devaratial in its original import is 
a renunciation of ordinary family life and a conse- 
cration to the service of God. With a lady nurse 
at a hospital or a sister at a convent a Devadasi at 
a Hindu shrine, such as she probably was in the 
early ages of Hindu spirituality would have 
claimed favourable comparison. In the cere- 


202 UNHAPPY INDIA 


. monial of the dedication—marriage of the dasi, 
elements are not wanting which indicate a past 
quite the reverse of disreputable. The girl to be 
married is generally from six to eight years in age. 
The bridegroom is the presiding deity in the local 
temple. Thenceforth she becomes the wife of the 
deity in the sense that she formally and solemnly 
dedicates the rest of her life to his service. with 
the same constancy and devotion that a faithful 
wife united in holy matrimony shows to her 
wedded lord.. The life of a Devadasi bedecked 
with all the accomplishments that the muses 
could give was one of spotless purity. Even now. 
she is maintained by the temple.. She undertakes 
fasts in connection with the temple festivals, such 
as the seven days’ fast for the Apamaragam cere- 
mony. During the period of this fast, strict 
continence is enjoined: she is required to take only 
one meal, and that within the temple—in fact to 
live and behave at least for a term in the manner 
ordained for her throughout life. Some of her 
daily work seems interesting; she attends the 
Diparadhana, the waving of lighted lamps in front 
of deity at sunset every day; sings hymns in his 
praise; dances before his presence and goes round 
with him in processions with lights in hand. After 
the procession, she sings a song or two from 
Jayadeva’s Gitagovinda and with a few lullaby 
hymns her work for the night is over. When she 
grows physically unfit for these duties she is 
_ formally invalidated by a special ceremony, ie., 

Totuvaikkuwa (old mother), entitled only to a 
‘subsistence allowance. When she dies, the temple 
contributes to the funeral expenses. On her death- 


THE DEVADASI 203 


bed the priest attends and after a few ceremonies 
immediately after death, gets her bathed with 
saffron-powder.” > 


Let the reader judge for himself if the version 
in Golden Bough is not at places materially 
different from that in Mother India. 


The institution of Devadasi is a monstrous 
one and every South Indian must feel ashamed of 
it. But it must be remembered that-the institu- 
tion is unknown outside the Southern Presidency, 
and Miss Mayo’s ‘some parts of the country’ is 
quite misleading. Even in the’ Southern Presi- 
dency large tracts like Malabar are unacquainted 
with it. The statement that ‘by the age of five 
she becomes the priest’s own prostitute’ is 
obviously a gross exaggeration. The worst feature 
in the institution is of course the association of 
this class of women with the temples. Some 
temples in Southern India serve as brothels kept 
by priests. But it may be pointed out that some 
of the monasteries and churches in Europe used 
to be, and. some perhaps even now are, no better. 


In Dr. Sanger’s History of Prostitution we 
read.: . 


“ Pope Clement: II issued a bull that prosti- 
tutes would be tolerated if they paid a certain 
amount of their earnings to the church. 


“Pope Sixtus IV was more practical; from one 
single brothel, which he himself had built, he 
received an income of 20,000 ducats.” 


204 — UNHAPPY INDIA 


Emma Goldman, the Russian-American 
revolutionist and feminist cites the above two. 
sentences from Sanger’s work and comments :* . 


‘‘ In modern times the church is a little more 
careful in that direction. Atleast she does not 
openly demand tribute. from prostitutes. .She 
finds it much more profitable to go infor real 
. estate, like Trinity Church, for instance, to rent 
out death traps at an exorbitant price to those 
who live off and by prostitution.” 


At its worst the South Indian Devadasi prosti- 
tutes are no better and no worse than the class of 
prostitutes in Europe and America. In a sub- 
continent with 315,000,000 souls the presence of 
‘a microscopic class like Devadasis is surely no 
justification for condemning the morals of the 
entire nation. 


Reform agencies are at work to abolish this 
vicious custom. It can be confidently hoped that 
ifthe Government does not take up cudgels to 
defend. it, the elected members of the Madras 
Council will not allow it to survive very’ long. 
*“ Now, if it were asked,” writes Miss Mayo, ‘‘how 
a@ responsible Government permits this custom to 
continue in the land, the answer is not far to seek.” 
She finds it in the religious fierceness of the 
orthodox. Yet the action of the Mysore Govern- 
ment is there to disprove her contention. In this, 


* Anarchism and Other Essays, p. 189. 


Kumari LILA BAI, B. Sc. 
She is well connected Rajput Lady who has gone England for higher education 
in Botany. 


pk vagy 
cas 


> GZS 
eee etl 


+rue 


MS as 


PPP AOD 


Shrimati DRAUPADI AGRAWAL, B.A.. B. T; 
She is the Principal of the Mahila Vidyalya Ferozepur (Punjab) and had a 


most brilliant career while a Student. 
Paces \y\, an ey 
=~ Wha C 


Co Route io) 


THE DEVADASI 205 


as in so many other things—in introducing 
compulsory elementary education, in abolishing 
child marriages, etc.—the enlightened Indian 
States have forged ahead whilst the British Indian 
bureaucracy still tenaciously sticks to everything 
that is hideous. 


CHAPTER XVII 


“ SCHOOLING, FREE OF CHARGE ” 


Miss Mayo should have known that in schools 
maintained by the State no tuition fee is charged 
in other countries. Butin India they do charge 
a tuition fee from every pupil in every -Govern- 
ment school. 


On pages 129 and 130 of Mother India appears 
the following statement: “ The rich men of India, 
as a whole, remain to-day still convinced at heart, 
that if indeed their daughters are to be schooled 
at all, the Government should give them school- 
ing, free of charge.’ This statement is on a par with 
other similar reckless statements made by Miss 
Mayo in her book. ~The difficulty is that in these 
general statements she never quotes her authority. 
I have before me~ the prospectuses of several 
schools and colleges for girls in Lahore and I am 
copying the scale of fees from them: 


GOVERNMENT COLLEGE FOR WOMEN. 


(Number of scholars about 69, out of which 30 are 
resident scholars.) 


Intermediate classes, tuition fee... Rs. 60 a year. 
Entrance fee (Intermediate) .. Rs. 2 
University Registration fees .. Rs. 5 


Degree classes (tuition fee) .. Rs: 144 


as 


Mr. & Mrs. BHARGAVA OF AJMERE. 
Mrs. Bhargava was a widow before her marriage to Mr. Bhargava who 
was a bachelor. Both the parties belong to an orthedox Brahmin family. 


68—206 


Dr. GOP] CHAND BHARGAVA, M.L.C., PUNJAB. 
An orthodox Brahmin who has recently married an orthodox Hindu widow. 


69—207 


SCHOOLING, FREE OF CHARGE’ 207 


Entrance fee (B.A.) ... .. Rs. 2 
University Special fee . Rs. 3 


These fees are for day scholars: only. The 
resident students pay Rs. 22 a month in addition, 
i.e., Rs. 264 a year. 


Tue SaereD Heart ScHOoL. 


School Department. 


Boarding fees Rs. 40 a month, i.e., Rs. 480 a year. 

Entrance fee for boarders Rs. 10. 

Entrance fee for day scholars Rs.5. 

Tuition, Infant class, Rs. 8 p.m., i-e., Rs. 96 a year. 

Primary class, Rs. 8 p.m., i.e., Rs. 96 a year. 

Middle class, Rs. 8 p.m.,i.e., Rs. 96 a year. 

High class, Rs. 10 p.m., i.e., Rs. 120 a year. 

School Car, Rs. 10 p:m.,.i.e., Rs. 120 a year. 

-Pianoforte, Rs. 10 p.m., i.e., Rs. 120 a year. 

Lunch for day scholars, Rs. 5 p.m., ie., Rs. 60 a 
year. 


In this school, at the time of writing, there 
were 68 boarders. and 300 day scholars. 


In the College Department of this institution 
fees are up to Rs. 15 a month, and boarding fees 
up to Rs. 40 a month. 


QuEEN Mary’s COLLEGE. 
(A school called college by courtesy.) 


Entrance fee .. Rs. 10 
Boarding fees ... From Rs. 30 a month. 


208 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Day Scholars. 


All classes below Middle ... Rs. 5 per month. 
Middle and High classes... Rs. 10 per month. 


Equally high is the tuition fee in another 
college called the Kinnaird College where.there 
are 130 resident scholars and 120 day scholars. 


No one really knowing- Indian. conditions 
would be so perverse as to say that rich Indians 
want free schooling for their daughters and are 
not prepared to pay for their education. It is a 
gratuitously false charge. 


On page 132, Miss Mayo puts the following 
sentence into the mouth of Miss Bose, Principal of 
the Victoria Girls’ School,. Lahore, which has, as 
Miss Mayo says, 500 students on its rolls: 


“<The tuition fees?’ Merely nominal; we 
‘Indians will not pay for the education of our 
daughters. This school is maintained by 
‘government grant and by private subscriptions 
from England.” [Italics are ours. ] 


. As to the last statement, the following letter 
from Dewan Bahadur K. B. Thapar, O.B.E., gives 
the. truth : 


My dear L. Lajpat Rai, | 


With regard to your enquiry about the 
Victoria Girls’ School, Lahore, with which I was 
connected as Secretary from 1887 to 1914, when it 
was provincialized and taken over by government, 


(1) Miss ELLI JOSHUA, M.A., 
(2) Miss ANNA JOSHUA, B. A, (Hon.) 


Daughters of Mr. K. C. Joshua, Munsiff Trivendrum 


it 


32 
‘2 


oie, | Uremnd| 


Spey 


Shrimati AMMAKUTI AMMAL, B. A,, L. T,, 


Head Mistress of the Girls School and Municipal Commissioner, 


Conjeevram. 


SAUBHAGYAWATI HANSA MEHTA, B.A. 
She is daughter of Sir Manubhai Mehta, lately Dewan of the Baroda State and 


presently holding the Office of Prime Minister of the Bikaner State. 
She graduated in Philosophy. She has extensively travelled all 


over the world and had a most brilliant career during 
her stu. 


A bmn ets hd 


Shrimati KAMLA BAI LAKSHMAN RAO 
She is a highly qualified Maharastra Lady who has been appointed Honorary 
Magistrate at Tinavelly by the Madras Government. 


“ SCHOOLING, FREE OF CHARGE’ . 209 


I beg to state that during all this period the school 
was never in receipt of any monetary grant from 
England or any other country in Europe. 


It was maintained by the Punjab Association 
with the help of an annual grant from provincial 
revenues and income derived from endowments 
which consisted of donations made by ruling chiefs 
and the gentry of the Province. 


LaHone : : Yours sincerely, 
14-1-1928 ; (Sd.) K, B. THAPAR. 
This nails another lie to the counter. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


THE SEX URGE IN THE WEST 


Miss Mayo takes curious delight in dilating 
upon the imaginary sexual depravity of the 
Indians. All yellow journalists know | what 
makes the story spicy. Their books are intended 
to form an accompaniment to chewing. gum—the 
most saleable thing at many American book- 
stalls. Miss Mayo’s ‘ personal. researches’ in 
India pertain mostly to the sexual side of life. 
Here official publications and statistics fail, and 
for the most part she has no reputable references— 
unless you call the Abbé Dubois a reputable 
authority. She has relied. chiefly on hearsay— 
perhaps on her own imagination—and sometimes 
gives us old, insipid. chestnuts. Yet she is a 
woman with ‘ courage ’"—as a sympathetic British 
reviewer of her book tells us—and so she does not 
hesitate to generalize about the morals of a nation. 
She cannot see mud, real or imaginary, without a 
strong impulse to wallow in it. 


Yet. this portion of Miss Mayo’s work cannot 
be summarily dismissed, for it forms the most 
vital part of her argument, and interested persons 
are seriously using it in their propaganda of 
calumny against the Indian people. 

Miss Mayo thinks it is the sexual depravity 


of the Indian that forms the ‘ rock-bottom’ 
/ physical base ‘upon which rests the whole 


THE SEX URGE 211 


pyramid of his woes, material and spiritual.’ To” 
her the Indian’s sex-life accounts ‘for his slave 
mentality, his poverty, ignorance, political 
minority, melancholy, ineffectiveness,’ etc., etc.* 


To prove her contention Miss Mayo relies on 
hearsay and on hospital cases. But if hospital 
cases, the worst selected out of them, are. to form 
the standard by which to judge, India is perhaps 
no better and no worse than countries in the West. 
Hearsay may give you interesting and sensational 
stories, but it cannot command credence with 
serious-minded people. 


Imagine an utter stranger coming to a vast 
sub-continent like India inhabited by 300 million 
people with different usages in different parts, 
with languages not one of which is known to the 
stranger, who still goes_about touring and does 
all the parts in a twelve-months’ time, and then 
sits down to write of the most intimate side of the 
people’s life, making sweeping generalizations 
against the whole nation, basing these for the 
most parton her own ‘ observation’ and ‘frank’ 
talks she-had with people—does not that require 
“ courage’ indeed? Add to this the ‘ courage’ to 
misquote most of the few people whose names are . 
actually given in the story, and you will know 
how to evaluate Miss Mayo’s statements. 


We have not the least desire to slander the 
nations of the West. But Miss Mayo’s generaliza- 
tions about Indian sex morality invite a com- 


* Mother India, p.29. — 


212 UNHAPPY INDIA 


parison with conditions in the West; and however 
unpleasant the task, it has to be undertaken. The 
only way to test the truth of Miss Mayo’s state- 
ments about sex indulgence and sex depravity in 
India is a comparative survey of sex morality and 
usage in this country and the West. However, 
we shall refrain from making statements based on 
hearsay and shall leave the task to be’ done by 
scientific writers and competent observers of 
Europe. 


At the outset we must admit, as we already 
have admitted in a previous chapter, that child 
marriage in India is a factor that does no doubt 
accentuate sex stimulus and cause physical 
deterioration. Miss Mayo’s version is a gross and 
malicious exaggeration—we have examined it 
already—but the existence of this factor is un- 
deniable. : 


Except for this one fact, we do not see any- 
thing in Indian customs and conditions that could 
make the social atmosphere: over-charged with 
sex--as compared with conditions in the West. 
In fact, the boot is on the other leg. Modern 
industrial and housing conditions, the lust for 
cheap excitement which these breed, the big cities, 
and above all the organization of vice on a 
commercial scale so as to get dividends out of it— 
all these factors go to accentuate the sex stimulus 
a. the Western countries beyond anything known 

ere. 


The opportunities for pre-marital and extra- 
marital sex indulgence in India are comparatively 


THE SEX URGE 213 


very rare. Too-early marriage may be unknown 
in the West, but notso too-early sex experience. 
In India child marriage seldom means consum- 
mation in childhood, while it also effectively 
excludes pre-marital indulgence. In the West, 
on the other hand, rightly or wrongly, radical sex 
thinkers now not only permit, but even command, 
some pre-marital experience. The custom, how- 
ever, of ‘ free marriage unions’ is not confined to 
the radicals. These unions, says Havelock Ellis,* 
seem ‘to be fairly common in many, or perhaps 
all, rural parts of England.’ ‘In-some countries,’ 
the same writer continues, ‘ it is said to be almost 
a universal practice for the women to have sexual 
relationship before legal marriage; sometimes she 
marries the first man whom she tries; sometimes 
she tries several before finding the man who suits 
her... Thus in some.parts of Staffordshire it is 
the custom’ of women to have a child before’ 
marriage.’ ‘In»Sweden,’ Ellis states on the 
authority of Ellen Key, ‘the majority of the 
population begin married life in this way.’ The 
arrangement; we are told, is found to be beneficial, 
and ‘marital fidelity is as great as pre-marital 
freedom.is unbounded.’ ‘In Denmark, also, a 
large number of children are conceived before th 

unions of the parents are legalized.’ 7 


In fact, in all ‘ Teutonic lands, the custom of 
free unions is very ancient and well-established.’ 
“In Germany,” the same authority continues, ‘“‘not 
only is the proportion of illegitimate births: very 


* Sex in Relation to Society (6th volume in the Studies in 
the Psychology of Sex), F. A. Davis, Philadelphia, 1921, p. 380. 


214 UNHAPPY INDIA 


high, since in Berlin it is 17 per cent., and in some 
towns very much higher, but ante-nuptial con- 
ceptions take place in nearly half the marriages, 
and sometimes in the majority. Thus in Berlin 
more than 40 per cent. of all legitimate first-born 
children are conceived before marriage, while in 
some rural provinces (where the proportion of 
illegitimate births is lower) the percentage of 
marriages following ante-nuptial conceptions is 
much higher than in Berlin. The conditions in 
rural Germany had been especially investigated 
by a committee of Lutheran pastors, and were set 
forth a few years ago in two volumes, Die 
Geschlechtsittlich Verhaltnisse’ im Deutschen 
Reiche, which are full of instruction concerning 
German sexual morality. In Hanover, it is said 
in this work, the majority of authorities state that 
intercourse before marriage is the rule. At the 
very least, a probe, or trial is regarded as a matter 
of course preliminary to a marriage, since no one 
wishes ‘to buy a pig ina poke.’...In Saxony a 
German pastor was informed: ‘‘ One does not 
buy even.a penny pipe without trying it.”’ The 
- same story is told of other districts and states. 
‘The number of women who enter legal marriage 
still virgins is not large (this refers more especially 
to Britain).’ But this state of things ‘is found to 

be favourable to conjugal fidelity.’ 


Whether ‘this state of things’ is something 
commendable or not, and whether the radical 
code is better than the conventional code are 
questions beyond our present purpose. What is 
relevant is to remember that whilst in India sex 


THE SEX URGE 915 


experience comes a considerable time after 
marriage, in the Western countries it comes 
considerably before it. In comparing the marriage 
age in this country with that in the West this fact 
must not be lost sight of it. 


This conclusion is implicit in Ellis’s observa- 
tion that*—- 


‘* The gradual but steady rise in the age for 
entering on legal marriage also points.in the same 
direction, though it indicates not merely an 
increase of free unions but an increase of all forms 
of normal and abnormal sexuality outside 
marriage.” 


Let him cast the- first stone who is himself 
safe. Miss Mayo, if she had no propagandist axe 
to grind, could more usefully have given attention 
to the sex-life of American boys and girls. Things 
there as revealed by an earnest and ardent 
reformer, Ben Lindsey, for 25 years Judge of a 
Juvenile Court, do not make very pleasant 
reading. .Yet Judge Lindsey’s conclusions are 
based_not on hearsay but entirely on the facts 
with which he was himself confronted in his 
professional capacity. 


Judge Lindsey’s material is drawn from high- 
school boys and girls, for the most part of respect- 
able, well-to-do families, and he is led to the 


* Ellis, op. cit., p. 378. 


t The Revolt of Modern Youth (New York: Boni and Live- 
right, 1925). See chapters 5-7. 


216 UNHAPPY INDIA 


conclusion that the type of American girl he had 
to deal with ‘feels the urge of sex years before the 
mind has grown sufficiently mature to cope with 
it and control it. 


_‘* The first item,” says Judge Lindsey, ‘“‘ in 
the testimony of these high school students:is.that 
of all the youth who go to parties, attend dances 
and ride together in automobiles, more: than 90 
per cent. indulge in hugging and kissing... The 
testimony I receive regarding -this~ estimated 
ninety per cent. is practically unanimous... Some 
girls insist on this kind of thing from boys they go 
with, and are as aggressive in a subtle way in their 
search for such thrills as are the boys themselves.” 


This hugging and Kissing and dancing means 
a life of excessive stimulation and strain for the 
nerves. “ These familiarities,” says the Judge, 
‘are responsible for much nervous trouble among 
young girls and for the prevalence of certain 
physical ailments which are peculiar to them.’ 
The Judge then gives the opinion of eminent 
physicians <‘ that. so far as the moral and physical 
results are concerned, the effect of such half-way 
improprieties on these young girls is just as 
dangerous as if they yielded themselves com- 
pletely.’ 


But the kissing and hugging and dancing are 
only the beginning and not the end. ‘ At least 
fifty per cent. of those who begin with hugging 
and kissing do not restrict themselves to that, but 
go further and indulge in other sex liberties which 


THE SEX URGE 217 


by all the conventions are outrageously improper.’ 
{Italics are ours. } — 


- The ‘ whole-hoggers’ are by ho means rare. 
‘Fifteen to twety-five per cent. of those who 
‘begin with hugging and kissing eventually go. the 
limit.’ This does not, in most cases, mean either 
promiscuity or frequency, but it happens. “TI can 
only say,” adds the Judge, “‘ that the estimates 
come from high school students and:that they are 
the most conservative estimates I have received 
from that source.” 


Judge Lindsey had a lot to do with girl- 
mothers, for he was. consulted by them in his 
professional capacity, in all untoward situations. 
In 1920-21, the Juvenile Courts of Denver ‘ dealt 
with 769 delinquent girls of high school age... 
They ranged in age from 14 to 17 years.’ 


‘* At least 2,000 cases were directly involved 
in the cases of those 769 girls. For one thing, the 
boy had to be reckoned with. In addition the 
two of them always had acircle of intimates, 
many of- whom were in on the secret and indulging 
in the\same kind of experiences. So it goes, 
from.one girl to other girls, and from one boy to 
other boys; and every time I have tried to follow 
up the many by-paths that present themselves for 
investigation it has been like exploring the endless 
passages of a dark cave, whose galleries and 
secrets lead one beyond the limits of endurance.” 


There are other facts which make Judge 
Lindsey infer that— - 


218 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“For every case of sex delinquency dis- 
covered. a very large number completely escape 
detection. For instance, out of 495 girls of high 
school age—though not all of them were in high 
schools—-who admitted to me that they had sex 
experiences with boys, only about 25 became 
pregnant. This is about 5 per cent., a ratio of 1 
in 20. The others avoided pregnancy, some 
by luck, others because they had a knowledge of 
more or less effective contraceptive methods, a 
knowledge, by the way, which I find~to be more 
common among them than is generally supposed. 


‘“Now the point is this, first, that three- 
fourths of that list of nearly 500 girls came to me 
of their own accord for. one reason or another. 
Some were pregnant, Some were diseased, some 
were remorseful, some wanted counsel, and so on. 
Second, the thing that-always brought them to me 
was their acute need for help of some kind. Had 
they not felt that need, they would not have come. 
For every girl. who came for help there must have 
been a great many, a majority, who did not come 
because-they did not want help and therefore kept 
their own. counsel. 


“In other words, that 500, covering a period 
of less than two years, represented a small group 
drawn from all levels of society...but a much 
larger group...didn’t know the ropes and never 
came around at all. My own opinion is that for 
every girl who comes to me for help because she 
is pregnant or diseased, in need of comfort, there 
are many more who do not come because they 


THE SEX URGE 219 


escape scot-free of consequences or else because 
circumstances are such that they are able to meet 
the situation themselves. Hundreds, for instance, 
resort to the abortionist. I don’t guess this, I 
know it.” [Italics are Judge Lindsey’s. | 


The Judge warns his reader, that he igs not 
exaggerating and that the state of things. des- 
cribed by him. is not peculiar to Denver. 


*‘[ have no wish to run these estimates into 
the ground. Even the minimum figures are 
shocking. I handled about a hundred cases of 
illegitimate pregnancy last year (1924), taking 
care of most of the mothers and the babies, and in 
most cases adopting the babies out. With every 
one of these girls it was a touch and go whether to 
come to me and arrange 'to have the baby or to go 
to an abortionist and arrange not to have it.” 


** And that among the girls of high school age, 
some in school and some out of school, in a city of 
300,000 population!’ [Italics are Judge 
Lindsey’s. | 


The following again from Judge Lindsey’s 
book gives telling figures about physical maturity 
among American school girls: 


** We found that 265 of the 313 [girls} had 
come to physical maturity at 11 and 12 years, 
more of them maturing at 11 than at 12. Divid- 
ing the 313 girls into two groups we found that 
285 of them matured at the ages of 11, 12, and 13; 
and that only 28 of them matured at 14, 15 and 16.” 


220 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Havelock Ellis quotes from a report about 
East Germany :* 


“With this inclination to sexual intercourse, 
it is not surprising that many believe that after 
sixteen vo girl is a virgin.” 


This means that all girls in the European 
country referred to mature before 16 and a good 
many perhaps do so very considerably before that. 
In the case of American school girls a similar 
conclusion is arrived at by Judge Lindsey, as we 
have seen above. : 


With the atmosphere ‘thus surcharged with 
sex, it is idle to expect virtue, in the conventional 
sense of conjugal fidelity, to flourish. Monogamy 
according to many. European writers is no more 
than a myth. Says Ellis :t 


“In no partof the world is polygyny so 
prevalent asin Christendom; in no part of the 
world is it so. easy for a man to escape the obliga- 
tions incurred by polygyny.’ Schopenhauer ex- 
pressed the same opinion. 


Looked at superficially, marriage in the West 
may appear to be a happy, perfect system of-love 
marriage. But a thinker like Max Nordau has 
described it as the ‘lie of marriage.’ Nordau 
thinks that not less than 75 per cent. of marriages 
are what are known as mariages de convenance 
and not real love marriages. George Hirth 


 ¥* Op. cit., p. 387. : t+ Op. cit., p. 493. 


THE SEX URGE 221 


[quoted by Bloch] estimates this percentage to be 
even higher still. 


No wonder, therefore, that we find Ellis saying 
on the authority of Professor Bruno Meyer, that 
‘far more than the half of sexual intercourse now 
takes place outside legal marriage.’* 


Recognizing these facts, radical European 
thinkers are advocating unions of a lower degree 
than marriage, and other similar forms of sex 
relationships. One of the strongest arguments 
used by these thinkers is the increasing popularity 
of divorce in European. and American countries. 


““The voluntary, childless marriages of to- 
day,” says Ellis,t ‘“‘ have served to show the 
possibility of such unions. outside legal marriage, 
and such free unions are becoming, as Mrs. Parsons 
points out, a progressive substitute for marriage.” 


In the Western cities, vice has become a 
scientifically organized industry, and a most 
flourishing. one too. M. Paul Bureau, a French 
writer, has described in a recent book, Towards 
Moral Bankruptcy,t the horrible ways and extent 
of this industry. Writing of Paris, he says: 


‘A short time before the War, an agency was 
established on the principle that every woman, 
whatever her condition, her surroundings, her 


* Ellis, op. cétt., p. 377. 
ft Op. cit., pp. 377-378. The reference to Dr. Elsie Clews 
Parsons is to her book, The Family, p. 351. 


towards Moral Bankruptcy. Introduction by Dr. Mary 
Scharlieb (London: Constable, 1925), p 16. 


222 UNHAPPY INDIA 


fortune or her habitual moral conduct can in the 
long run be brought to accept the chance of a ‘new 
experience; while any man who wishes to enter 
into relations with anyone of the other sex has 
nothing to do but communicate with this agency, 
send twenty-five francs for expenses and state the 
amount of money he can offer to the person to be 
solicited. The agency transmits the request; and 
on receiving the reply informs the customer that 
he must abandon his plan ‘at least in the mean- 
time,’ or on the contrary, that his-application has 
been favourably received. I am assured that the 
double list of correspondents makes most instruc- 
tive reading: all the social and financial world of 
Paris is creditably represented.” 


This traffic, M. Bureau assures us, goes on 
‘in broad daylight, under the official protection of 
the police and the: municipal authority and with 
the tacit consent-of a great number of honest (?) 
folks of all conditions and all opinions.’ 


Tn a footnote M. Bureau quotes from Le Bilan 
de la Pornographie a report presented to the Second 
National-Congress against Immorality, held at 
Paris in March, 1912: 


“Alongside of this aristocratic way of keep- 
ing the business going, there are other cheaper and 
simpler ways. At X the performers at a cafe- 
chantant are put into a lottery; they themselves 
offer, in the hall, tickets at ten centimes each, the 
‘winner can keep the woman and her room: for the 
night; the key is outside the bargain. At T, there 
is a kind of exhibition of the female personnel of 


THE SEX URGE 223 


the music-hall; the director, before a crowd of 
spectators, fixes the price for each of the artistes, 
by the month, day or night. It is a veritable 
market—the white slave-traffic.” 


During the War, says M. Bureau* in another 
footnote : 


“ The organization of ‘ war godmothers’—the 
ingenuous founders of that kindly -institution 
never dreamt of such vice—was prompily utilized 
by systematized prostitution, the initiative coming 
at once from both clients and vendors. Several 
daily journals with a large circulation and notably 
two large illustrated papers, Fantasio and Vie 


Parisienne have found great profit in advertise-. 


ments requesting or offering to provide these ‘god- 
mothers’; a single number of the Vie Parisienne at 
the beginning of 1917.had as many as 199 such 
offers advertised.” 


The kind of life that is confined in India to 
prostitutes and devadasis is said by competent 
authorities to.be spread among a far wider portion 
of society.in the West. The younger Dumas 
eh thus in a classic passage defining the demi- 
monde : 


“All these. women have made a false step in 
their past; they have a small black spot upon 
their name and they go in company as much as 
possible so that the spot may be less conspicuous. 
They have the same origin, the same appearance, 
the same prejudices as good society, but they no 


*Op. cit., p. 15. 


a 


224. UNHAPPY INDIA 


longer belong to it and they form that which we 
call the half-world (demi-monde), which floats 
like an island upon the ocean of Paris and draws 
towards itself, assumes, and recognizes, every- 
thing which falls from the firm land or which 
wanders out or runs away from the firm land... 
At the present day this irregular world is in full 
bloom and its bastard society is greatly loved by 
young men. For here love is less difficult than in 
circles above—and not so exepnsive as in circles 
below.” 


'* To-day,” comments Bloch,* ‘“ demi-mon- 
daines are characterized by the, fact that their 
price is high.” ‘‘ They are the prostitutes of the 
upper ten thousand. The. modern half-world... 
forms a. characteristic. constituent of modern 
‘high life.’”’, About the ubiquity of the half- 
world in modern society Bloch says: ‘“‘ Whether 
this especially manifests itself on the race-course, 
at first nights at the theatre, in great charitable 
bazaars, at masked balls, at fashionable sea-side 
resorts, at Monte Carlo, at floral festivals and the 
like, there also we encounter the half-world, and 
its members, in respect of beauty, toilet, distin- 
guished appearance, cultivation and conversation, 
are in no way to be distinguished from the ladies 
of high society.” The half-world, says Bloch.t 
‘plays a great part in public life. The Parisian 
demi-mondaine maintains influential relationships 
with the new great power of our time—the power 


* Sexual Life of Our Time (English Translation) London: 
Heinemann, 1914, p. 346. 


t Op. cit., p. 347. 


THE SEX URGE 295 


of the Press. The journalists who are in the 
service of the demi-monde are by George Dahlen 
termed the Presse-Fridoline, because “ their pens 
are paid, not with ducats but with more or less 
enviable hours of love in distinguished boudoirs.”” 


“ To-day,” says Mr. W. A. Coote of the 
National Vigilance Association, ‘“ London is an 
open-air cathedral compared with what it was 
forty years ago.”* 


But even then things are bad enough. 
“ Women are distinctly abundant,” says Flexner 
(1914), “‘ in the streets radiating from and in the 
vicinity of, Trafalgar Square, Oxford Circus, 
Regent Street, and the various railway stations.” t 


“Brothels,” the same authority tells us, 
““nowadays lead a stealthy, uneasy, transient 
life. In certain regions they are masked as 
massage establishments, baths, schools for teach- 
ing languages orelocution, and so on. The 
methods of attracting men are through the 
medium. of small announcements in the daily, 
evening, and weekly papers.” 


These brothels are run under the guise of 
treatment establishments.t The employ several 
‘nurses’ and ‘assistants’ on the premises during 
business hours, and if a customer is not pleased 
with the choice so afforded him, photographs of 
available girls are shown and the selected one 


*The Master Problem by James Marchant (New York: 
Moffat and Yard, 1917), p. 186. 


t Ibid., p. 186. 
t Tbid., p. 188. 
19 / 


226 UNHAPPY INDIA 


sent for. Veiled prostitution has become a great 
menace. The Shop Assistant drew pointed atten- 
tion to the situation when it wrote :* 


** What is the position of thousands of shop- 
girls working for a paltry pittance not sufficient to 
keep body and soul together? In the case of those 
who have good homes it means that their parents 
are subsidizing their employers, while the poor, 
friendless girl, left alone in the world to rely on 
her own resources and fight the battle_of life, has 
to contend against this unfair competition, and is 
often driven to eke out a miserable existence by 
leading a life of shame. This isno exaggerated 
statement, but is only too true, as anyone who has 
been intimately connected with shop life in our 
big cities can testify.” 


Young girls run great risks and their em- 
ployers incur a great responsibility because of the 
nefarious activities of those engaged in the White 
Slave Traffic. The British Government in 1913 
gave emphatic official recognition to the fact when 
it caused an extraordinary warning to be issued 
to telephone girls against the devices of these 
traffickers. The circular was accompanied by the 
following leaflet which we copy in extenso from 
The Master Problem :t 


WARNING TO GIRLS: FOREWARNED 18 FOREARMED. 


“ Girls should never speak to strangers, either 
men or women, in the street, in shops, in stations, 


* Quoted by Marchant, op. cit., p. 188. 
Tt pp. 195-196. : 


THE SEX URGE 227 


in trains, in lonely country roads, or in places of 
amusement. 


Girls should never ask the way of any but 
officials on duty, such as policemen, railway 
officials, or postmen. 


Girls should never loiter or stand about alone 
in the street, and if accosted by a stranger 
(whether man or woman) should walk as quickly 
as possible to the nearest policeman. 


Girls should never stay to help.a woman who 
apparently faints at their feet in the street, but 
* should immediately call a policeman to her aid. 


Girls should never accept an invitation to join 
‘Sunday School or Bible Class given them by 
strangers, even if they are wearing the dress of a 
sister or nun, or are in.clerical dress. 


Girls should. never accept a lift offered by a 
stranger in a motor, or taxi-cab, or vehicle of any 
description. 


Girls should never go to an address given 
them by.a stranger, or enter any house, restaurant, 
or place of amusement on the invitation of a 
stranger. 


Girls should never go with a stranger (even if 
dressed as a hospital nurse) or believe stories of 
’ their relatives having suffered from an. accident or 
being suddenly taken ill, as ms is a common 
device to kidnap girls. 


Girls should never accept sweets, food, a glass 
of water, or smell flowers . offered’ them. by a 


228 UNHAPPY INDIA 


stranger; neither should they buy scents or other 
articles at their door, as so many things may 
contain drugs. 


Girls should never take a situation through an 
advertisement or a stranger registry office, either 
in England or abroad, without first making 
enquiries from the society to which they belong. 


Girls should never go to London or any large 
town for even one night without knowing of some 
safe lodging.” . 

This in the land which sends out ‘saints’ to 
our country! 


A great authority on prostitution, Dr. Alfred 
Blaschko, after painstaking researches came to the 
conclusion :* 


“Although prostitution has existed in all ages, 
it was left to the. nineteenth century to develop it 
into a gigantic social institution. The develop- 
ment of industry with vast masses of people in the 
competitive-market, the growth and congestion of 
large cities, the insecurity and uncertainty of 
employment, has given prostitution an impetus 
never dreamed of at any period in human history.” 


Public prostitution and the half-world apart, 
there is in modern cities ‘a much more extensive 
secret prostitution.” . Dr. Bloch gives an account 
of the various localities and types of this secret 
prostitution, which covers public-houses with 
‘women attendants,—ball-rooms and dancing 


* Quoted by Emma Goldman, op. ci#., p. 187. 


THE SEX URGE 229 


saloons, variety theatres, low wmusic-halls, 
cabarets. and academies of music. All of these 
are, for the most part, nothing less than brothels. 


The sex stimulus provided by these semi- 
brothels is helped further by wide-spread and well- 
organized pornography. Says M. Paul Bureau:* 
“These great establishments of luxury. and 
debauchery have a most active auxiliary in porno- 
graphic literature, which is at once, the prepara- 
tion and the satisfaction of sensual appetites 
which ever grow more exacting.” The obscene 
literature, picture cards, etc.,. are extensively 
advertised and boosted in journals because porno- 
graphy is a very successful trade. Says M. 
Bureau :f 


“The production of-obscene pamphlets and 
books reaches in France proportions of which few 
people have any suspicion. Some of them have 
reached a circulation of 50,000 in the first edition 
. and are now being sold in their sixteenth at 95 
centimes. _The price varies; so does the degree of 
licentiousness. Thus one can buy Trois Nuits 
damour-for 30 c., Les Péchés roses for 25 c., Les 
Adventures du roi Pauzole or Mariette for 95 c., 
and for 3 fr. 50 c. La Mort des Sexes, or Aphro- 
dite, or Les Demi-Vierges or the Journal d’une 
Femme de Chambre, or...the whole endless series 
of romances by well-known authors. To write a 
licentious book is counted no dishonour; still 
better if it runs into many editions; its success 
may lead to a chair in the Academy or at least to 


* Op. cit., p. 36. t Op. cit., p. 39. 


230 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the Croix d’honneur. Sometimes the honourable 
author sits as a judge at the assizesorin the 
criminal court in cases of abortion or injury to 
those under age, but such, it seems are merely 
youthful sins, which a kindly judgment easily 
pardons and some questionable performances no 
more hinder a fine literary career than they com- 
promise an advantageous political one...” 


No wonder then, that M. Bureau’s. girl in 
Society [with a big S] had to remark, ‘ How tire- 
some it is: I can’t find anything more to read that 
makes me blush.’ M. Bureau continues :* 


** The cheapness of these pamphlets and books 
puts them within everybody’s reach, and the 
number of readers is enormous. Tobacconists’ 
shops and. newspaper, kiosks, libraries and rail- 
way book-stalls, are fairly encumbered with them. 
Along with this licentious literature there is 
another, frankly obscene, and _ reserved for 
debauched exquisites and special collectors. ‘ The 
Lyons and Paris catalogues advertise, one 114 
different works rising to 20 francs the volume, the 
other 229.works from 5 to 10 francs, of which I 
forbear to give the titles; there are copies at 60, 
100.and 150 francs. The very abundant Littéra- 
ture Flagellante includes 22 books by the same 
author... Among foreigners, Italy and Spain are 
the chief centres for the French output. One 
catalogue, “No 108,” published at Madrid, 
advertises 298 works of the most obscene kind. It 
may be had for a franc. The price of the volumes 


* Op. cit., pp. 40-42. 


THE SEX URGE 231 


varies from 10 to 15 francs. Another catalogue, 
from a Barcelona depdt, which must however be 
obtained from Turin, includes a hundred series 
still more varied and more obscene. The English 
works advertised in this list are represented by 
113 various titles—a copy costs from 25 to 250 
francs. There is one book in six volumes of which 
the price is a trifle of 1,875 francs’. 


“ This obscene literature leads its readers on 
to still more revolting productions—obscene photo- 
graphs—but here we enter on the indescribable, 
the unrelatable, and on whatever is.most unclean... 


“This trade is in possession of a powerful 
international organization which pushes the kind ° 
of goods sold, because photography shares with the 
other plastic arts the privilege of a free circulation 
on which. diversity oflanguage places no check. 
‘Portugal, Spain, Italy, Holland, Hungary, 
Germany, Belgium and Switzerland . encircle 
France with their obscenities.’ Perhaps our 
country is in this respect more threatened than 
threatening; the Paris houses are managed indis- 
criminately by Frenchmen and foreigners. One 
house alone.in Amsterdam sells 6,000 different 
series, each containing 25 photographs; another at 
Turin puts out several series at 500, 2,000, 3,000 
and even 7,000 fancs each... ‘ The Boche back is 
broad enough,’ writes M. Pouresy, ‘but truth 
obliges us to say that every week more than 

- 300,000 copies of illustrated French papers, 
published in Paris by Frenchmen, commend to the 
public lists in which the most licentious series are 
advertised.’ she's 


232 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“* This clandestine trade, to which the police 
shut their eyes, occasions ravages, the gravity of 
which is not suspected by the public. “These filthy 
photographs,’ says M. Emile Poursey, ‘produce an 
incredible disturbance of the senses, and tend to 
urge the unfortunate people who buy them to the 
most, monstrous crimes’. Their disintegrating 
action upon boys and girls is fearful, and we have 
seen many colleges ruined morally and physically 
by their means. For girls there is no more power- 
fully destructive agent. We will say-nothing of 
their effect upon rakes, libertines“ and old men, 
whom they lead quickly to sadism and satyrism.” 


These pornographic publications are no mere 
offence against prudery. They are the schools to 
instruct people in all sorts of perversions. Miss 
Mayo makes so much fuss about the nude sculp- 
ture in a few of the Saivite temples. The nude 
has never been absent from European paintings 
and sculpture, and a great artist like Leonardo da 
Vinci—perhaps the greatest figure thrown up by the 
Renaissance—is' said to have painted the sexual 
embrace in one of his remarkable pictures. But 
the commercial and popular pornographic Press 
of these days has no artistic considerations to 
justify-its existence. Bloch alludes to the motifs 
m the pornographic products and the centres of 
this industry : 


“ Side by side with these higher pornographic 
works,* there exists also a lower kind—obscene 
garbage writings and pornographic pictures of the 


*Of these we shall speak presently. 


THE SEX URGE 233 


worst possible kind, such as picture postcards, 
act-photographs, etc., in which all possible sexual 
perversities are represented either in printed 
matter or by pictures. [We omit the details; the 
curious may turn to Bloch’s book.].... They are 
manufactured in France, Germany, Belgium and 
Spain (especially in Barcelona).”* 


Another successful industry of a similar kind 
is the manufacture of ‘fornicatory dolls,’ ‘Parisian 
rubber goods.’ etc. 


All these ‘industries’ spend a good ‘deal on 
advertising. Miss May alludes to the advertise- 
ments of quacks in Indian papers as showing the 
conditions of the people here. But the advertise- 
ments that appear inthe Press in the Western 
countries are something far less creditable. 
Dr. Bloch gives samples of these in his book :t 


“ The majority of matrimonial advertisements 
are inserted for mercenary or interested purposes, 
and really.belong to the category of ‘ immoral 
advertisements ’ which conceal] themselves under 
all possible titles... 


‘“ A young widow, twenty seven years of age,: 
desires friendly intercourse with a man of position, 
who will assist her with word and deed. 


‘““A young stranger desires acquaintanceship 
[!] to relieve her of a temporary difficulty. 


* Op. cit., pp. 736-737. 
+ Op. cit., pp. 723 et. seq. 


234 ' ‘- UNHAPPY INDIA 


ty merchant, a man of middle age, desires the 
acquaintanceship of a good-looking lady (a slender 
figure preferred), for the purpose of friendly inter- 
course. 


‘‘A young merchant, between twenty \and 
thirty years of age, desires. friendly intercourse 
with a young man of good family. 


“ A young vigorous [!] man, a Swiss, twenty- 
four years of age, well recommended, desires a 
situation with a gentlewoman living alone. 


‘A wealthy, talented uranian young man 
desires the patronage of a noble well-to-do urning. 


“The numerous advertisements also in which 
young girls and women or widows desire ‘position’ 
as housekeepers, companions, etc., in the houses 
of ‘ well-to-do gentlemen ’ ‘ living alone’ have, asa 
rule, an immoral™~basis.” Also often advertise- 
ments for teaching languages. 


“ Advertisements of Rooms.—Among these 
advertisements we find that of the ‘ convenient 
room ’.or the room ‘ with separate entrance ’—the 
“storm free diggings ’ of the student. Such rooms 
are usually offered to men; women must seek them 
for themselves... 


“ The advertisements regarding rooms to be 
let ‘ during the day ’ mostly refer to opportunities 
for...(‘Shouses of accommodation’). 


** Private Enquiries.—Under this heading 
persons advertise in the. newspapers that for an 


THE SEX URGE 235 


honorarium (usually a very high one) they. will 
undertake to watch secretly any desired person— 
and almost invariably such watching relates to the 
sexual life and activity of the person under 
observation; when employed, they use all the 
methods of the most unscrupulous detective... A 
detective advertisement of this character‘is. the 
following : 


PRIVATE INQUIRY. 


- “Confidential! Enlightening! Unfailing! 
Truthful! Universal! Extraordinarily satisfactory 
conjugal inquiries; mode of life, family relation- 
ships, liaisons, peculiarities-of character, occupa- 
tions, present condition, past misconduct, future 
pees: state of property, secret intercourse, 
etc., etc.” 


The ‘higher’ pornography to which Bloch 
refers in the passage quoted on page 234 is the 
pornography in literature, and the drama, etc. 
About the drama and the revue in France 
M. Bureau writes :* 


‘““Who does not know, in France or among 
foreigners, how perseveringly our dramatic 
authors have devoted themselves, these last thirty 
years, to place on the stage all the most scandalous 
passages of adultery and free love, of licentious 
life and of divorce? Under the pretence of re-. 
presenting the manners of our time one would 
imagine that France had none but unfaithful 


** Op. cit., pp. 43-45. 


236 UNHAPPY INDIA 


spouses, no husbands except boors and fools, and 
that women of the demi-monde have a monopoly 
of delicate and honourable sentiments. The 
manners of abandoned persons, the vilest passions, 
alone deserve the honours of the stage... 


“ At B, monologues and songs are grossly 
obscene; the tableux and dramatic scenes too, go 
so far as to picture the sexual relations. The 
audience—there are more than a thousand 
distinguished spectators (at least they~ appear so) 
oan frantically. At N, the-little songs, the 
most obscene monologues and some gestures which 
are veritable public outrages on chastity are 
‘applauded by children and. young people under 
the approving eyes of their parents. At L, a very 
numerous audienec calls. five times the cabotin 
who ends his turns with the most lascivious little 
song imaginable. 


“The revues in which there is even more 
‘intrigue are greatly appreciated, because they 
afford opportunity in every stanza for the greatest 
excess of _filthiness.” 


Since the War this thing has been on the 
increase. The ‘incest motif’ in_ particular 
appears to find special favour. In one of 
Mr. Noel Coward’s dramas mother and son are 
represented in incestuous relationship. There 
are hordes of other people who have not the 
artistic qualities even of Mr. Coward, but 
who pander successfully to the depraved tastes. 
Mr. James Agate, British dramatic critic, 


THE SEX URGE 937 


in his book* published last year, tells us that 
Mr. Somerset Maugham’s Our Betters has set a 
fashion for people without his talent to produce 
what he calls ‘ naughty plays.’ The London stage 
just now is all but monopolized by these ‘ naughty 
plays’. Mr. Agate, however, feels sure that this 
is only a passing fashion and will not last. long. 
Let us hope it will not. 


The Government of India has appointed a 
Cinematograph Enquiry Committeebecause it 
wants to encourage British films as against 
American films. One of the charges against the 
American films is that they provide an exaggerated 
sex stimulus, and the Government is anxious to 
protect the Indian youth against it. Indian 
opinion is not in favour of this discrimination 
against America, for India with her present 
status has no cause to-be grateful to Britain or the 
Empire. The talk of ‘ protecting the morals of 
the youth ’ is mere cant. Censorship generally is 
cant. Who can forget the way this cant was 
exposed in one of Bernard Shaw’s prefaces? The 
censorship, it seems, banned only the plays by 
authors with a sound moral view—Shaw, Tolstoi, 
Ibsen. Shaw’s Mrs. Warren's Profession was 
banned and could not be brought on the stage for 
years. Shaw showed very successfully in his 
preface to the play that his book was not immoral 
enough to be permitted ! 


* 


*A Short View of the English Stage, 1900-26 (London: 
Herbert Jenkins). . 


238 : UNHAPPY INDIA 


Whether the radical code will solve these 
problems better than the conventional code which 
is honoured to-day more in the breach than in the 
observance, is yet problematic. What appears 
certain to competent observers is that in the 
modern western life sex stimulus is exaggerated 
beyond healthy limits. Says Bloch :* 


** A great physician has said: ‘ We eat three 
times too much.’ I might add, in amplification of 
this saying, not only do we eat three times too 
much, but we look for all other .sensual pleasures 
in excess, and for this reason we love also three 
times too much, or rather, we indulge too often in 
sexual intercourse.” 


This ‘ oversexed ’ life is leading to very perni- 
cious psychological results. Bloch quotes approv- 
ingly the opinion of Willy Hellpach, ‘ one of our 
most talented psychologists ’ : 


‘To the enormous majority of our young men 
sexual indulgence is a matter. of course, like their 
card-parties, their evenings at the club, their glass 
of beer; and of the few who live otherwise, a 
considerable proportion do .so_ simply from 
timidity,.or from poverty of spirit.” 


A popular British author, ‘ A Gentleman with 
a Duster,’ expresses the same opinion in one of his 
very popular books, The Glass of Fashion :t 


*Op. cit... : me Eg ad 
f Lendon: Mills and Boon, pp. 131-132. 


THE SEX URGE 239 


“This atmosphere, which is now almost 
universal throughout society, I regard as fatal to 
the higher life of the human race. It makes 
passion one of the indecencies of life—a subject for 
grins and whispers, a theme for revue, an oppor- 
tunity for gossip, a matter on all fours with a dirty 
story. It is a destructive atmosphere. It kills 
love as readily as an abortionist kills-a future 
human being.” 


Sex indulgence is now becoming merely a 
means for ‘ killing time, the great modern disease,’ 
as Bloch puts it. ‘ Killing time,’ or having a 
‘good time’ seems now to be nothing short of a 
malady. The author of The Glass of Fashion* 
lays his finger unerringly. when he puts down 
much of modern vice toa diseased craving for 
vacuous good time: 


“The vice ofour public streets has under- 
gone a remarkable change. There is a new race of 
immoral women. They come from. offices and 
shops. They are young, and the glamour of the 
summit has bewitched them. They desire the life 
of fashion, the life of indelicafe clothes, gilded 
restaurants, the theatre, and the night-club. 


“‘ They are not vicious. They have none of 
the criminal instincts of those women who 
complain of their competition. Ask them what 
they want, and they will tell you ‘a good time.’ 
That is all. They want to see life. They have 


*p. 142. 


240 UNHAPPY INDIA 


looked up to our highest, and in their own small 
way would copy them, So they sell first their 
modesty and then their virtue. It is the price they 
pay for ‘a good time’.” 

* 


Things do not stop here. This state of affairs 
leads to horrible crimes and a horrible prevalence 
of venereal disease. Miss Mayo speaks of the 
great prevalence of venereal disease among 
Indians. For her generalization she has no 
figures, no medical authority, no investigation to 
go upon. She merely gives some™~ hospital cases, 
often without telling the reader’ where and how 
she got them, and then begins to generalize. 
There is good reason to suppose that venereal 
disease in India is not.as wide-spread as it is in the 
West. It is a matter of history that in this respect 
Europe has proved a “‘-world-menace.’ India along 
with other Asiatic countries got syphilis from 
the Portuguese and other European peoples four or 
five centuries.ago, even as several primitive races 
in Africa are. getting it.to-day from their white 
civilizers.. Indians call syphilis frangi rog or the 
‘Frankish disease’ because they got it from the 
‘Franks’ or Europeans. Dr. Iwan Bloch has 
gone.into the matter thoroughly in his History of 
Syphilis, and shown conclusively that till the end 
of the fifteenth century this fell disease was un- 
known in the civilized world. This history is 
summed up by this eminent authority in these 
words : - 


*Op. cit., p. 355. 


THE SEX URGE 241 


_ “ Syphilis was first introduced into Spain in 
the years 1493 and 1494 by the crew of Columbus, 
who brought it from Central America, and more 
especially from the island of Hyati, from Spain it 
was carried by the army of Charles VIII to Italy, 
where it assumed an epidemic form; and after the 
army was disbanded the disease was transported 
by the soldiers to the other countries of Europe, 
and also was soon taken by the Portuguese to the 
Far East, to India, China and Japan. 


In the sixteenth century in Europe, historians 
of this disease tell us, syphilis’ was almost pan- 
demic, particularly amongst the well-to-do classes. 


Dr. Bloch notices that syphilis in Europe has 
now become comparatively mild, for the white 
people have become to some extent immune 
from it because of its-wide prevalence amongst 
their ancestors. .““Our forefathers,” says Bloch,* 
“ carried out for us a great part of the campaign 
against syphilis,”—by themselves becoming victims 
of the disease’ He quotes Albert Reimbayr as 
saying : 


“During the last 400 years, every. human 
being now living in Europe has had about 4,000 
ancestors; of these, however disagreeable the fact 
may seem, a considerable number must have had 
to contend with syphilis.” 


Investigations carried out in different Western 
countries and cities about the spread of venereal 


*Op. cit., p. 384. 
20 


242 UNHAPPY INDIA 


disease do not show a bright prospect. The 
‘Western Governments are spending a great deal 
on anti-syphilis campaigns and on popularizing 
prophylactic methods. The Indian Government 
has done but little in this direction. Still it is 
apparent in this matter that conditions in the West 
are much worse than in India. 


Bloch gives results of an investigation carried 
out in Prussia in 1900, and quotes Kirchner who 
assumes that ‘every day in Prussia~ more than 
100,000 individuals are suffering from a transmis- 
sible venereal disease.” From «Blasekka’s inquiry, 
Bloch tells us: ‘‘ It appears that, of the men who 
entered on marriage for the first time when above 
the age of thirty years, each one had, on the 
average, had gonorrhea twice, and about one in 
four or five had been. infected with syphilis.”* 


The following based on Copenhagen figures is 
also taken from Bloch’s authoritative work :t 


‘On the average, there are infected with 
venereal disease every year 16 to 20 per cent. of 
all young men between the ages of 20 and 30 years; 
with gonorrhea 1 in 8 are infected; with svphilis 1 
in 55.are infected. In these last ten years, for every 
100 young men living, there have been 119 infec- 
tions during ten years; that is to say, on the 
average every one has been infected more than 
once.’ 


* Op. ctt., pp. 394;395. ' 
+ Op. cit., p. 393. 


THE SEX URGE 243 


Yet conditions in Denmark are far better than 
in most other European countries. Says Bloch :* 


“Denmark, Germany, German-Austria, and 
Switzerland show the most favourable conditions; 
next come Belgium, France, Spain, Portugal.and 
North and Middle Italy. Worst of all are-—the 
‘conditions in Southern Italy, Greece, Turkey, 
Russia and England.” 


In Havelock Ellis’s book we read :t 


“In America a committee of the Medical 
Society of New York, appointed to investigate the 
question, reported as the result of exhaustive 
inquiry that in the city of New York not less than 
a quarter of a million of cases of venereal disease 
occurred every year, and a leading New York 
dermatologist has stated that among the better 
class families he knows intimately at least one- 
third of the sons_have had syphilis. In Germany 
800,000 cases of venereal disease are by one 
authority estimated to occur yearly, and in the 
larger universities 25 per cent. of the students are 
infected every term, venereal disease being, how- 
ever, specially common among students. The 
yearly number of men invalided in the German 
army by venereal disease equals a third of the 
total number wounded in the Franco-Prussian 
war. Yet the German army stands fairly high as 
regards freedom from venereal disease when 
compared with the British army which is more 
syphilized than any other European army.” 


*Op. cit., p. 392. 
t Sex in Relation to Society, p. 327. 


244 UNHAPPY INDIA 
In a footnote to this Ellis adds: 


‘* Even within the limits of the English army 
_ it is found in India (H. C. French, Syphilis in the 
Army, 1907) that venereal disease is ten times more 
frequent among British troops than among Native 
troops. Outside of national armies it is found, by 
admission to hospital and death rates, that the 
United States stands far away at the head for 
frequency of venereal disease, being followed by 
Great Britain, then France and Austria-Hungry, 
Russia and Germany.” 


Giving evidence before the Royal Commission 
for venereal diseases in 1914, Dr. Douglas White 
stated that, according to his estimate, there were 
every year ‘122, 500 fresh cases of sexual disease in 
London alone and 800,000 in the United Kingdom; 
of these 114,000 would-be cases of syphilis. From 
these figures he deduced that there must be in the 
United Kingdom some 3 million syphilitics.** Add 
to this figure the enormous number of those who 
have at some. period of their life suffered from 
gonorrhea and then you will find that Miss 
Christabel) Pankhurst’s estimate of about 75 per 
cent, of the population having at some time or 
other suffered from venereal disease is not an over- 
drawn picture. 


We shall conclude the section on venereal 
disease with two brief quotations about gonorrhea’ 
from Ellis : t 


*The Master Problem. 
t Op. cit., pp. 330-33. 


THE SEX URGE 245 


_ ‘In America, Wood Ruggles has given (as 
had Noggerath previously, for New ape the 
prevalence of gonorrhea among adult males as 
from 75 to 80 per cent.” 


About England we read : 


‘In England, a writer in the Lancet, some 
years ago, found, as the result of experience and 
inquiries, that 75 per cent. adult males have had 
gonorrhea once, 40 per cent. twice, 15 per cent. 
three or more times.” 7 


India may or may not be a world-menace. 
But Europe has proved to be a world-menace in 
history by infecting the world with: venereal 
disease. Even to-day it is infecting the primitive 
races whom it sets out-to civilize, and even to-day 
zs Ss @ menacing amount of this dangerous 
stock. 


* 


* No country has been denounced more severely as a ‘world- 
menace’ than Soviet Russia,—and of course Russia zs a menace 
to the interests represented by those who thus denounce her. 
However,-it_seems particular attention ought to be drawn to one 
fact : “Syphilis...has reached the proportions of a terrible plague; 
it is bad enough in the towns, but in the country there is not a 
village. which has not been infected. There is not the least 
exaggeration in this statement, which is founded upon informa- 
tion given to me personally by Dr. Siemashko [Commissioner for 
Health] and upon official announcements made...in the Bolshevik 
newspapers... Syphilis, as we know, is very wide-spread, far 
more wide spied than the average person supposes. But here 
we have a whole nation composed of 130 million souls stricken. One 
shrinks from imagining how awful must be the effects upon the 
race in the future; and upon the races with which it may be in 
contact.” See p. 238 of The Russian Revolution, 1917-1926 by 
Lancelot Lawton (Macmillan). This description, if true, might 
be some justification for calling Russia a world-menace. 


246 UNHAPPY INDIA 


In spite of the popularity of contraceptive 
methods in all strata of European society to-day 
abortion seems to be on the increase. M. Paul 
Bureau writes :* 


“In 1905 Dr. Doleris submitted other figures 
to the Obstetrical Society. ‘Seven years since, at 
the Boucicaut Hospital, the proportion of abortions 
to deliveries was 7:7; it is now 17 :7. 


And in a footnote he tells us: 


* Yet M. Lucas Champonniere (surgeon) has 
challenged these figures as insufficient.” 


Again :t 


“In his Precis de medicine legale Professor 
Lacassagne of Lyons, basing his estimate on very 
grave reports which it is;impossible to reproduce 
here in detail, reckons the annual number of 
abortions committed. at Lyons at 10,000. Now 
the population is about 550,000, and the annual 
birth-rate between 8,000 and 9,000. Accord- 
ing to the-same physician, one may estimate 
the annual abortions in France at half a 
million, i-e., two-thirds of the birth-rate. As to 
Paris, Dr. Robert Monin says : “We reckon 100,000 
as the annual number of abortions, and we are 
pretty sure this is below the truth. Professor 
Bordin reckons at 500 a day, i.e., 182,500 a year, 
the number for the whole country. Dr. Paul 
Landroy, formerly President of the Societé de 


* Op. cit., p. 26. 
+ Lbid., p. 28. 


THE SEX URGE 247 


Medicine, maintains that there are nowadays more 
abortions than births. These estimates are far 
from agreeing with each other. If I may add my 
own opinion, I should say, without entering into 
the details on which it is grounded, that the 
number is, approximately, between 275,000 and 
325,000, and this figure agrees with that reached in 
1900 by the Societé Obstetricale de France, which 
reckoned that abortion destroys about one-third of 
the results of conception. 


“ According to Dr. Boissard) (Journal du 
Practicien, 1908) there were at Lyons 150 midwives, 
of whom at least 100 were suspects. One of them 
acknowledged that she caused about three abor- 
tions a week—150 per annum. Taking the 
suspects’ average at 100, one arrives at a total’ of 
10,000 abortions for 550,000 inhabitants. There 
are, therefore, at.Lyons more abortions than 
births.” 


In France, anyway, M. Bureau tells us that 
the crime of abortion. ‘no longer disturbs public 
opinion, therefore neither does it disturb the 
magistracy.’ ‘ Without recourse to Parliament, 
custom has abolished law.’ In such a state of 
affairs there is perhaps something to be said for 
the Soviet Russian practice of providing well- 
equipped state clinics for abortion, and granting 
easy licences for it. This frankly recognizes facts 
and makes the best of a bad bargain. Civilized 
Europeans express horror atthe immorality of 
the Bolsheviks and at the large number of yearly 
abortions in Russia. But the Russians do not pass 


248 UNHAPPY INDIA 


? 


off their abortions as ‘ operations for appendicitis 
as the Americans do. 


From abortion to infanticide is but a step, 
and infanticide is by no means very rare. During 
the period that the custom of infanticide has been 
disappearing in India, for quite different reasons 
the practice of it has been increasing in -some 
Western countries. Of France M. Bureau tells 
us: 


‘In the wake of abortion come infanticide, 
incest, and crimes that outrage nature. There is 
nothing special to say about the first, except that 
the crime has become more frequent in spite of all 
facilities offered to unmarried mothers and of 
the extension of anti-conceptionist practices and 
abortion It no longer arouses the same reproba- 
tion among so-called ‘respectable’ people, and 


9°99 


juries usually return. a verdict of ‘not guilty’. 


The following two cases are cited by M. Bureau 
as showing the attitude of the French magistracy 
toward infanticide :t 


“In. February, 1918, the Court of Assize for 
the Loire district acquitted, in two separate affairs, 
two women guilty of infanticide, the girls F and 
D. The former had drowned her infant, though 
her relatives had offered to bring up the child, as 
they had done in the case of another to whom she 
had ‘previously given birth. The girl D had 


* [otd., p. 35. 
t Op. cit., p. 35, footnote. 


THE SEX URGE 249 


strangled her baby and finished it by knocking its 
head against a wail. 


_ ‘In March, 1918, the jury of the Seine even 
surpassed this, and acquitted a dancer at the La 
Scala, Maria M., age twenty-one, who had tried to 
tear out her infant’s tongue, crushed its skull and 
cut its neck. She had then hidden the body in a 
cupboard. And this took place in March 1918, in 
the capital of France, on the eve of those. bloody 
days when the flower of the country’s youth went 
to face death that France might live.” 


Considering that this murder of infants is 
much more deliberate than.that’ amongst people 
who commit it in deference to a rotten old usage, 
one should not be surprised to find it accompanied 
by callousness towards children, and ‘ offences 
against young persons’: But let that form the 
subject for a separate chapter. 


The other and more horrible crimes in Europe 
and America, incest, bestiality, etc., would be too 
revolting reading, and those who want informa- 
tion about.these may look into the authoritative 
books-of Bloch, Kraft-Ebning and other medical 
authorities. 


* 


Miss Mayo has canonized Anglo-Indian 
offcialdom. Their ranks, she says, contain many 
a saint. The ‘saints’ seem to be in their heart of 
hearts glad over her muck-raking, for it depicts 
their political opponents as blackguards and 
sexual perverts. We have no desire to slander 


250 UNHAPPY INDIA 


their community, but it is only fair to point out 
to them that if an American tourist has used the 
tar, brush in describing Indian morals, others may 
use, and in fact have used it, in describing 
Anglo-Indian character. Miss Mayo’s English 
publishers, the house of Jonathan Cape, published 
only five years earlier a book by an Englishwoman, 
Barbara Wingfield-Stratford, who had spent 
perhaps more’ time in India than Miss.Mayo did. 
In this book we read about the Anglo-Indian 
community :* 


“ For there never was a more Philistine com- 
munity on this earth than the Anglo-Indian. Art, 
literature, music, practically do not exist for 
them. This craving for pleasure, and shirking of 
serious issues, was especially noticeable during 
the War. One was-particularly struck by it on 
coming out, early in the War, straight from the 
gloom and stress of life in England to the sunny, 
thoughtless atmosphere of society in India. It 
was, indeed, hard to tell that there was a war on 
at all. Certainly there was some slight curtail- 
ment of the more formal and official type of festi- 
vity, such as large Civil Service and regimental 
balls (though some of these latter did take place), 
but still there was gaiety enough, dances at the club 
once or twice a week, race meetings, gymkhanas, 
official garden parties and plenty of private enter- 
taining. No one seemed to bother much about 
what was happening at the Front. or to be very 


* India and the English (Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Srinivasa 
Sastri), 1993, p. 35. 


THE SEX URGE 251 


interested in the war news, in fact one seldom 
heard any talk about the War at all.” 


Regarding the sexual morals of the Anglo- 
Indian community this Englishwoman observes :t 


“The charge of having a lower moral 
standard than that usually maintained. in 
England has often been brought against Anglo- 
Indian society, and as often fiercely denied by its 
defenders. Things are seen in a different perspec- 
tive out there, and allowance has-to be made for 
the fact that the transitory nature of station life 
encourages a certain degree of hedonism... Any- 
how it is curious to see how Mrs, Smith, who, had 
fate settled her in a neat little house in Bromley or. 
Pinner or West Hamstead, would have been a 
colourless, worthy, domesticated wife and mother, 
respectable to the-point of dullness and with 
thoughts all for her children, her house, her little 
circle of lady acquaintances, will, just because she 
happens to live in India, be in actual fact a dash- 
ing mondaine whose only thoughts are of amuse- 
ment and who has a different ‘boy’ every month. 
For in-India nearly every woman under fifty has 
a ‘boy’, whom she rides and dances with, goes for 
walks with in the hills, and who isin constant 
attendance on her at the Club. He is in fact 
almost the cavalier servante so much advocated by 
Lord Byron. Of course these flirtation-friendships 
vary a great deal in intensity. Some are real 
friendships, and some serious love-affairs, but the 
majority of them are neither, but a sort of playing 


t Ibid., pp. 36-38. 


252 UNHAPPY INDIA 


at love, a titillation of jaded vanity, sentimental 
excursions by ladies who are generally horrified by 
any suggestion that they are not, with it all, 
devoted and constant wives...” 


Here follow details which we refrain from 
reproducing. We have not the least desire to 
slander the British community in India, but if 
they begin to boost Miss Mayo’s piffle, one may 
remind them that Barbara Wingfield-Stratford 
could with plausibility be expected to understand 
her cousins much better than Miss Mayo could 
understand Indians. 


Miss Mayo in her sexual muck-raking deems 
it unnecessary to have even the doubtful authority 
of the Abbé Dubois in her support. Even the 
Abbé, as we have seen-already, refuses to support 
her in her contention that Indian women cannot 
safely venture within reach of India’s men. Her 
sole bit of evidence here is a discredited story 
about a marital law poster. She has dug the 
poster out from. the Hunter Committee’s report 
on Martial Law and the Disorders. The story was 
investigated by the Congress Enquiry Committee, 
including Mahatma Gandhi and the late Mr. C. R. 
Das_as its members, and was completely refuted 
in its. report. Miss Mayo makes no mention of 
that refutation. The fact is that in this respect 
the Indian standard is particularly high. 
Dr. Cornelius in his Current History article— 
extracts will be found in the Appendix—comments 
on Miss Mayo’s libel, ‘ where women are not safe 
is by the side of forts and barracks in which 
British soldiers are quartered. Miss Wingfield- 


THE SEX URGE. 253 


Stratford in her book, India and the English, 
remarks thus on this aspect of Indian character :* 


“It has never been proved that a single 
Englishwoman was outraged during the Mutiny, 
and even at Cawnpore the soldiers stubbornly 
refused to murder the women and children, and 
Muhammadan butchers had to be called in:from 
the bazar for the purpose. It is recorded that at the 
Barrackpore Mutiny in 1824 the leaders bound 
themselves by a solemn oath not to-suffer any 
European lady or child to be injured or molested, 
whatever might happen. One English officer used 
to let his children go into the ranks and play with 
the soldiers up till the very day of the Mutiny, and 
no ladies troubled to leave the station till the guns 
were actually heard.-‘For a good woman,’ says 
Sir Andrew Fraser, ‘whether European or Indian, 


999 


they have a chivalrous respect and admiration’. 


* Page 126. 


CHAPTER XIX 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 


Writing in the latest Hindu Annual, Col. J.C. 
Wedgwood tells us how Mr. Winston Churchill, 
British Chancellor of the Exchequer, passing him 
in the lobby of the House of Commons, wished 
to send-him a presentation copy of Mother India. 
But the Colonel had already read the book, a copy 
of which had been received by him as a pre- 
sent. ‘ What! Read it already!~ Well, what do 
you think of your friends now?’ enquired Mr. 
Churchill. And he added with righteous indigna- 
tion: ‘Icould stand anything except these bloody 
outrages on children.’ 


Mr. Winston Churchill is horrified at the cases 
of outrages on children in India mentioned in Miss 
Mayo’s book. Mr.-Winston Churchill is a states- 
man of the type which, if it had its own way, 
there would be no peace in the world. Woe to an 
empire, the destinies of which are in such hands! 


The basis of Miss Mayo’s charge about out- 
rages.on young children is a memorial presented 
to the Legislative Assembly by the woman doctors 
practising in India in 1891. The list contains 13 
cases of which Miss Mayo has picked out the worst 
7, Indiais a country of 315 million human beings, 
inhabiting 2 millions of square miles of land. A 
dozen ceases in such a country afford no basis for 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 255 


generalization. The fact that Miss Mayo had to 
disinter a document more than three decades old 
to show some evidence in support of her contention 
is significant. The following, however, from the 
pen of the very popular writer, ‘A Gentleman 
with a Duster,’ was written quite recently about 
Mr. Churchill’s own country :* 


“‘ To realize the condition of modern childhood 
in our great cities, let your mind ponder the 
necessity for enactments concerning children 
under sixteen years of age and_children under 
fourteen years of age. Where are-the mothers of 
these children? And what have been the condi- 
tions of their home life? Is it unreasonable to ask 
questions of the womanhood of the country? Is 
it not folly to wander away into the side-issue of 
economic conditions? 


“The novelist; Miss Clemence Dane, has lately 
taken up the question of cruelty to children, the 
awful and unspeakable cruelty which exists in all 
our great cities and towns, and which, for some 
unknown reason, is punished so lightly by the 
magistrates. 


‘She writes of ‘that vilest of all cruelties, 
child assault’. I quote the following instances 
from her article: 


“How these men guilty of unspeakable 
offences against children are too often dealt with 


*The Glass of Fashion (London: Mills and Boon), 1922, 
pp. 145-147. 


256 "> + YNHAPPY INDIA 


in practice, the following random extracts from 
newspapers may show. I omit the unprintable 
details. 


For attempted assault on a child of four. 
Bound over on account of previous good 
character. 


For assault on a child of seven. Sentence: 
six months. 


For stealing leather from employers (same 
case): six months. 


For assault on a baby of four. Sentence: £2 
fine. 


For assaulting and infecting a child of seven. 
Sentence: twelve months. 


For assaulting and infecting a child of seven. 
Bound over. 


For assaulting (on the same day) two little 
girls. Bound over. 


For assault on three small children—evidence 
unfit for publication. Sentence: £5 fine. 


For assault on a child of twelve (six previous 
convictions for the same offence). Sen- 
tence: three months.” 


‘* We are not reading of Siberia,” ‘ A Gentle- 
man with a Duster’ reminds his reader, “ we are 
reading of the greatest country of the world and 
of the greatest cities in that country. Is it not 
folly to wander away into the side-issues of econo- 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 257 


mic conditions? Women are becoming bad. There 
is a moral declension. It has nothing to do with 
economics. It is a spirit appearing in the richest 
and the poorest. .Housing and education are no 
valid factors in this problem. In every circle of 
the community, and in all conditions, morality 
has lost its grip. The particular woman is every- 
where an anachronism.” 


Mr. Winston Churchill is a member of the 
British Cabinet, and may be presumed to have 
read the report of the Departmental Committee on 
Sexual Offences against Young Persons presented 
to Parliament by command.of His Majesty.* The 
report is dated the 2nd December, 1925. Three of 
its members were British women; also the Secre- 
tary was a woman. :Fhe Committee was originally 
appointed by the Labour Government on the 28th 
July, 1924, and confirmed by the Tory Govern- 
ment in February, 1925, by the appointment of a 
new Chairman in place of the old, who had died 
in the meantime. I make a present of the follow- 
ing passages and facts taken from the report of 
this Committee to Mr. Winston Churchill. 


The report deals with cases known to the 
Police and tried by Courts of Law. The statistics 


*Issued by His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1996. Cmd. 2501. 
Recently a deputation, headed by Lady Astor, waited on Sir 
William Joynson-Hicks asking him to give effect to the recom- 
mendations embodied in this report, and to raise the age of 
consent from 14 to 16, 


21 


258 UNHAPPY INDIA 


are given in appendix III, tables Ato E. Here 
is an abstract of these tables : 


Annual Average Annual Average 
1909 to 1913. 1920 to 1924. 


Unnatural offences 62 62 

Attempts to commit unnatural 
offences 96 215 
Indecency with males ... 182 176 
Rape 4. 165 120 
Indecent assaults on ‘females . .. 1,129 1,515 
Defilement of girls under13 ... 137 74 
Defilement of girls under 16 ... 214 184 
Incest wy 1. 56 89 
Total)... 1,991 2,435 


Analysed it means; that in Great Britain 
sexual offences against males (first three heads in 
the table) known to the Police amounted to 290 
every year during 1909-13 and to 453 during 
1920-24. In 1924, the figures under the first three 
heads were,-70; 265; and 185, giving a total of 520. 
The figures for defilement of girls under 13 are 
also important. 


There is good reason to believe that the 
number of ‘ cases known to the police’ fell short 
of the actual number. The margin for undetected 
and unpunished cases is particularly large here 
because of certain inherent difficulties. In §16 of 
the Report we read : 


** INCEST .—The special relationship existing 
between members of a family creates difficulties 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 259 


which often prevent disclosure to the police when 
offence has been committed. A conviction for 
incest may deprive the family of the support of a 
father or brother for many years and there may be 
no source of income, other than Poor Relief, during 
the time he is in prison. It is therefore readily | 
admitted by official and other witnesses that the 
number of incest cases reported to the police can 
only be a small proportion of those which actually 
occur.” 


In section 10 the Committee-speak of the 
difficulties of getting convictions in cases involv-. 
ing young persons: . 


‘“‘ The number of persons proceeded against is 
somewhat strikingly less than the number of 
offences known to the police. We are satisfied 
that this difference does not, as might be inferred, 
indicate of itself_that proceedings are not readily 
taken, where possible, in respect of each offence 
reported to the police. 


‘“* The extreme difficulty of proof, the absence 
of corroboration, and the careful scrutiny which 
complaints receive before being brought into 
_ Court, also account for a certain proportion of 
offences known in which proceedings are not 
taken, and we have had reported to us cases in 
which proceedings were not taken for these 
reasons, although the perpetrator of the offence 
was known to the police. 


‘* There are many reasons which in our view, 
account for the large number of acquittals, such, 


260 : UNHAPPY INDIA 


for example, as the strain on child witness and the 
difficulty of obtaining corroboration.” 


Yet another difficulty is that the ‘ Courts 
cannot act upon the unsworn evidence of children 
unless it is corroborated.’ Not unoften Courts 
‘have declined to administer the oath to children 
of 10 or even -11 years of age.” The difficulties 
about corroboration are set forth in §68 of the 
Report. 


“ Tt is often impossible to obtain corroboration 
since those who perpetrate these offences generally 
take care not to do so in circumstances which may 
implicate them with the offence. It therefore 
happens that a serious crime may be committed 
on a child of tender years. and for want of corro- 
boration the man, who, the Court is convinced, is 
guilty has to be acquitted. We have had many 
such cases brought to our notice, and we have 
evidence of the reluctance of Courts to dismiss 
the case when, after receiving the unsworn 
evidence with great caution, they came to the 
conclusion that the child was speaking the truth. 
To give an example of a case in which a man was 
six.times before the Court for indecently assault- 
ing little children : 


27th March, 1922.—Indecent assault on a girl 
of five years—With- 
drawn. 


27th March, 1923.—Indecent assault on a girl of 
seven years—Acquit- 
ted. ° 


A PRESENT TO MR.:WINSTON CHURCHILL 261 


27th June, 1923.—Indecent assault on a girl of 
hree _ years—Dis- 
missed. 


19th November, 1923.—Indecent assault on a 
girl of three-and-a-half 
years—Acquitted. 


24th June, 1924.—Indecent assault on a girl of 
four years—12. months’ 
hard labour. 


“It is probable that, with such a record of 
alleged offences, and on different children, one at 
least of the previous acquittals may have been 
due to a lack of corroboration of the evidence of a 
child of tender years, and yet the man was legally 
entitled to go free untilat last the assault was 
committed in circumstances which furnished 
corroboration.” 


Dealing with the ‘ Defilement of Girls between 
13 and 16’ (§17) the Committee seem to be of the 
opinion that the actual offences are far in excess 
of the number of cases known to the police and the 
courts : 


““In this category there are cases in which 
both the girl and the man are concerned to keep 
the matter to themselves, and the offence is only 
known if pregnancy results. Many of these girls 
find their way to Rescue Homes or to Maternity 
Homes, and in a large majority of cases the police 
are never informed that an offence has been 
committed. , 


262 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“The Ministry of Health assisted us by 
making inquiries from 72 ‘Mother and Baby’ 
Homes as to the number of girls admitted during 
the year ended June 1, 1925, who became pregnant 
under 16 years of age. Thirty-five Homes reported 
that they had admitted no such cases in the year. 
Thirty-seven Homes reported a total admission of 
. 78 girls who were pregnant under 16 years of age. 
Of these 78 girls it was reported that no proceed- 
ings had heen instituted in 44 cases. Thus there 
were no proceedings in respect of 56 per cent. of 
offences known to have been committed. . 


“Tt should be remembered that with young 
girls under 16 pregnancy vesults in only a small 
proportion of cases.in which ‘the full offence has 
been committed. The criminal statistics show 
that some 200 offences of carnal knowledge of a 
girl under 16 are reported annually to the police, 
and among these 200 offences are included some 
‘ attempts ® to commit the offence. Since thirty- 
seven Homes for unmarried mothers alone report 
78 offences and there are 101 ‘ Mother and Baby’ 
Homes (aswell as all the Poor Law Institutions, 
Hospitals, and other Maternity. Homes which also 
receive cases), it is clear that the official figures 
for cases of carnal knowledge of a girl between 13 
and 16 would be very much higher than 200, if 
every offence was reported to the police. Those 
in charge of Homes hesitate, perhaps, to report 
these offences because the girl is not in good 
health, and they may also have been discouraged 
by the failure of prosecutions. Of 5 cases under 
16 in one Home all were reported to the police; in 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 263 


two the police could but advise proceedings; in 
two others the prosecution failed; in the last the 
man was convicted at Assizes, but his conviction 
was quashed on appeal. In another Home which 
had admitted 11 girls under 16, three cases were 
taken into Court, and the prosecution failed in all 
of them.” [Italics are ours. | 


The general conclusions of the Committee as 
to the prevalence of the offences within their scope 
of investigation are summed up thus in §18: 


‘* We have now considered official statistics, 
local statistics and general evidence as to the 
prevalence of sexual offences against young 
persons, and we have come to the following con- 
clusions : 


1. That there are-many more sexual offences 
committed against young persons than are re- 
ported. 


We hope that one result of this enquiry will 
be a greater readiness on the part of the public to 
report these very serious offences to the police in 
every case which is discovered. 


2.~- That when proceedings are taken the pro- 
portion of acquittals is high. 


3. That there isa considerable decrease in 
sexual crimes accompanied by violence. 


4. That there is a distinct increase in in- 
decent assaults on boys and on girls under 16 as 
shown in the criminal statistics. 


264 UNHAPPY INDIA 


We have received conflicting evidence as to 
how far this increase in the official figures denotes 
a genuine increase in the occurrence of the offence. 
We consider, after weighing all the evidence, that 
there is an increase in the number of indecent 
assaults on young persons. 


5. That owing to the practice of reducing 
‘charges, mainly in the interests of the child or 
young person, the statistics of indecent assaults 
now include a peop non of more serious sexual 
offences, and this is an additional ground for 
viewing their increase with concern.” 


. Many witnesses recommended to the Com- 
mittee that an offence between uncle and niece 
should be made punishable under the Punishment 
of Incest Act. The Committee have had to make 
special recommendations to cover cases of indecent 
assault by father on daughter! 


Full five paragraphs (84-88) are filled in the 
Report by “Elderly Offences,’—i.e., indecent 
_ assaults on young persons by aged people. In §84 
“we read: 


** We have had brought to our attention the 
cases of old men who commit indecent assaults on 
children, and the difficulty that there is in dealing 
with them, especially when the offence is due to 
~some physiological or psychological cause. We 
consider that where an elderly man has been 
guilty of an isolated offence of this nature, the 
best method of dealing with him is, where he has 
relations willing to be responsible, to place him on 


! 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL. 265 


probation under supervision, or to bind over with 
sureties on condition that he consents to live with 
his relatives. 


*“'We have had evidence of men over 80 years 
of age, otherwise respectable, who had been to 
prison repeatedly for indecent offences. . We 
consider that for such cases detention in a non- 
penal institution is the best solution.” 


The. concluding paragraph. on ‘ Elderly 
Offences’ gives ‘ only a few examples of the cases 
which, have been reported to us.’~ But these few 
cases ought to make Mayos and, Churchills pause 
when they grin over hospital and criminal court 
cases in India. Says the Report: 


“ We have come to the conclusion, however, 
after bearing in mind-the representations made to 
us, that in certain cases the sentence was very 
inadequate, having regard to the nature of the 
offence. Several of the cases have called for 
comment in Parliament and there can be no doubt 
the comment has been justified. For instance, we 
have-had reported to us the case of two indecent 
assaults by a father on his daughter, which were 
punished with one month’s imprisonment. In 
another case two indecent assaults of a very grave 
character were committed by one offender on two 
little girls, and he was punished bv two terms of 
four months torun concurrently. We have also 
had brought to our notice particulars of a man 
placed on probation for an indecent assault who, 
during the term of his probation, committed 


266 UNHAPPY INDIA 


another indecent assault, and was then dealt with 
by an extension of his period of probation. In 
another case tried at Assizes a man of 24, lodging 
in the house, was convicted of carnal knowledge 
of a girl of 14 who was childish for her age and.in 
poor health and the girl became pregnant. At the 
trial the man pleaded guilty and stated that hehad 

taken precautions to prevent anything happening. 

He received 4 months’ imprisonment.” 


Dr. Bloch,* the great authority on European 
sexual life, speaks of a ‘ mania for defloration’, 
which flourished in England in the eighties, and 
which meant such a hardship for-children. 


Before concluding, it is perhaps necessary to 
point out one particular factor which is reponsible 
for a considerable number of these indecent. 
assaults on children,—i.e., the superstition in 
several civilized European countries that inter- 
course with children is a cure for venereal disease! 
Dr. Bloch+ cites ‘a gross case” in which ‘a 
peasant affected with venereal ulcers, having been 
advised that a cure could only be obtained by 
intercourse with a pure virgin, had sexual inter- 
course with his own daughter, and was cured!! 


The British Committee from whose report we 
have quoted copiously also had to come across 
this superstition. Speaking of the cases of. 
gonorrhea and syphilis in children between 1 and 
5 years, and between 5 and 14 years, they say: 


"Op. cit. 
t Ibid. 


A PRESENT TO MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL 267 


‘“'We are of opinion, from the evidence of 
legal and medical witnesses, that a certain number 
of cases of gonorrhea in these young girls is due to 
the superstition that connection with a virgin will 
cure a-man.” 


The Committee hope that at no distant date 
this superstition will be entirely dispelled... We 
say a most sincere ‘ Amen!’ to this. 


* 


In her Liberty article to which we had 
occasion to refer in our Introduction, Miss Mayo- 
reverts to her charges to which the present 
chapter is a rely. Mahatma Gandhi who so 
appropriately dubbed Mother India a ‘ Drain 
Inspector’s Report’ had argued : 


“* Tf I open out-all-the stench exuded from the 
drains of London and say, ‘ Behold London,’ my 
facts will be incapable of challenge, but my judg- 
ment will be rightly condemned as a travesty of 
truth. Miss\Mayo’s book is nothing better, 
nothing else.” 


To. this Miss Mayo replies by quoting the New 
York Outlook’s ‘Yankee comment, terse and 
sufficient’ : 


** Perhaps. But no one has ever shown that 
in London they imprison little girls in the drains.” 


Chicago and New York, of all places, to 
indulge in such cant! But perhaps this hypo- 
crisy is characteristic of these crime centres of the 
World. The authentic evidence we have put 


268 ; UNHAPPY INDIA 


together in this chapter does not make out 
London’s drains to be very pleasant for children. 
Those of American cities are certainly no better. 
We have not before tus, at the time of writing, 
American documents of the kind of the official 
British report we have drawn upon in this 
chapter. To put the New York and Chicago daily 
muck-rakers in the witness-box would not be fair 
to America. But in passing we may mention that 
it was an American State, Nevada, that had to 
devise the novel and ‘scientific ’ punishment of 
electric sterilisation to deal with its incorrigible 
people ak, in sexual offences against young 
persons. And this novel punishment had soon 
after to be taken off the statute-book because the 
incorrigible Yankees refused to acknowledge the 
punishment as a punishment at all! 


CHAPTER XX 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW 


No one who wants to acquaint himself with 
the methods of American journalists, the tribe to 
which Miss Mayo belongs, can do better than turn 
to Upton Sinclair’s classic study, The Brass Check. 
As a boy Upton Sinclair had occasion once to hear 
a candidate for district attorney, who was busy 
carrying on a whirlwind campaign. The orator 
waxed eloquent in his wrath over the system of 
prostitution which was paying its millions to the 
city police every year. He pictured rooms in which 
a man would make his selection out of women 
kept for inspection, pay his three or five dollars to 
the cashier at the door and receive a ‘ brass check.” 
The man would then go upstairs and pay the 
‘check ’ to the woman upon receipt of her favours. 
The orator suddenly drew forth from his pocket a 
bit of metal; and cried ‘ Behold! the price of a 
woman’s honour.’ Since he heard that speech, the 
brass check has been to Sinclair the symbol of ‘ the 
most monstrous wickedness in the world.’ And as 
he found this ‘most monstrous wickedness’ in 
such abundant measure in American journalism, 
he called his book giving glimpses of it, The Brass 
Check.* ; 


*The Brass Check: A Study of American Journalism by 
Upton Sinclair (Pasadena, California), 19920. 


‘ 


270 | UNHAPPY INDIA 


There are of course noble exceptions even in 
American journalism. But it is highly significant 
that so many of America’s greatest writers to-day 
are writers of protest—H. L, Mencken, Upton 
Sinclair, Jack London, Sinclair Lewis. The best, 
that is, the most honest and independent American 
journals—The Nation, New Republic, American 
Mercury, New Masses—are likewise’ pre-emi- 
nently journals of protest. But in dealing with 
Mother India we have not to deal with the noble 
exceptions. 


One of Sinclair’s chapters is entitled, ‘ The 
Scandal Bureau,’ and the American Press is a 
veritable Scandal Bureau.. Some of the American 
cities are recognized leading world-centres of 
crime. But in spite of that, the Scandal Bureau 
know full well, the most effective method of dis- 
crediting a man in America is to circulate a 
scandalous sex story about him. The hypocritical 
puritanism is always anxious to be shocked. Be- 
sides, the story becomes spicy, and spicy, salacious 
stuff is ever in demand. 


Upton Sinclair has had often to suffer at the 
hands of the Scandal Bureau. At one time in fact 
his life was made so miserable by the muck-rakers 
that he had to leave America with the intention of 
never coming back. Besides, he has often found 
that when he happens to be particularly active 
against the vested interests that control the Press, 
the Scandal Bureau become particularly active 
against him. He started a socialist colony, and the 
Bureau dubbed it ‘Sinclair’s Love Nest,’ and cir- 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW Q71 


culated all sorts of scandals against it. He went 
to help the workers in a strike at Denver, and again 
the same tactics were adopted. When Gorki 
went to America after the Russo-Japanese War, 
the American capitalist Press adopted its usual 
tactics and successfully defeated his mission of 
getting money for the Russian Revolution. It 
happened that Gorki’s marriage had not taken 
place in the official Christian way, so-the Bureau 
cried from the house-tops that the woman that 
passed for Mme. Gorki was a disreputable mistress 
of a libertine. Gorki was denounced as a moral 
leper in the Press, on the platform and the pulpit. 
We have in a previous chapter had occasion to 
speak of Judge Lindsey. .The Judge is an ardent 
radical reformer, and sohe has always received 
special attention at the hands of the Bureau. In 
Lindsey’s case the Bureau adopted very extreme 
methods indeed. Lindsey’s Juvenile Court served 
for the Bureau as a basis for grave charges against 
him. Upton Sinclair tells us that the Scandal 
Bureau hired perjured affidavits and even organ- 
ised a fake reform organisation to lend authority to 
the scandals. 


Miss Mayo has adopted the usual tactics of 
the Scandal Bureau against a whole nation to dis- 
credit it in the eyes of the Americans. She has 
attributed to them all the vices and enormities 


that can stir up the puritanical conscience against 


a people. 


In American newspaper-offices reports of 
events are called ‘news stories,’ or even more 


272 UNHAPPY INDIA 


generally, simply stories. Interviews are also 
called ‘.stories,’—and for the most part they give 
not facts but stories. Miss Mayo has adopted the 
same style in her ‘stories’ in Mother India. But 
some of her stories are so silly that judged even by 
American newspaper standards they make a_ very 
large draft on human gullibility. 


* The place of honour in these ‘ stories’ must 
be given to the stale yarn, which is now no better 
than an insipid chestnut, about the prince who is 
alleged to have bragged that ‘if the British left 
India, in three months’ time there would not be a 
virgin or a rupee left in the land.’ 


‘ Ditcher ’ (the late Mr. Pat Lovett) writing in 
the Capital, Calcutta, observed : 


“ Miss Katherine Mayo is seemingly conscious 
of her limitations, for she shows a fondness for 
smoking-room stories to eke out her mess of stale 
kail. Those who told them to her pulled her leg 
egregiously..Take the following, for instance: 


‘Here is a story from the lips of one whose 
veracity has never, I believe, been questioned. 
The time was the stormy period in 1920 when the 
new Reforms Act was casting doubt over the land 
and giving rise to the persistent rumour that 
Britain was about to quit India. My informant, 
an American of long Indian experience, was visit- 
ing one of the more important of the princes—a 
man of great charm, cultivation and force, whose 
work for his State was of the first order. The 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW 273 


Prince’s Dewan was also present and the three 
gentlemen had been talking at ease, as became the 
old friends that they were. 


‘** His Highness does not believe,’ said the 
Dewan, ‘ that Britain is going to leave India. But 
still, under this new regime in England, they may 
be so ill-advised. So, His Highness is getting his 
troops in shape, accumulating munitions and coin- 
ing silver. And if the English do go, three months 
afterwards not a rupee or a virgin will be left in 
all Bengal.’ 


‘* To this His Highness sitting in his capital; 
distant from Bengal by half the breadth of India, 
cordially agreed. His ancestors through the ages 
had been predatory Mahratta chiefs.” 


I heard the original of that story much better 
and more racily told more than forty years ago. 
The actors were. Lord Dufferin and Sir Partab 
Singh, the gallant Rajput who so often acted as 
Regent of Jodhpur. 


* What would happen if the British left India? 
asked the Viceroy. : 


‘What would happen,’ replied the Rajput 
warrior, ‘I would call to my Jawans to boot and 
saddle and in a month there would not be a virgin 
or a rupee left in Bengal.’ sos 


I knew Sir Partab well, and at the Curzonian 
durbar I asked him if this conversation had ever 
taken place. ‘ Lie, my friend, a damned lie,’ he 
answered fiercely. ‘We Rajputs never offend the 


22 


274 UNHAPPY INDIA 


inoffensive. When we insult our foes we give 
them the chance to retaliate with the sword.’ I 
am tempted to quote Sydney Smith on American 
gullibility, but why libel a nation for the rantings 
of an eccentric woman? ” 


Chapter XXIV of Mother India is headed 
‘ Firebrands to Straw.’ In this chapter Miss 
Mayo gives the too familiar one-sided version of 
the disturbances during the Non-co-operation 
days. She makes no attempt to notice,or even to 
mention, the reply given to those allegations by the 
Non-co-operators. On page 294; her careless 
chronology places Chauri-Chaura before the 
Moplah Revolt, and she says: ‘‘ Less than six 
months before the Moplah affair began, occurred 
the Chauri-Chaura incident in the United Pro- 
vinees, far away from Malabar.’’ This statement 
is untrue. On page 295 she says: ‘‘ In the Punjab 
during the disorders of 1919, anti-Government 
workers launched a special propaganda for the 
violation of foreign women.” The sole evidence in 
support of this monstrous allegation is the copy 
of a placard. which was emphatically repudiated 
_ by the leaders of the Punjab as soon as it was 
brought to their notice. It was supposed to be 
the work of an agent provocateur. Mr. Gandhi 
‘also commented on it in his report. Miss Mayo 
takes no notice of these repudiations. 


Take another story (pages 273-74) : 
' ‘© In the same line, a well-informed New York 
journalist, in the winter of 1926-27, asked certain 
Indians who had been publicly talking in the city : 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW _ 275 


“Why do you make such egregiously false allega- 
tion about conditions in India?’ ‘ Because,’ said 
one of them, speaking for the rest, ‘ you Americans 
know nothing of India. And your missionaries, 
when they come. back for more money, tell too 
much truth, and hurt our pride. So we have to 
tell lies, to balance up’.” 

The name of the New York journalist is not 
given—nor that of the man to whom the absurd 
statement is ascribed. 


Take yet another story (pages 305-6) : 


‘*More usual is the spirit illustrated in 
another incident, which occurred in February, 
1926. An old Muhammadan assistant engineer 
who had long served.in the Irrigation Department 
under a British superior, suddenly found himself 
taking orders froma Hindu. This young man, 
just out of college and full of new ideas, set him- 
self to worry his senior, baiting and pin-pricking 
till his victim could bear'no more. So, accom- 
panied by his son, the old Muslim sought outa. 
major British official, asking for counsel. ‘ Sahib, 
can’t you help my father? Surely it is a shame, 
after all his years of service, to treat him so!’ 
-exclaimed the son, at the end of his story. But - 
the Briton could not resist his opportunity. 
“ Mahmoud,’ said he, ‘ you have always wanted 
Swaraj. You see, in this, what Swaraj does to = 
you. How do you feel about it?’ ‘ Aha!’ replied 
the youngster. ‘But I have got a Deputy 
Collectorship now. I take office shortly, and 


276 UNHAPPY INDIA 


when I do, God help the Hindus I get my hands 


on. 


No names are given. Miss Mayo does not 
give the source of her information. It could not 
be the major British official nor the Muslim Deputy 
Collector. Can’ any one in his senses believe. that 
an educated Muhammadan already appointed a 
Deputy Collector, could have made such a state- 
ment to a British official, thereby running the risk 
of having his remarks reported to his superiors 
and imperilling his appointment and his future 
prospects? Or are we to suppose that high British 
officials encourage this kind of outbursts on the 
part of the subordinate Indian: staff ? 


The credulous may turn sceptic when they 
read on page 204 of Mother India: 


““One orthodox, Prince, at least, when going 
into European society, used always to wear gloves. 
But it is told of him that, at a certain London 
dinner party, when he had removed his gloves, the 
lady beside him chanced to observe a ring that he 
wore. ‘What a beautiful stone, your Highness!’ 
She remarked. May I look at it?’ ‘ Certainly,” 
said he, and, removing the ring from his finger, 
laid it by her plate. The lady, a person of rank, 
turned the jewel this way and that, held it up to 
the light, admired it as it deserved, and with 
thanks, laid it beside the plate of the owner. The 
latter, then, by a sidewise glance indicated the 
ring to his own attendant who stood behind his 
chair. ‘Wash it,’ ordered the Prince, and, un- 
disturbed, resumed his conversation.” 


MUCK-RAKERS WHOM WE KNOW 277 


Who was the Prince? When did this London 
incident take place, and what is Miss .Mayo’s 
authority for the statement? Of course these 
questions are unanswered. Miss Mayo ignores the 
obvious fact that an orthodox prince of this style 
will not attend ‘a London dinner party’. The 
whole story is a concoction on the face of it. It 


has evidently been supplied to her by a story- 
teller. 


CHAPTER XXI 
THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS 


Yet another of the false impressions left by a 
perusal of Miss Mayo’s book is about. the. un- 
hygienic, unclean habits of the Hindus. Now, in 
fairness to Miss Mayo, it must be admitted that 
this is the first impression that is produced on the’ 
mind of a foreign visitor to Indian cities and 
villages. Such a visitor knows nothing of the 
inner life of the people, nor can he make any dis- 
tinction between the different-communities of the 
Indian population or the different parts of this sub- 
continent. The impression once made remains 
and no amount of explanations can modify it. Yet 
it is a fact that no other people in the world (ex- 
cept the Japanese) regard cleanliness to be so 
absolutely an essential qualification for a good man 
as the Hindus.do. It is a binding part of their re- 
ligion, and as Professor Lowes Dickinson of 
Cambridge has remarked in his book, A ppear- 
ances,-that India,is perhaps the only part of the 
world where religion is a real live thing which 
matters. 


Cleanliness is of several kinds: of person, of 
environments and of clothing. In _ provinces 
where the Hindus form the great bulk of the 
population, one finds absolute cleanliness of 


THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS Q79 


person, combined with a modicum of the other 

varieties. In other provinces where the cold 

is bitter and poverty great, one comes across a 

different state of things. Cleanliness of clothing: 
in cold climates is necessarily a question of money. 

A person who cannot find money enough to get two 

meals a day can hardly be expected to find: money 

for clean dresses. Clean environments are more a 

concern of national and local administration than 

of the individual. In the, Deccan, south of the 

Vindhyachal, where there is no winter, or at least . 
not a severe winter, you find Hindus of all classes. 
keeping their persons and homes scrupulously 

clean. Their environments are as neat as they 
can be under a system of government foreign in. 
its methods and foreign in. its aims and objects. 

In Northern India, on the other hand, where six 

months of the year are.cold (in some places like the 

Punjab, Oudh, Bihar and Assam, the cold is 

rather severe) the-condition of things is different 

and yet all Hindus, everywhere, even of the lowest 

classes, have scrupulously clean habits, so far as 

cleanliness of person goes. 


In this respect it will be useful to refer to the 
religious books of the Hindus to show the back- 
ground of their ideas of public and private 
hygiene. The Hindu religious as well as medical 
books lay down standards of cleanliness very rare 
in the ancient world among any other class of 
people. His Highness the Thakore Saheb of 
Gondal (who is an M.D. of London, and also an 
‘A.D.C.L., F.R.C.P.E., etc.) -has discussed the 
subject in a chapter of his excellent History of 


280 UNHAPPY. INDIA 


Aryan Medical Science. About the religious duty 
of bathing we read in the Thakore Saheb’s work :* 


‘Among the Hindus, bathing is included as 
part of their religious duty. Manu’s ordinance is: 
* Early in the morning, let him void faeces, bathe, 
decorate his body, clean his teeth, apply collyrium 
to his eyes, and worship the gods’ (iv, \203). 
Yajnavalkya also recommends ablution as one of 
the required religious observances (iii, 314).” 


Nor is the injunction a dead letter. As a rule 
every Hindu in normal health bathes at least once 
daily. As the Thakore Saheb says: ‘‘ As a rule, 
bathing is a pre-requisite to.the morning meal, 
though not afew of the higher classes perform 
ablution before taking their evening meal also, as 
well as after touching any unclean thing.” It is 
because of these habits that the Hindus boast that 
they are the most.cleanly nation in the world. 


Long before the European nations knew any- 
thing of hygiene, and long before they realized the 
value of tooth-brush, and a daily bath, the Hindus 
were, as-arule, given to both. Only twenty years 
ago, the London houses had no bath-tubs and the 
tooth-brush was a luxury. Both in Great Britain 
and America, the Hindus used to be complimented 
on their clean teeth.t Even now with all their 
scientific advance, Europeans have much to learn 


*A Short History of Aryan Medical Science (Macmillan, 
1896), p. 62. ; 

-t Mr. Colgate, a well-known British tooth paste manufac- 
turer, who visited India in the cold weather of 1927-28, was struck 
by the clean beautiful teeth he saw in this country. : 


THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS - 281 


about personal cleanliness from the Hindus. The 
European methods of toilet are absolutely un- 
scientific and unclean. The bath-tub and the 
wash-basin are the repositories of germs of disease 
and dirt. The Hindu methods of toilet, wash and 
bath, are the cleanliest. A Hindu who does not 
use water for toilet, and does not bathe and clean 
his teeth every day isarare being—unless he is 
an, anglicised person who has taken to European 
mode of life. 


Hindu books of medicine lay down elaborate 
rules for dincharya, (i.e. the outline of daily 
duties). These include early rising and cleaning 
the teeth with paste or powder with the aid of a 
fresh twig. The Thakore Saheb, quoting ancient 
Hindu books, says :* 


‘* It is good for a-healthy man to rise early in 
the morning, that.is, about an hour before sun- 
rise. He should then answer the calls of nature... 
Then he should. clean his teeth with a tooth-paste 
or powder. »The substances generally used for the : 
purpose_are powdered tobacco, salt, or burnt betel- 
nut, or some compound preparation of drugs such 
as. pepper, dry-ginger, long-pepper and jijbal 
(Xanthozxylum rhetsa). The most common tooth- 
brush is a tender twig of Bavala (Acacia arabica) ; 
but the medical works recommend other twigs. 
Persons suffering from certain diseases are 
prohibited from using the tooth-brush. After 
cleaning the teeth, the tongue is polished by means 


*Op. cit., pp. 57 et. seg. 


282 UNHAPPY INDIA 


of a scraper, which may be of gold, silver, or 
copper, or even of a split twig ten fingers long. 
Then the mouth is rinsed with cold water several 
times and the face washed. This process keeps 
the mouth free from disease. The washing of the 
“mouth with cold water is a necessary adjutant. to 
remedies for aphthew, pimples, dryness of, and 
burning sensation in the mouth. Washing with 
lukewarm water removes phlegm and wind, and 
keeps the mouth moist. The nose is preserved 
from disease by dropping into it alittle rape-seed 
oil every day. This tends to keep the mouth 
sweet, improves the voice, and prevents the hair 
turning gray.. White antimony’ applied to the 
conjunctiva with a lead or zinc pencil, besides 
making the eyes beautiful, ensures acute vision. 
Black antimony of the Sindhu mountain can be 
used even inits unrefined state. It removes the 
irritation, burning, hypersecretion of mucus and 
painful lachrymation, renders the eyes beautiful, 
and enables them to stand the glare and the 
wind... The nails, beard, and hair are to be kept 
clean and trimmed, and are to be cut every fifth 
day. This promotes strength, health, cleanliness, 
and beauty... Regular exercise should be taken 
every day. It makes the body light and active, 
the limbs strong and well-developed, and the 
gastral fire increases so much that any kind of 
food is soon digested. Physical exercise is the 
surest means of getting rid of sluggishness... 
Exercise after dinner or after sexual intercourse is 
injurious. It is not recommended at all for one 
suffering from asthma, consumption, and chest 
diseases. Over-exertion is deprecated. There 


THE HYGIENE OF THE AINDUS 283 


Ni 
are various kinds of physical exercises, indoor and 
outdoor... 


““ When the bath is over, the body is to be 
carefully rubbed dry with a towel and properly 
dressed... ”’ 


Detailed instructions are given about. diet. 
Only two meals a day are recommended for adults. 
Then it is said: ‘‘Gormandizing is to be avoided... 
One must study the nature of the food before eating 
it, for the food one eats, has much to do with the 
development of the mind, and it is the mind that 
makes a man either good, bad, stupid, or wicked.” 


“Tt is not proper,” says the Thakore Saheb, 
“to peep into the privacy of a bedchamber. “But 
the ancient writers on Medicine and Religion have 
not omitted to prescribe. rules of conduct to be 
observed even there.”~ Thus he cites Sushruta, the 
great Hindu physician, laying down instructions 
about sexual intercourse.* Nor did the religious 
lawgivers like, Manuf neglect this important 
domain... They took good care to emphasize the 
evils of—over-indulgence. Anyone who turns to 
Hindu literature will easily see how false Miss 
Mayo’s. contention is when she says that nobody 
ever preached continence to the Hindu. The fact 


*“ Again Sushruta is of opinion that the carnal desire may 
be gratified at the interval of a fortnight in summer, and at the 
interval of not less than three days in other seasons. Those who 
have eaten a heavy meal, are hungry, thirsty, impatient, boyish, 
old, with aching limbs and pressed with the calls of nature, 
should abstain from the indulgence.”’ Jbid., p. 77. 


t Ibid., pp. 76-77. 


284 UNHAPPY INDIA 


is that continence was preached even to the limit 
of asceticism. 


The Thakore Saheb quotes* the injunction 
prohibiting the use of ‘ shoes, clothes and garlands 
used by others,’ and comments: ‘‘ This advice 
shows that the Hindus were not blind to the risk 

of contagion.” 


In personal cleanliness the Hindu ideal has 
always been, and to this day is, an exceptionally 
high one. The cleanly habits of the Hindus 
impelled Sir William Hunter who had long ex- 
perience. of them in the latter half of the last 
century to remark : : 

“Tt is needless to say that the Indian Hindus 
.. stand out as examples of bodily cleanliness 
among Asiatic races, and, we may add, among the 
races of the world. The ablutions of the Hindu 
have passed into @ proverb. His religion demands — 
them, and the custom of ages has made them a 
prime necessity of his daily life.’’ 


Nor were the Hindus deficient in a sense of 
public hygiene. Their political treatises recognized 
a separate department of state, which insisted on 
the purity of water supplies, on the cleanliness of 
roads, streets and other places of public utility and 
which made offences against public hygiene 
punishable. Lord Ampthill, Governor of Madras, 
when declaring open the King Institute of Pre- 


*Tbid., p. 72. 


THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS 285. 


ventive Medicine, Madras, in February, 1905, 
dwelt at length on this topic :* 


‘“Now we are beginning to find out,” said 
Lord Ampthill, “‘ that the Hindu Shastras also 
contain a sanitary code no less correct in principle, 
and that the great lawgiver, Manu, was one of the 
greatest sanitary reformers the world has‘ever 
seen.” é 


Of the achievements of the Hindus in this 
field His Excellency remarked : 


“When we undertake municipal water-supply 
schemes, with filter beds and hydraulic pressure, 
when we build hospitals \and establish medical 
schools, when we promulgate regulations to check 
the spread of plague, or when we impose on local 
bodies the duty of watching over the health of the 
people, we are not. introducing any modern 
innovations or European fads, but merely doing 
that which was done centuries ago, and again 
centuries before that, but which has long since 
been forgotten by all except the historian and the 
archeologist. The study of these questions brings. 
out the truth of the old saying that there is nothing 
new in the world. Now, this saying is even true 
as regards preventive medicine, which we are all 
apt.to regard as one of most recent discoveries of 
modern science. Colonel King gives, clear proof 
that the ancient caste injunctions of the Hindus 
were based on a belief in the existence of transmis- 


*Extracts from the speech will be found in Mr. Har Bilas 
Sarda’s Hindu Superiority, pp. 253 et. seq. 


286 UNHAPPY INDIA 


sible agents of disease, and that both the Hindus 
and Muhammadans used inoculation by small-pox 
virus as a protection against small-pox; and 
certain it is that long before Jenner’s great dis- 
covery, or to be more correct, re-discovery of 
vaccination, this art of inoculation was used for a 
while in Europe, where it had been imported 
from Constantinople; and knowledge of medicine 
‘which flourished in the Near East at the com- 
mencement of the Christian era, emanated, as I 
have already shown you, from India.” 


His Excellency then added: “‘ It is also very 
probable, so Colonel King assures me, that ancient 
India used animal vaccination secured by trans- 
mission of the small-pox virus through the cow, 
and he bases this interesting theory on a quotation 
from a writing by Dhanvantari, the greatest of the 
ancient Hindu physicians, which is so striking and 
so appropriate to the present occasion... Take the 
fluid of the pock on the udder of the cow or on the 
arm between the shoulder and elbow of a human 
subject on the point of a lancet, and lance with it 
the arms_between the shoulders and elbows until 
the blood appears: then mixing the fluid with the 
blood, the fever of the small-pox will be produced. 
This is vaccination, pure and’ simple. It would 
seem from it that Jenner's great discovery was 
actually forestalled by the ancient Hindus.’ 


His Excellency further said: ‘‘ I cannot 
refrain from mentioning yet another of Colonel 
King’s interesting discoveries, which is that the 
modern plague policy of evacuation and disinfec- 


THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS 287 


tion is not a bit different from that enjoined in 
the ancient Hindu Shastras.”’ 


Of the history of medical lore Lord Ampthill 
spoke thus: 


“The people of India should be grateful to 
him (Col. King) for having pointed out to them 
that they can lay claim to have been acquainted 
with the main principles of curative and preven- 
tive medicine at atime when Europe was still 
immersed in ignorant savagery...l am not sure 
whether it is generally known that the science of 
medicine originated in India, but this is the case, 
and the science was first exported from India to 
_ Arabia and thence to Europe. Down to the close 

of the seventeenth century, European physicians 
learnt the science. from the works of Arabic 
doctors; while the Arabic doctors many centuries 
before had obtained their knowledge from the 
works of great Indian physicians such as 
Dhanwantari, Charaka, and Sushruta.” 


Disease and bad sanitation in the present-day 
India-are to be traced very largely to the poverty 
of the masses. They cannot spend adequately on 
clean surroundings, and their dwindled vitality 
due to impoverishment makes them easy victims 
of epidemics. If India is becoming a ‘ world- 
menace’ the blame must largely rest on the 
government’s niggardly policy in spending on 
education and public health. The new conditions 
from which India cannot get the prosperity they 
have brought about in self-governing lands have 


988 UNHAPPY INDIA 


very much aggravated the disease problem in 
India. Railways have made it easier for epi- 
demics to spread and therefore made it very 
imperative for the government to spend money on 
combating them. The irrigation systems have 
contributed largely to the spread of malaria, but 
effective anti-malaria measures, like those adopted 
in the Panama Canal area and elsewhere, remain 
yet to be adopted by the government. 


The importance which the Government of 
India have attached to the health.of the people of 
India, can best be judged by the amount they 
have been spending on the Health Department from 
the Central and Provincial. revenues. In a letter 
from the Government of India. Department of 
Health and Education, dated the 9th January, 1928, 
I have been informed that ‘up to the year 1916-17, 
Public Health expenditure was included under 
the head ‘‘ Medical.”’ If India is the land of 
illiteracy and disease, it is only reasonable that 
‘the Government should spend more money on 
education and. public health than do the States, 
where .literacy is common, education in all 
respeets general, and people fully conscious of the 
benefits of a hygienic life. But what are the 
actual facts? In the letter referred to I am in- 
formed that up till 1916-17, the total expenditure 
of the Government, both from Central and Provin- 
cial revenues for this work was Rs. 1,29,86,498 (i.e., 
less than one million sterling) yearly. In 1918-19 
when India lost six million lives from influenza 
alone, it was Rs. 1,66,43,053. The latest figures 
available are for 1924-25. The total expenditure 


THE HYGIENE OF THE HINDUS 289 


during that year from Central funds was 
Rs. 26,07,271 (i.e., less than two hundred thousand — 
sterling) and from Provincial funds, Rs. 3,04,20,169 
(i.e., about £2,250,000). The improvement began 
with the introduction of the Reforms scheme in 
1919-20, i.e., with the coming of Indian ministers. 


23 


CHAPTER XXII 
WHY THE COW STARVES 


Chapters XVII to XX of Miss Mayo’s book 
are devoted to the Cow. Chapter XVII is called 
The Sin of the Salvation Army, but has really 
nothing tosay about the Army, except what is 
contained in a footnote at the end. There is 
besides a passing reference to it in a Young India 
quotation, to which we shall refer shortly. The 
burden of this chapter is that the Hindus raise 
‘ food for themselves, but they will not raise food 
for their mother, the cow. So the cow starves.’ 


The only mention of the Salvation Army in the 
text of the Salvation Army chapter is on page 206, 
where one of the correspondents of Mahatma 
Gandhi, Mr. Desai, is-quoted as saying: ‘‘ In an- 
cient times, and even during the Mussalman period, 
cattle enjoyed the benefit of common pastures and 
had also the free run of the forests. The main- 
tenance of the cattle cost their owners practically 
nothing... But the British Government cast a 
greedy eye upon this time-honoured property of 
the cattle, which could not speak for themeslves 
and which had none. else to speak on their behalf, 
and confiscated it, sometimes with an increase in 
the land revenue in view, and at other times in 
order to oblige their friends, such as_ the 
missionaries.” ‘‘ This writer,” adds Miss Mayo, 
“then supports his last quoted phrase by the 


WHY THE COW STARVES 291 


statement that the Salvation Army was once 
allowed by the Government to take up 560 acres of 
public grazing ground in Gujarat for farm pur- 
poses.” 


Comparing India with the United States, 
Miss Mayo remarks : 


‘“* We have, it is true, great grazing  areas— 
but we rotate them and protect them from over- 
grazing—a matter unconceived by the Indian. 
And even in the section where this area is widest, 
our semi-arid and arid western range country, we 
devote three-fifths of our total. cultivated ground 
to raising feed for our cattle. Our cotton belt 
gives 53 per cent. of its.crop area to live-stock 
feed, as corn, cow-peas,.beans, peanuts, against 
10 per cent. used to grow food for man; our corn 
and winter wheat belt uses 75 per cent. of its 
cultivated land.to grow similar forage for its 
cattle, our corn belt gives 84 per cent. of its crop 
land to forage growing, and only 16 per cent. to 
man’s food, and the North and East devote about 
70 per cent. of their crops to fodder. Seven-tenths 
of our total crop is devoted to harvested forage. 
We have 257,000,000 acres in crops for human 
food,-and we have one milching cow to every 
family of five.” 


Speaking of the Hindu’s respect for the cow, 
Miss Mayo quotes from the Abbé Dubois to the 
effect that ‘very holy men drink it [the cow’s 
urine] daily ’"—a statement which is a lie. I do not 
know whether it was true or not of some people in 
Madras at the end of the eighteenth century; but 


292 UNHAPPY INDIA 


in my life [I am now 63] I have never come across 
a single holy man who drank cow’s urine. How- 
evef, Miss Mayo’s comment on the Abbé’s state- 
ment is, ‘‘ Orthodox India, in these fundamentals, 
. has changed not a whit since the Abbé’s time’ 
This at any rate makes the proposition pre- 
posterous. 


In taunting the Hindu with the neglect of his 
catile by omitting to raise feed for them, .Miss 
Mayo shows her ignorance of the agricultural 
conditions of India as compared with those of the 
United States. Firstly, the United States have 
almost double.the area of India while their popula- 
tion is only about one-third of the latter. Secondly, 
there is no such thing. asa system of ‘ annual 
land revenue ’ there. _ Thirdly, the United States 
ranchers have the support of their Government, 
as cattle-raising is. a regular industry which is 
necessitated by the conditions of land and the 
sparseness of its population. Fourthly, the people 
are not so poor as to be compelled to raise ‘ better 
paying crops’ for the payment of land revenue to 
the government and keeping their families alive. 
In India every acre of cultivated land is taxed. 


There is no analogy between India and the 
United States in this respect. There are hundreds 
of thousands of acres in the United States where 
nothing can be grown except forage. Miss Mayo 
knows that a large number of cattle is raised in 
the United States for the meat industry. 
Millions of cattle, including cows, are slaughtered 
for that industry. : 


WHY THE COW STARVES 293 


However, I am free to confess that through- 
out Europe and America milching cows are better 
looked after than in India. In India, the cow is 
rather neglected for various reasons, primarily 
economic. All governments in the world have 
actively and seriously handled the question of the 
milk supply. Milk, good milk, is a necessity for 
the healthy, growth of children and the health of 
the nation. Governments have therefore enacted 
laws to see that the cow is well protected and the 
milk supply is ample, good and cheap. The 
Government of India have practically done 
nothing in this line for the simple-reason that for 
them the Army and the European Services .are 
more important than the health of the children 
and the people of the country. For the Govern- 
ment of India, the health of the people is at best 
only a secondary concern. In the United States 
of America it is a primary concern of the govern- 
ment (Federal, State or City). Throughout her 
book, Miss Mayo has ignored this vital point, and 
my contention is that she has ignored it out of 
dishonest and. partisan motives. 


On page 210 Miss Mayo remarks: ‘“ Mr. 
Gandhi’s correspondent has shown us in the cow’s 
hunger one of the evil effects of British rule. And 
British rule is indeed largely responsible for the 
present disastrous condition.” She explains what 
she means by the responsibility of the British 
Government in this matter : 


‘* Upon this order [the old order] broke the 
British with their self-elected commitment, first of 


294 UNHAPPY INDIA 


all, to stop banditry, warfare and destruction, and 
to establish peace. The task was precisely the 
same that America set for herself in the 
Philippines. As we achieved it in the Philippines 
so did the British achieve it in India—in a greater 
interval of time commensurate with the greater 
area and population to be pacified. About fifty 
years ago, Britain’s work in this respect until then 
- all-absorbing, stood at last almost accomplished. 
Life and property, under her controlling hand, 
had now become as nearly safe as is, perhaps, 
possible, Epidemics were also checked and 
famine largely forestalled. So that, shielded from 
enemies which had before kept down their 
numbers, men and cattle alike multiplied. And 
men must be fed. Therefore Government leased 
them land in quantity according to their neces- 
ae that they might-raise for themselves and 
not die.” 


What all this has to do either with the cow or 
the Salvation Army one fails to understand. But 
this brief. paragraph is characteristically full of 
misstatements—(1) ‘ Self-elected commitment.’ 
‘Who implored them to commit themselves to the 
pacification of India? Who invited them? They 
came for their gain and they remain for their gain. 
(2) ‘ About 50 years ago, Britain’s work...stood 
accomplished.” Miss Mayo ought to have known 
that the last annexation was that of 1849, more 
than 75 years ago, and the settlements of land 
revenue which devastated Bengal, Bihar and the 
U.P. were made before that time. (3) Life and 
property is even now not safe under British 


WHY THE COW STARVES 295 


control. (See the accounts of Frontier wars and 
raids and riots, etc.) (4) Devastating epidemics 
are still there in the country, and famines are 
everyday occurrences. Epidemics have increased 
both in frequency and intensity because of the 
railways and poverty. The poverty and ignorance 
of the masses feed epidemics and bring. about 
famines as is to a certain extent corroborated by 
Miss Mayo’s chapter, ‘ The World Menace?’ 


The best reply to these foolish comments of 
Miss Mayo is the one given by Mr- Arnold Lupton. 
Discussing the food supply of India, Mr. Lupton 
observes :* 


‘‘ On the other hand there must be deducted 
from these figures the amount of grain consumed 
by the cattle, of which there are nearly as many as 
human beings—thatis to say, about 209,000,000 
altogether, large and small, equivalent to about 
170,000,000 oxen. This is without counting 
poultry, etc.. There can be no doubt that these 
animals require some richer food additional to the 
fodder crops, to grass, leaves, straw, corn stalks, 
roots, cotton seeds, rape seeds, husks, chaff, etc. 


“There can be little doubt that in addition 
they get a great deal of that grain, which I have 
calculated as being sufficient for the human 
population, and it is probable that it is the need of 
giving this grain to the cattle which is one of the 


* Happy India, Arnold Lupton (London: George Allen and 
Unwin, 1922), pp. 144-8. 


296 UNHAPPY INDIA 


chief causes of the insufficient supplies of food to 
the working population. The richer people, who 
own horses and who desire a good supply of milk 
from their cows and good work from their oxen, 
will buy corn for those purposes, thus raising the 
price and diminishing the supply of corn for their 
poorer neighbours... 


‘“‘Some portion of grain, bran or’ meal is 
generally set down as part of the daily ration of a 
cow or a working’ ox or horse, so.l am forced to 
the conclusion that in the densely. populated parts 
of the Ganges Valley and the Punjab, and else- 
where the cattle eat a considerable proportion of 
grain which is required for human consumption, 
and for that reason many of the poorer people are 
half starved... 


“ Tf the production was increased 50 per cent. 
it would add very,greatly to the health and well- 
being and efficiency of the cattle, and that again 
would help the people, for whom the labour of the 
cattle is so essential and the milk so valuable, to 
say nothing of the supply of meat to those whose 
pringip\s and pockets will allow them to eat flesh 

ood.” 


Mr. Lupton does not, like Miss Mayo, protest 
again and again that he has no politics to actuate 
his study, but he does try to present ‘ test facts’ 
of present-day India in an impartial way. He 
does not connive at the evils that exist here but 
looks at them from a practical helpful point of 
view. His remarks quoted above sum up the 


WHY THE COW STARVES 297 


position regarding the question under comment so 
correctly that one need not labour the point any 
further. 


In this statement Mr. Lupton does not consider 
the evil effects of a policy of free export of food 
grains even in years of famine. The exports are 
a source of profit to the landlords, but they are as 
much causes of the Indian masses being starved 
and insufficiently fed as the Indian, cattle in the 
opinion of Mr. Lupton are. , 


And vet it would not do to say, as superficial 
critics have sometimes actually suggested, that 
half the cattle of India should be exterminated. 
Compare the number of cattle per acre of cultiv- 
able land in India with. that in other countries, 
and you will get the reply. The cattle in India 
have not increased proportionately to the increase 
in population, and the present number is not 
enough to till the available land in order to feed 
the present population.* 


These economic factors explain why the cow 
starvesin the landin which itis venerated. It 
must, however, be admitted that there is a good 
deal of callousness about the treatment the cattle 
receive at the hands of the ignorantly selfish 
gowalas (cowherds and dairymen) in India. The 
Indian can easily ask Miss Mayo to spare him the 
sermon on his flaying goats alive when she knows 


*The Condition of Cattle in India by N. Chatterjee (Fore- 
word by Sir John Woodroffe, Calcutta, All-India Cow Conference 
Association, 1926), p. 14. ‘ 


298 UNHAPPY INDIA 


that in her own country and in the European 
countries infinitely more callous things are done 
for the sake of feathers and furs for ladies. But, 
that reply does not absolve Indian gowalas from 
the sin of the abominable practices like phooka. 
It must in fairness be pointed out, however, that 
cow slaughter on a large scale is a new factor in 
India. The interests of the government of foreign 
exploiters appear to conflict with those of the 
nation. For the sake of the meat and hides export 
industry foreigners from Brazil and-other countries 
are allowed a free hand by the government. The 
ost-War cattle famine in the West has wrought 
avoc among Indian milch cattle. The foreign 
buyers come as a disturbing. factor, tempting the 
gowalas to make milch cattle unfit for milking 
after one or two lactations by practices like 
phooka, for the sake, of_a little commercial gain. 
As a recent authority, Mr. N. Chatterjee, points 
out in a foot-note in-his carefully written and well- 
documented volume already referred to :* 


** In countries where people are accustomed 
to flesh-eating, they raise a particular type of 
cattle for meat purposes... They never brook the 
idea of slaughtering their milch cattle. But here 
we have no such provision, and the ‘ best milkers 
are. being sent to the towns...and are being 


3 93 


slaughtered in large numbers’. 


Mr. Chatterjee in his book complains: 
“ Taking advantage of the poverty and ignorance 


*Chatterjee, op.  cit., p. 27. In the last sentence 
Mr. Chatterjee is quoting Sir John Woodroffe. 


WHY THE COW STARVES . 299 


of the native cattle owner the exporters usually 
purchase the best cattle ‘ at a price which hardly 
represents half their economic value’.”* 


Miss Mayo complains that the care of cattle 
has unwisely been included in the schedule of 
‘transferred subjects ’ administered by Indian 
ministers under the new Reforms Act, and ‘there- 
fore deprived of the Briton’s solicitude for it. But 
have cattle in India prospered under British rule? 
Mr. Chatterjee says :t 


“ The animals all over Indiahave consider- 
ably deteriorated. Open the pages of any District 
Gazetteer, official or non-official. report on cattle, 
and you will find that the. common complaint is 
that cattle have grown stunted in size, poorer in 
milk-producing capacity and weaker for agricul- 
tural or draught purposes.” 


Again :{ 


“ Their quality is fast deteriorating—deterio- 
rating in strength as well as their milk-producing 
capacity.. During Akbar’s time ‘many cows at 
Delhi gave. 20 quarts of milk each and were seldom 
sold for more than 10 rupees.’ 


“They would walk faster than horses and 
could fight with tigers and elephants.§ Only 25. 


*Chatterjee, op. cit.. p. 38. In the last sentence 
Mr. Chatterjee is quoting from the Proceedings of the Board of 
Agriculture, 1916. 

+ Chatterjee, op. ctt., p. 41. 

t Ibid., p. 12. 

§ Bernier, quoted by Chatterjeo. 


300 UNHAPPY . INDIA 


years ago Bengal cattle used to yield from 3 to 5 
seers of milk per head on an average, but now the 
yield has dwindled down to one seer only per 
head per day.* And this figure applies generally 
to all milch cattle in India.”t 


The ‘quality of mercy’ is not altogether 
independent of economic factors and-of govern- 
mental action and inaction. 


* Blackwood : ‘A Survey and Census of Cattle of Bengal,’ in 
the Calcutta Englishman; quoted by Chatterjee. 


¢ Sir John Woodroffe, quoted by Chatterjee. w 


CHAPTER XXIII 
INDIA—HOME OF PLENTY* 


To the author of Mother India this country 
not only is, but has always been, the.‘ home of 
stark want.’ She contends so in all seriousness, 
and even makes a pretence of basing her conclu- 
sion on historical research. But her ignorance of 
history is matched only by her, rashness in 
generalization. Her superficial history lets her 
down when she naively speaks-of the ‘Sikh 
Rebellion in 1845 ’ (page 259). Mr. Edward Thom- 
son pertinently asks, ‘‘ Against whom did the 
Sikhs rebel? The English had not yet annexed 
their territory; did they rebel against their own 
authority?” That perhaps is not a very important 
matter in itself; but it does mean that the reader 
need not take Miss Mayo’s knowledge of Indian 
history seriously. 


It is only a courageous—i.e., rash and ignor- 
ant—generalizer that could contend that India 
never developed a system of village government. 
‘‘ Tt is well to observe,’ says Miss Mayo “ that 
north or south, a history made up of endless wars 
and changes of dynasty developed no municipal 
institutions, no free cities, no republics, no poli- 
tical consciousness in the people.’ Other similar 
generalizations, unsupported and insupportable by 


*The material for this chapter is mainly extracted from my 
book, England’s Debt to India. 


302 UNHAPPY INDIA 


historical data, abound in Miss Mayo’s story of 
the ‘ Home of Stark Want.’ Thus on page 251 we 
read: ‘‘ A very few bridges and such roads as are 
made by the plodding of bullocks’ feet through 
dust and mud comprised the communication lines 
of the land.” Miss Mayo’s own table of contents 
could effectively refute the lie about roads). A 

section of it is called, ‘The Grand Trunk Road.’ 
If she is at all aware of what the Grand Trunk 
Road is she must be aware that it is neither bullock- 
made nor Briton-made. Some ofthe pre-British 
roads of India in fact number their miles in four 
figures, and in the pre-steam, era. kept travellers 
busy for months on end before they could traverse 
their whole length. 


In her picture of the ‘ Home of Stark Want’ 
Miss Mayo has made it-a point to include accounts 
given by travellers.who happened to find famine 
conditions in some~part or other of this vast sub- 
continent. But that is hardly a fair way of giving 
a true historical retrospect. India may not have 
been wealthy according to twentieth century 
American. standards; but, judged by standards 
appropriate to past ages, India undoubtedly was 
a land of plenty and prosperity. 


The part of India included in the Empire 
of Darius was, according to Mr. V. A. Smith,* the 
richest province of all his dominions. Thornton’s 
History of British India tells us in the opening 
paragraphs : 


* Early History of India, 3rd edition, p. 33. 


HOME OF PLENTY 303 


‘* Ere yet the Pyramids looked down upon the 
valley. of the Nile,—-when Greece and Italy, those 
cradles of European civilization, nursed only the 
tenants of a wilderness,—India was the seat of 
wealth and grandeur. A busy population had 
covered the land: with the marks of its industry; 
rich crops of the most coveted productions of 
Nature annually rewarded the toil of husbandmen ; 
skilful artisans converted the rude produce of the 
soil into fabrics of unrivalled delicacy and beauty ; 
and architects and sculptors joined in construct- 
ing works, the solidity of which has not, in some 
instances, been overcome by. the evolution of 
thousands of years... The ancient state of India 
must have been one of extraordinary magni- 
ficence.” 


4 Says Rhys Davids about the India of Buddha’s 
ay: 


“ There was security; there was independence, 
—there were no landlords and no paupers.” The 
mass of the people “ held it a degradation to which 
only dire misfortune would drive them, to work 
for hire.” 


But perhaps Miss Mayo has no patience with 
such. remote antiquity. So we shal! confine our 
citations to the Mussalman period and the period 
immediately preceding British rule in India. 


In the ‘India Reform Pamphlet,’ No. 9 issued 
by the India’ Reform Society, which had 387 
Members of Parliament on its Committee, we read : 


* Buddhist India (London, 1903), p. 49s 


304. UNHAPPY INDIA 


“We found the people of India, it is said, 
abject, degraded, false to the very core... ‘Che 
most indolent and selfish of our own governors 
have been models of benevolence and beneficence 
when compared with the greatest of the native 
sovereigns. The luxurious selfishness of ‘the 
Moghul Emperors depressed and enfeebled. the 
people. Their predecessors were either» un- 
scrupulous tyrants or indolent debauchees... 
Having the command of the public press in this 
country and the sympathy of the public mind with 
us, it is an easy task thus to exalt. ourselves at the 
expense of our predecessors. We tell our own 
story and our testimony is unimpeachable, but if 
we find anything favourable related of those who 
have preceded us, the accounts we pronounce to 
be suspicious. We contrast the Moghul conquest 
of the fourteenth century: with the ‘ victorious, 
mild and merciful progress of the British arms in 
the East in the nineteenth.’ But if our object was 
a fair one, we should contrast the Mussalman 
invasion of Hindusthan with the contemporaneous 
Norman invasion of England—the characters of 
the Mussalman sovereigns with their contem- 
poraries in the West—their Indian wars of the 
fourteenth century with our French wars or with 
the Crusades—the effect of the Muhummadan 
conquest upon the character of the Hindu with the 
effect of the Norman conquest upon the Anglo- 
Saxon when ‘to be called an Englishman was 
considered as a reproach—when those who were 
appointed to administer justice were the fountain 
of all iniquity—when magistrates whose duty it 
was to pronounce righteous judgments were the 


HOME OF PLENTY 305 


most cruel tyrants and greater plunderers than 
common thieves and robbers;’ when the great men 
were inflamed with such a rage of money that 
they cared not by what means it was acquired— 
when licentiousness was so great that a princess 
of Scotland found it ‘ necessary to wear a religious 
habit in order to preserve her person from. viola- 
tion!’ (Henry of Huntington, Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle and Edmon.) . 


‘The history of Muhammadan dynasty in 
India is full, it is said, of lamentable instances of 
cruelty and rapacity of the early conquerors, not 
without precedent in the contemporary Christian 
history; for when Jerusalem was taken by the first 
Crusaders, at the.end of the eleventh century, the 
garrison, consisting of 40,000 men, ‘ was put to the 
sword without distinction; arms protected not the 
brave, nor submission™ the timid; no age or sex 
received mercy; infants perished by the same 
sword that pierced their mothers. The streets of 
Jerusalem were covered with heaps of slain, and 
the shrieks of agony and despair resounded from 
every house.’ When Louis the Seventh of France, 
in the twelfth century, ‘made himself master of 
the town of Vitri, he ordered it to be set on fire.’ 
In England, at the same time, under our Stephen, 
war ‘ was carried on with so much fury, that the 
land was left uncultivated, and the instruments 
of husbandry were left or abandoned,’—and the 
result of our French wars in the fourteenth 
century, was a state of things ‘ more horrible and 
destructive than was ever experienced in any age 
or country.’ The insatiable cruelty of the Muham- 

24 


306 UNHAPPY INDIA 


madan conquerors, it is said, stands recorded upon 
more undeniable authority than the insatiable 
benevolence of the Muhammadan conquerors. ‘We 
have abundant testimony of cruelty of contempo- 
rary Christian conquerors,—have we any evidence 
of their benevolence ? 


“ As attempts are thus systematically made, in 
bulky volumes, to run down the character of 
native Governments and Sovereigns, in order that 
we may have a fair pretext for seizing upon their 
possessions, it becomes necessary to show that we 
have a Christian Roland for every native Oliver, 
that if the Muhammadan. conquerors of India 
were cruel and rapacious, they were matched by 
their Christian contemporaries. It is much our 
fashion to compare India in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries with England in the nine- 
‘teenth, and to pique ourselves upon the result. 
‘ When we compare other countries with England,’ 
said a sagacious observer, ‘we usually speak of 
England as she now is—we scarcely ever think of 
going back beyond the Reformation—and‘we are 
apt to regard every foreign country as ignorant 
and uncivilized whose state of improvement does 
not in some degree approximate to our own, even 
though it should be higher than our own was at 
no distant period.’ It would be almost as fair to 
compare India in the sixteenth with England in the 
nineteenth century, as it would be to compare the 
two couniries in the first centuries of the Christian 
era, when India was at the top of civilization, and 
England at the bottom.’ 


HOME OF PLENTY ; 307 


Mr. W. M. Torrens, M.P., writing in the last 
century, observed :* 


“ There never was an error more groundless 
than that which represented the ancient systems 
of Indian rule as decrepit or degrading despotisms, 
untempered by public opinion. It accords. too 
well with the arrogance of national self-love and 
seems too easily to lull the conscience of aggression 
to pretend that those whom it has wronged were 
superstitious slaves, and that they must have so 
remained but for the disinterested violence of 
foreign civilization introduced, by it, sword in 
hand. This pretentious theory is confuted by the 
admissions of men whose. knowledge cannot be 
disputed and whose authority cannot be denied.” 


As to the so-called usurpations, infamies and 
fanaticism of Indian monarchs, Mr. Torrens asks 
his readers to compare them with the deeds and 
practices of the Borgias, Louis XJ, Philip II, 
Richard III;. Mary Tudor and the last of the 
Stuarts, and-to ‘look back at the family picture 
of misrule.”in Europe, from Catherine de Medici 
to Louis. le Grand,—from Philip the Cruel to 
Ferdinand the Fool,—from John the Faithless to 
Charles the False,—not forgetting the parricide 
Peter of Muscovy and the Neapolitan Bourbons! 
“Tt is no more true,” he concludes, ‘‘ of Southern 
Asia than of Western Europe to say that the every- 
day habits of supreme or subordinate rule were 
semi-barbarous, venal, sanguinary or rapacious.” 


* Empire in Asta, London, p. 100. 


308 UNHAPPY INDIA 
Again we read in the Reform Pamphiet, No. 9: 


“ Writers, both Hindu and Mussalman, unite 
in bearing testimony to the state of prosperity in 
which India was found at the time of the first 
Muhammadan conquest. They dwell with admira- 
tion on the extent and magnificence of the capital 
of the Kingdom of Canauj, and of the inexhaustible 
riches of the temple of Somnath.” 


Let us put the British administrator and 
historian, Elphinstone, in the witness-box :* 


‘‘The condition of the people in ordinary 
times does not appear to have borne the marks of 
op ression. The historian of Feroz Shah (A.D. 

1-94) expatiates on the happy state of the ryots, 
the goodness of their ‘houses and furniture, and 
the general use of gold-and silver ornaments by 
their women.’ 


Elphinstone went. through the records left by 
other historians and travellers. We summarize 
below the verdict of some of his authorities : 


‘“The general state of the country must no 
doubt _have been flourishing. Nicolo de Conti, 
who travelled about 1420 A.D., speaks highly of 
what he saw in Guzerat, and found the banks of 
the Ganges covered with towns amidst beautiful 
gardens and orchards, and passed four famous. 
cities before he reached Maarazia, which he 
describes as a powerful city filled with gold, silver 


* Elphinstone, vol. II, p. 203. _ 


HOME OF PLENTY 309 


and precious stones. His accounts are corro- 
borated by those of Barbora and Bartema, who 
travelled in the early part of the sixteenth 
century.” 


Cesar Frederic gives a similar account. of 
Gujrat, and Ibn Batuta, who travelled during the 
anarchy and oppression of Muhammad Tughlak’s 
reign, in the middle of the fifteenth century, when 
insurrections were raging in most parts of the 
country, enumerates the large and. populous towns 
and cities, and gives a high impression of the state 
the country must have been in, before it fell into 
disorder. 


In the account of Moghul India we read in the 
Reform Pamphlet :* 


** Abdurizag, an ambassador from the grand- 
son of Tamerlane, visited the south of India in 
1442, and concurs with other observers in giving 
the impression of a prosperous country. The 
kingdom of.Kandeish was at this time in a high 
state of \prosperity under its own kings; the 
numerous stone embankments by which the 
streams were rendered applicable to irrigation are 
equal to anything in India as works of industry 
and ability.” 


** Baber speaks of Hindusthan as ‘ a rich and 
noble country’, and expresses his astonishment at 
the swarming population and the innumerable 
workmen of every kind and description.” . 


* Page 10. 


310 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The following again from Elphinstone effec- 
tively refutes Miss Mayo’s statement about roads 
in pre-British India :* . 


““ {Sher Shah] made a high road extending 
for four months’ journey from Bengal to Western 
Rohtas near the Indus with caravanserais~ at 
every stage and wells at every mile and a half... 
The road was planted with rows of trees for shade, 
and in many places was in the state described 
when the author saw it, after it had stood for 82 
years.” 


Amongst the authorities quoted in the Reform 
Pamphiet is the Italian traveller, Pietro del Valle, 
who, writing in 1623, says 


** Generally all live much after a genteel way 
and they do it securely, as well because ‘the King 
does not persecute his subjects with false accusa- 
tions, nor deprive them of anything when he sees 
ee live-aplendagly and with the appearance of 
riches!” 


And about Aurangzeb we read :t 


“ Notwithstanding the misgovernment of 
Aurangzeh and the reign of a series of weak and 
wicked princes, together with the invasion of 
Nadir Shah, who carried away enormous wealth 
when he quitied Delhi in 1739, the country was 
still in a comparatively prosperous condition.” 


i" * Elphinstone, vol. II, p.151; Reform Pamphlet, pp. 10 and 


t Reform Pamphlet, p. 12. 
tIbid., p. 16. 


HOME OF PLENTY 311 


We shall cite a few more iestimonies about 
the economic condition of the different provinces 
of India in the pre-British days. James Mill, 
father of the philosopher, writing of Oude and 
Karnatic says :* 


‘Under their dependence upon the British 
Government, it has been seen that the people of 
Oude and Karnatic, two of the noblest. provinces 
of India, were, by misgovernment, plunged into a. 
state of wretchedness with which no other part of 
India—hardly any part of earth,;—had anything 
to compare.” 


Col. Fullarton’s View of the Interests of 
India contains an estimate of the character of 
Hyder Ali of Mysore and of conditions during his 
reign. The writer of the Reform Pamphlet 
remarks : 


‘* Manufacturer and merchant prospered... 
cultivation increased, new manufactures were 
established, wealth flowed into the kingdom...the 
slightest defalcation by the officers of revenue was 
summarily punished...” 


The. following is the substance of Moore’s 
estimate of Tipu’s administration :f 


“When a person, travelling through a strange 
country, finds it well cultivated, populous with 
industrious habitants, cities newly founded, 
commerce extending, towns increasing and every- 


* Mill: History of British India, Bk. VI, pp. 51-2. 
t+ Moore’s Narrative of the War with Tipu Sultan, p. 201, 
quoted in the Reform Pamphlet. . 


312 UNHAPPY INDIA 


thing flourishing so as to indicate happiness, he 
naturally concludes the form of government 
congenial to the people. This is a picture of 
Tipu’s government.” 


All this prosperity was not created entirely by 
Hyder or his son, whose sway did not last half a 
century. For the foundations of this flourishing 
condition, we must look to the rulers of the 
ancient Hindu dynasty—they were the construc- 
tors of those magnificent canals which intersect 
Mysore and insure the people prodigal returns 
from the fertile soil. 


Howell, writing in his Tracts upon India, says 
of Bengal :* 


‘* Here the property, as well as the liberty, of 
the people, are inviolate. The traveller, with or 
without merchandise, becomes the immediate care 
of the government, which allots him guards, with- 
out any expense, to conduct him from stage to 
stage... I£f..:a bag of money or valuables is lost in 
this district, the person who finds it hangs it on a 

- tree and gives notice to the nearest guard...” 


About Dacca we read :t 


“The rich province of Dacca was cultivated 
in .every part...justice was: administered im- 
partially... Jeswant Roy...had been educated in 
urity, integrity and indefatigable attention to 
usiness, and studied to render the government of 


* Reform Pamphlet, p. 21. 
+ Stewart: History of Bengal, p. 430; Reform Pamphlet, 
p. 22, 


HOME OF PLENTY 313 ~ 


his province conducive to the general ease and 
happiness of his people—he abolished all mono- 
polies and the imposts upon grain.” 


Here is another passage about Bengal im- 
mediately before the British assumed charge of 
it :* 

. “ Such was the state of Bengal whem Alivardy 
Khan...assumed its government. Under his rule 
...the country was improved; merit and good 
conduct were the only passports to ~his favour. 
He placed Hindus on an equality) with Mussal- 
mans, in choosing ministers,, and nominating 
them to high military and civil command. The 
revenues, instead of being drawn to the distant 
treasury of Delhi were spent on the spot.” 


Miss-Mayo has given a good chit to the East 
India Company. ‘Here is what Macaulay said 
about Bengal under the Company’s rule :¢ 


‘** Accordingly, the five years which followed 
the departure of Clive from Bengal, saw the mis- 
government of the English carried to such a point 
as seemed, incompatible with the existence of 
society. The Roman proconsul, who, in a year or 
two, squeezed out of a province the means of rear- 
ing marble palaces and baths on the shores of 
Campania, of drinking from amber and feasting 
on singing-birds, of exhibiting armies of gladiators 
and flocks of camelopards; the Spanish Viceroy, 
who, leaving behind him the curses of Mexico or 


* Stewart quoted in Reform Pamphlet, p. 22. 
+ Macaulay: Essay on Clive. 


314 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Lima, entered Madrid with a long train of gilded 
coaches and sumpter horses trapped and shod with 
silver, were now outdone. The servants of the 
Company obtained for themselves a monopoly of 
almost the whole internal trade. They forced. the 
natives to buy dear and sell cheap. They insulted 
with impunity the tribunals, the police and fiscal 
‘authorities...every servant of a British factor was 
armed with all the power of the Company...Enor- 
mous fortunes were thus rapidly accumulated at 
Calcutta, while thirty millions of human beings 
were reduced to an extremity of wretchedness... 
Under their old masters,...when evil became in- 
supportable, the people rose-and pulled down the 
government. But the English Government was 
not to be shaken off. That Government, oppres- 
sive as the most oppresive form of barbarian des- 
ae was strong with all the strength of civil- 
isation.’ 


Writing of the Company’s methods, even 
Warren Hastings had to use strong language. 
Said he :* . 


‘*T fear that our encroaching spirit, and the 
insolence with which it has been exerted, has 
caused our alliance to be as much dreaded by all 
the powers of Hindusthan as our arms. Our en- 
croaching spirit, and the uncontrolled and even 
protected licentiousness of individuals, has done 
injury to our national reputation... Every person 
in India dreads a connection with us.” 


* Gleig : Life of Hastings, vol. II, quoted in Reform 
Pamphlet, p. 20. 


HOME OF PLENTY 315 


The extent of the salaries, pensions and en- 
croachments of the company’s service, civil and 
inilitary, upon the Nawab’s revenues and author- 
ity, says Warren Hastings, “have become an 
intolerable burden and exposed us to the enmity, 
and resentment of the whole country, by exclud- 
ing the native servants and adherents of the Vizier 
from the rewards of their service and’ attachments. 
I am afraid few men would understand me were 
I to ask by what right or policy we levied a tax on 
the Nawab Vizier for the benefit of patronized in- 
dividuals, and fewer still, if I questioned the right 
or policy of imposing upon him an army for his 
protection, which he could not pay, which he does 
not want; with what expression could I tell him to 
his face, ‘ You do not want it, but you shall pay 
for it!’... Every Englishman in Oude was 
possessed of an independent and sovereign author- 
ity. They learned...to claim the revenue of lacs. 
as their right, though they could gamble away 
more than two lacs (I allude to a known fact) at a 
sitting.’’* 

Now. about the Mahratta territory. The 
traveller, Anquetil du Perron, writing in his 
‘ Brief Account of a Voyage to India,’ published in 
the Gentleman’s Magazine (1762) writes: 


** From Surat, I passed the Ghats,...about ten 
in the morning, and when I entered the country of 
the Mahrattas, I thought myself in the midst of 
the simplicity and happiness of the golden age, 
where nature was yet unchanged, and war and 


* Life of Hastings, vol. II, p. 458; Reform Pamphlet, p. 26. 


316 UNHAPPY INDIA 


misery were unknown. The people were cheerful, 
vigorous and in high health, and unbounded hos- 
pitality was an universal virtue; every door was 
open, and friends, neighbours and strangers were 
alike welcome to whatever they found.” 


, This is how Sir John Malcolm expressed him- 
self about the Mahratta administrator, Nana 
Furnawese :* 


“Tt has not happened to me_ ever to see 
countries better cultivated, and more abounding 
in all the produce of the soil as well as in. commer- 
cial wealth, than the Southern Mahratta districts. 
... Poonah, the capital of the Peishwah, was a very 
wealthy and thriving commercial town and there 
was as much cultivation in the Deccan as it was 
possible, and an arid and, unfruitful country could 
admit...- 


.. “ With respect-to Malwa, I saw it in a state 
of ruin, caused by the occupancy...of the preda- 
tory hordes.of\India. Yet, even at that period, I 
was surprised...to find that dealings in money up 
to large amounts had continually taken place be- 
tween cities, where bankers were in a Hourishing 
state,.and goods to a great extent continually 
passed through the province...the insurance offices 
which exist through all parts of India...had never 
stopped their operations... I do not believe that 
in Malwa the introduction of our direct rule could 
have contributed more, nor indeed so much, to the 
prosperity of the commercial and agricultural 


* Reform Panphlet, pp. 28-9. 


HOME OF PLENTY 317 


interests, as the re-establishment of the efficient. 
tule of its former princes and chiefs. With respect 
to the Southern Mahratta districts, of whose 
prosperity I have before spoken...I do not think 
either their commercial or agricutural interests 
are likely to be improved under our rule. Their 
system of administration is, on the whole, mild. 
and paternal. I refer their prosperity tobe due... 
to the knowledge and almost devotion of the 
Hindus to agricultural pursuit; to their better 
understanding, or better practice than us...in 
raising towns and villages to prosperity, from the 
encouragement given to moneyed men, and the in- 
troduction of capital...but above all causes which 
promote prosperity, is the invariable support 
given to the village and other native institutions, 
and to the employment, far beyond what our 
system permits, of all classes of population.” 


Regarding Oudh we get glimpses in Bishop 
Heber’s Journal., About Bharatpur. the Bishop 
wrote : 


** This country...is one of the best cultivated 
and watered tracts which I have seen in India. 
The crops of corn'on the ground were really 
beautiful; that of cotton...a very good one. What 
is.a sure proof of wealth, I saw several sugar- 
mills, and large pieces of ground where the cane 
had just been Cleared... The population did not 
seem great, but the villages were in good condition 
and repair, and the whole afforded so pleasing a 
picture of industry, and was so much superior to 


* Journal, vol. EI, quoted in Reform Pamphlet. 


318 UNHAPPY INDIA 


anything I had been led to expect in Rajputana, 
which I had seen in the Company’s territories... 
that I was led to suppose that either the Raja of 
Bhurtpore was an extremely exemplary and paren- 
tal governor, or that the system of management 
adopted in the British provinces was less favour- 
able to the improvement and happiness ‘of. the 
country than in some of the native states.” 


Governor-General Lord Hastings’ declared in 
1827 (Parliamentary Papers, page 157).: 


“A new progeny has grown up under our 
hand; and the principal features of a generation 
thus formed beneath the shade of our regulation, 
are, a spirit of litigation, which our judicial 
establishments cannot meet, and a morality cer- 
tainly deteriorated.”’ ° 


About Clive himself a recent British historian 
says :* 


*‘ Clive had no sense of responsibility for the 
good government of Bengal. His sole desire was 
to preserve the Company’s political ascendency by 
playing upon the weaknesses of the Nabob and his 
subjects.” But in the language of Brooks Adams, 
the takings of Clive either for himself or for the 
government were nothing compared to the whole- 
sale spoliation which followed his departure, when 
Bengal was surrendered a helpless prey to a 
myriad of greedy officials who ‘ were irresponsible 
fe rapacious and who emptied the private 
oards.’ ” 


*Muir: Making of British India (Manchester, 1915), p. 82. 


CHAPTER XXIV 


INDIA—‘ HOME OF STARK WANT 


India will not remain and ought not to remain 
content to be a hewer of wood and a drawer of 
water for the rest of the Empire. 


J. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, 
Secretary of State for India, 
London Times, March 30, 1917. 


The above quotation. very pithily embodies 
the econemic position of India in the British 
Empire. India has been the making of wealthy 
Great Britain, and the latter has been the economic 
unmaking of India.. The tale has been told in 
many books on the subject by competent English 
and Indian. authorities. I have condensed it in 
my book, England’s Debt to India. The present 
chapter is practically extracted from that book. 


That India played a very definite part in the 
success of the British Industrial Revolution, is a 
fact almost universally acknowledged; yet how 
great a part India played in making for the 
industrial and economic prosperity of Great 
Britain is known to very few. ; 


Let us consider first the respective economic 
positions of India and England at the time when 


320 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the Industrial Revolution was brought about by 
the invention of the steam engine and of mecha- 
nical one for the spinning and weaving 
of cloth. 


We have already given the reader an idea of 
the economic prosperity of India in pre-British 
days. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries 
India had enormous wealth; the treasuries of her 
rulers were full of money, bullion and precious 
stones of fabulous value; her industries.and manu- 
factures flourished, and she exported large 
quantities of goods in return for payment in gold 
and silver. Her trade with Asia, Europe and 
Africa was extensive, and she made enormous 
profits from the sale of her manufactured goods. 
Her cotton muslins, manufactured silks, woollen 
shawls, brass and bronzes had made her famous 
throughout Asia and Europe. 


For more than a century and a half the 
English trade in India consisted mainly of the 
export of cotton and silk goods, indigo and spices 
in return for bullion. During this period India 
imported. practically nothing. Bruce says that 
‘on the average of ten years, from 1747 to 1757, 
£552,423 bullion was exported to India, but after 
that year bullion was no longer exported there.’* 


How the East India Company made enor- 


mous profits from this trade is told by all the 
historians of the time. Macaulay says: 


' * Plans for British India by J. Bruce, p. 316. 


HOME OF STARK WANT’ . 321: 


‘The Company enjoyed, during the greater 
part of the reign of Charles II, a prosperity to 
which the history of trade scarcely furnished any 
parallel, and which excited the wonder, the cupi- 
dity and the envious animosity of the whole 
capital (London)... During the twenty-three years 
that followed the Restoration the value of the 
annual imports from that rich and popular district 
(the Delta of the Ganges) increased from £8,000 to 
£300,000.” And he adds that ‘the gains of the 
body (i.e., the Company) were almost-incredible... 
the profits were such that in 1676 every proprietor 
received as a bonus a quantity of stock equal to 
that which he held. On the capital thus doubled 
were paid, during five years, dividends amounting 
to an average of 20 per cent. annually.* 


In 1677 the price of the stock was 245 for 
every one hundred., In 1681 it rose to 300 and 
later on to 360 and 500. The only limitations to 
the profits of the Company were the exactions of 
the English Crown, the demands of the English 
Exchequer, and the dishonesty of its servants. 


At that time the balance of trade was entirely 
in favour of India. The British historian, Orme, 
in his Historical Fragments says that the manu- 
facture of cotton goods was almost universal 
throughout India. The rupee which now sells for 
1s. 6d. was then worth 2s. 8d. Such was the eco- 
nomic condition of India. 


Let us now consider the economic condition of 
England. ‘In the Sixteenth century,” says 


* Macaulay’s History of England, vol. V, p. 2004. 
25 


322 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Robertson, ‘‘ England was a backward country; 
and capitalists seeking investments looked to- 
wards it from all the monetary centres.”’ 


‘‘Early in the seventeenth century,” says 
‘Mill, ‘‘ the English, whose country, oppressed by 
Misgovernment or scourged by civil war,. afford- 
ed little capital to extend trade, or protect it; were 
unequal competitors of the Dutch.’’ 


By the end of the seventeenth century, condi- 
tions had become alarmingly acute, not only in 
England, but throughout Europe, as has been 
shown by Brooks Adams. Adams says that to- 
wards the close of the seventeenth century Europe 
appeared to be on the brink of a contraction of 
money, due partly to the constant drain to Asia 
and the increasing demands of commerge. From 
the reign of Augustus commerce between Europe 
and Asia had usually favoured Asia. The lack of 
money led to a considerable depreciation of cur- 
rency in England. 


Speaking..of the time of the Revolution, 
Ruding says: 

** At that time the diminution of the value of 
money-and counterfeiting had been so excessive 
that what was good silver was worth scarcely one- 
half of the current value, and a great part of the 
coins was only iron, brass, or copper plated, and 
some no more than washed over.” 


In the decade between 1710 and 1720 the 
actual export of bullion by the East India Com- 
pany averaged £4,344,000.. 


>) 


HOME OF STARK WANT’ 323 


The story of how England supplied her needs 
at this time is one of the most dramatic pages of 
history. As Jevons has observed, ‘ Asia is the 
great reservoir and sink of the precious metals.’ 
From time immemorial the Oriental custom has 
been to hoard, and from the Moghul blazing with 
the diamonds of Golconda, to the peasant starving 
on his wretched pittance, every Hindu had, in 
former days, a treasure stored away against a day 
of trouble: 


‘* These hoards, the savings of millions of 
human beings for centuries; the English seized 
and took to London, as the Romans had taken the 
spoils of Greece and Pontus to Italy. What the 
value of the treasure was,.no man can estimate, 
but it must have been many millions of pounds— 
a vast sum in proportion to the stock of the pre- 
cious metals then owned by Europeans.”’* [Ttalics 
are ours. | 


We have already pointed out on the author- 
ity of Bruce that the last export of bullion from 
England to India took place in 1757, the year in 
which the battle of Plassey was fought. After 
that, bullion was no longer exported to India. 
‘From this period on, the export of bullion to 
China very considerably decreased and it was only 
sent occasionally after the supply from India 
failed. This circumstance was explained in every 
letter sent by the Directors to their servants at 
Madras and Bengal, which contained instructions 


* Brooks Adams in The Law of Civilization and Decay, 
305. : 


324 UNHAPPY INDIA 


to them to collect as,much bullion as they could, 
to be ready for ships which would come out from 
Madras and China, and by the answers to the 
letters specifying the quantity sent by the different 
vessels.’”* 


The circumstances in India at that time were 
very favourable to the collection of bullion by the 
servanis of the East India Company.In the 
words of Macaulay, ‘ Treasure flowed to England 
in oceans; and what was lacking in England to 
make the fullest possible use of the mechanical 
inventions made by Watt and others was supplied 
by India. The infiux of Indian treasure added 
considerably to England’s cash capital.’ 


It is clear then that the ‘Industrial Revolu- 
tion,’ the foundation on which England’s econo- 
mic prosperity was built up, was made possible 
only by the influx of Indian treasure, and that but 
for this capital, not loaned but taken, and bearing 
no interest, the ascendency of the steam engine and 
mechanical appliances for mass production might 
have remained unutilized. England’s -gain was 
India’s loss—a loss of treasure more than enough 
to starve her industries and retard the progress of 
agriculture. No country, however, rich or re- 
sourceful, could bear such a drain unharmed.’ 


As an example of how the East India Com- 


pany carried on its trade operations we will quote 
what Sergeant Brago wrote : 


*J, Bruce: Plans for British India, pp. 314-15. 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 325 


‘A gentleman sends a gomastah here to buy 
or sell; he immediately looks upon himself as 
sufficient to force every inhabitant either to buy 
his goods or sell him theirs; and on refusal (in 
case of non-capacity) a flogging or confinement 
immediately ensues. This is not sufficient.even 
when willing, but a second force is made use of, 
which is to engross the different branches of trade 
to themselves and not to suffer any person to buy 
or sell the articles they trade in; and if the country 
people do it, then a repetition of their authority 
is put in practice; and again, what things they 
purchase, they think the least they can do is to 
take them for a considerable-deal less than another 
merchant and often-times refuse paying that; and 
my interfering occasions an immediate complaint. 
These and many other oppressions, more than can 
be related, which are daily used by the Bengal 
gomastahs, arethe reasons that this place 
(Backergunj, a prosperous Bengal district) is grow- 
ing destitute of inhabitants; every day numbers 
leave the town to seek a residence more safe, 
and the .very markets, which before afforded 
plenty,.do hardly now produce anything of use, 
their peons being allowed to force poor people; 
and if the zemindar offers to prevent it, he is 
threatened to be used in the same manner. Before, 
justice was given in the public catcheree (court), 
but now every gomasiah is become a judge, and 
every one’s house a catcheree; they even pass 
sentences on the zemindars themselves and draw 
money from them by pretended injuries, such as 
a quarrel with some of the peons, or their having, 


326° UNHAPPY INDIA 


as they assert, stole something, which is more 
likely to have been taken by their own people.”* 


William Bolts, an English merchant, thus 
narrated this part of this sad story : 


“Tt may with truth be now said thatthe 
whole inland trade of the country, as at present 
conducted, and that of the Company’s investment 
for Europe in a more peculiar degree, has been 
one continued scene of oppression; the baneful 
effects of which are severely felt by-every weaver 
and manufacturer in the country, every. article 
produced being made a monopoly; in which the 
English, with their banyas.and black gomastahs, 
arbitrarily decide what quantities of goods each’ 
manufacturer shall deliver, and the prices he shall 
receive for them... Upon the gomastah’s arrival 
at the aurung, or manufacturing town he fixes 
upon a habitation.which he calls his catchery; to 
which, by his peons and hircarahs, he summons 
the brokers, called dallals and pykars, together 
with the weavers, whom, after receipt of the 
money despatched by his masters, he makes to 
sign a.bond for the delivery of a certain quantity 
of goods at a certain time and price, and pays 
them a certain part of the money in advance. 
The assent of the poor weaver is in general not 
deemed necessary; for the gomastahs, when 
employed on the Company’s investment, fre- 
quently make them sign what they please; and 
upon the weavers refusing to take the money 


*Quoted by Romesh Dutt in India Under. Early British 
Rule, pp. 98-24. 


HOME OF STARK WANT ’ 327 


offered, it has been known they have had if tied 
in their girdles and they have been sent away 
with a flogging... A number of these weavers are 
generally’ also registered in the books of the 
Company’s gomastahs and not permitted to work 
for any others, being transferred from one to 
another as so many slaves, subject to the tyranny 
and roguery of each succeeding gomastah... The 
roguery practised in this department is beyond 
imagination; but all terminates in the defrauding 
of the poor weaver; for the prices which the 
Company’s gomastahs and, in, confederacy with 
them, the jachendars (examiners of fabrics) fix 
upon the goods, are in all places at least 15 per 
cent. and some even 40 per cent. less than the 
goods so manufactured. would sell in the public 
bazar or market upon free sale... Weavers also, 
upon their inability.to perform such agreements 
as have been forced upon them by the Company’s 
agents, universally.known in Bengal by the name 
of mutchutcahs, have had their goods seized and 
sold on the spot to make good the deficiency; and 
the winders of raw silk, called negoads, have been 
treated.also with such injustice, that instances 
have been known of their cutting off their thumbs 
to prevent their being forced to wind silk.” 


Even Lord Clive wrote a graphic and strongly- 
worded letter to the Directors at Home.* But of 
Clive’s own gains, Macaulay says: 

“ As to Clive, their was no limit to his 
acquisitions but his own moderation. . The 


* Malcolm: Zife of Clive, p. 379. 


328 UNHAPPY INDIA 


treasury of Bengal was thrown open to him. 
There were, well piled up, after the usage of the 
Indian princes, immense masses of coin among 
which might not seldom be detected the florins 
and byzants with which, before any European 
ship had turned the Cape of Good Hope, \ the 
Venetians purchased the stuffs and spices of the 
East. Clive walked between heaps of -gold and 
silver crowned with rubies and diamonds and was 
at liberty to help himself.” 


What followed Clive’s departure was thus 
summed up by the same authority : 


‘*Enormous fortunes ~were thus rapidly 
accumulated at Calcutta while thirty millions of 
human beings were reduced to the extremity of 
wretchedness. The misgovernment of the English 
was carried to such a point as seems hardly 
compatible with the very existence of society.” 


During the five years following Lord Clive’s 
retirement from the service of the East India 
Company. the servants of the latter left nothing 
undone-to. wring out as much money as they 
could, by every means, from the rulers and 
natives of Bengal. The ‘trade oppression’ 
practised during this period may better be des- 
cribed in the words of William Bolts, a servant of 
the Company, from his Considerations on Indian 
Affairs, published in 1772, a description which 
rare Muir pronounces as ‘ substantially 
rue.’ 


* Muir: The Making of British India, p. 89. 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 329 
Says Mr. Bolts on page 73 of his book : 


“ Inconceivable oppressions and hardships 
have been practised towards the poor manufac- 
turers and workmen of the country, who are, in 
fact, monopolized by the Company as so many 
slaves... Various and innumerable are the 
methods of oppressing the poor weavers, which 
are duly practised by the Company’s agents and 
gomastahs in the country; such as by fines, im- 
prisonments, floggings, forcing bonds-from them, 
etc., by which the number of weavers in the 
country has been greatly decreased. The natural 
consequences whereof have been the scarcity, 
dearness and debasement of the manufactures as 
well as a great diminution of the revenues; and 
the provision of the Company’s investment has 
thereby now become a monopoly, to the almost 
entire exclusion of all others, excepting the 
servants of the Company highest in station, who 
having the management of the investment, pro- — 
vide as much as their consciences will let them for 
the Company, themselves and their favourites; 
excepting. also the foreign companies, who are 
permitted to make some small investments, to 
prevent clamours in Europe... 


In this way, the servants of the Company 
ruined the trade of the country, and by coercion 
and oppression established their monopoly. 


The whole matier was clearly put by Burke 
in the report of the select committee of the House 
of Commons appointed later on to enquire into the 
affairs of the East India Company : 


330 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“This new system of trade, carried on 
through the medium of power and public revenue, 
very soon produced its natural effects. The 
loudest complaints arose among the natives and 
among all the foreigners who traded in Bengal. 
It must have unquestionably thrown the _whole 
mercantile system of the country into the greatest 
confusion. With regard to the natives, no 
expedient was proposed for their relief..The case 
was serious with respect to European Powers. 
The Presidency plainly represented to the 
Directors that some agreement. should be made 
with the foreign nations for, providing their 
investment to a certain amount or that the 
deficiencies then subsisting must terminate in an 
open rupture with France.”* 


“ Notwithstanding the famine in 1770, which 
wasted Bengal in a manner dreadful beyond all 
example, the investment by a variety of succes- 
sive expedients, many of them of the most 
dangerous nature and tendency, was forcibly kept 
up; and even.in that forced and unnatural state 
it gathered strength almost every year. The debts 
contracted in the infancy of the system were 
gradually reduced and the advances to contractors 
and manufacturers were regularly made; so that 
the. goods from Bengal, purchased from the 
territorial revenues, from the sale of European 
goods, and from the produce of the monopolies 
for the four years which ended with 1780, when 
the investment from the surplus revenues finally 


* Ninth Report, p.47; Burke: Collected Works, vol. ITI, 
quoted by Digby, p. 28. ; 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 331 


closed, were never less than a million sterling, 
and commonly nearer twelve hundred thousand 
pounds. This million is the lowest value of the 
goods sent to Europe for which no satisfaction is 
made.”* (The sale, to the amount of the hundred 
thousand pounds annually, of the export.from 
Great Britain ought to be deducted from \ this 
million). 


‘* In all other countries, the revenue, follow- 
ing the natural course and order of things, arises 
out of their commerce. Here, by @ mischievous 
inversion of that order, the whole foreign maritime 
trade, whether English, French, Dutch or Danish, 
arises from the revenues. .These are carried out 
of the country without producing anything to com- 
pensate so heavy a loss.”+ 


This is one part of the story. 
Drain. 


The question whether India pays tribute to 
England, or ever has paid it, has been and still is’ 
the subject of bitter controversy among English 
publicists. One party asserts that India has 
been paying an enormous tribute to England and 
still pays it; that there has been going on a regular 
‘drain of India’s wealth to England ever since 
British connection with India began; that under 
the direct administration of India by the crown 


* Tbid., pp. 47-48. 
t Ibid., p. 50. 


332 UNHAPPY INDIA 


since 1858 that drain not only has not ceased but 
has actually increased; and that this drain has 
impoverished India beyond description. The 
other party holds that India has never paid any 
tribute to England; that there is no drain from 
India to England; that what has been paid. by 
India has been received by England in lieu of 
services rendered or capital loaned for her im- 
provement; and that under British rule India has 
attained a prosperity which she had never known 
before in her history. Miss Mayo-agrees with the 
latter party and has adopted their point of view. 


In the preceding section we have shown how 
England stood economically. for more than two 
‘centuries immediately preceding the battle of 
Plassey and thereabout; also how Indian treasure 
flowed to England and changed the whole econo- 
mic outlook there. We do not know of a single 
publicist, English or Indian, who denies or ques- 
tions the facts upon which the theory of drain is 
based. All parties are agreed that at least for 
thirty years,;.from 1757 to 1787, Bengal was ‘ plun- 
dered’ by the servants of the East India 
Company. 


In-a letter of July 2, 1901, published in the 
Morning Post, London, the late Mr. H. M. Hynd- 
mah, the great Socialist leader, said : 


““More than twenty years ago the late 
Sir Louis Mallet (I presume with the knowledge 
and consent of Lord Cranbrook, then Secretary of 
State for India, and of my friend the late Edward 
Stanhope, then Under-Secretary) put at my dis- 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 333. 


posal the confidential documents in the India 
Office, from Indian finance ministers and others, 
bearing on this question of the drain from India 
to England and its effects. The situation is, to my 
mind, so desperate that I consider I am entitled 
to call on Lord George Hamilton to submit the 
confidential memoranda on this subject, up to. and 
after the year 1880, for the consideration of the 
House of Commons. I venture to assert that the 
public will be astonished to read the names of 
those who (privately) are at one -with me on this 
matter. As to remedy, there is but one, and it is 
almost too late for that; the stanching of the drain 
and the steady substitution of native rule, under 
light English supervision. for our present ruinous 
system.” 


On page 208 of his Prosperous British India 
Mr. William Digby gives the photographic repro- 
duction of two pages from an Indian Blue Book. 
containing admission about the drain: 


** Great Britain, in addition to the tribute she 
makes India pay her through the customs, derives 
benefit from the savings of the service at the three 
presidencies being spent in England instead of in 
India; and in addition to these savings, which pro- 
bably amount to near a million, she derives benefit. 
from the fortunes realized by the European mer- 
cantile community which are all remitted to 
England.”* . 


The following extracts are made from the 
Reports of the Committees of the House of Com- 


* Parl. Papers, 1858 (445-11), p. 680. 


334 ' UNHAPPY INDIA 


mons (vol. V, 1781-82, printed 1804). Comparing 
Indian rule with the rule of the East India Com- 
pany, Mr. Philip Francis, once a member of the 
Bengal Council, wrote : 


“Jt must give pain to an Englishman to have 
reason to think that since the accession of the Com- 
pany to the Divanee, the condition of the people of 
this country has been worse than it was before; 
and yet I am afraid the fact is undoubted; and I 
believe has proceeded from the following causes: 
the mode of providing the Company’s investment; 
the exportation of specie, instead of importing 
large sums annually; the strictness that has been 
observed in the collections; the endeavours of all 
concerned to gain credit. by an increase of revenue 
during the time of their being in station, without 
sufficiently attending to what future consequences 
might be expected from such a measure; the errors 
that subsist in the.manner of making collections, 
particularly by the employment of awmils. These 
appear to me the principal causes why this fine 
country, which flourished under the most despotic 
and arbitrary government, is verging towards its 
ruin while the English have really so great a share 
in the administration.’’ 


Ten years later, says Mr. Digby,* Charles 
Grant of the India House, the greatest panegyrist 
of British rule in India—and at the same time 
himself the worst disparager of the Indian people 
known in British-Indian literature—was cons- 


* Prosperous British India, p. 216. 


“HOME OF STARK WANT’? 335 


trained to admit: ‘‘ ‘We apply a large portion of 
their annual produce to the use of Great Britain.” 


The Honourable F. J. Shore, once a Bengal 
administrator, says in his Notes on Indian 
Affairs :* 


‘“More than seventeen years have elapsed 
since I first landed in this country; but’ on my 
arrival and during my residence of about a year 
in Calcutta, I well recollect the quiet comfort- 
able and settled conviction which in those days 
existed in the minds of the English population, of 
_ the blessings conferred on the natives of India by 
the establishment of the English rule... 


“‘T was thus gradually led to an inquiry into 
the principles and practice of British-Indian ad- 
ministration. Proceeding in this, I soon found 
myself at no loss to understand the feelings of the 
people both towards the government and to our- 
selves. It would have been astonishing indeed 
had it been otherwise. The fundamental prin- 
ciple of the English had been to make the whole 
Indian nation subservient, in every possible way, 
to the interests and benefits of themselves. They 
have been taxed to the utmost limit; every succes- 
sive province, as it has fallen into our possession, 
has been madea field for higher exaction; and it 
has always been our boast how greatly we have 
raised the revenue above that which the native 
rulers were able to extort. The Indians have been 
excluded from every honour, dignity, or office 


*London, 1837, vol. II, p. 516. 


336 UNHAPPY INDIA 


which the lowest Englishman could be prevailed 
upon to accept.’’ (Italics are ours.) 


And elsewhere he writes: 


“The halcyon days of India are over; she has 
been drained of a large proportion of the wealth 
she once possessed; and her energies have been 
cramped by a sordid system of misrule to which 
the interests of millions have been sacrificed for 
the benefit of the few.’* 


John Sullivan, also an eminent English ad- 
ministrator, who served in India from 1804 to 1841 
and was examined by the Select Committee of the 
House of Commons when the question of the re- 
newal of the charter of the East India Company 
came up in 1853, said ; 


“*Q.—Do you suppose that they (the people 
of India) have traditions among them which tell 
them that the economic condition of the popula- 
tion was better in former times under their native 
rulers than it is now? 


“ A-—I think, generally speaking, history 
tells us that it was; they have been in a state of 
the greatest prosperity from the earliest times as 
far as history tells us. 


‘*Q-—-How do you account for the superior 
economie state of the people, and for their ability 
to lay out the money which they did in canals and 
irrigation and tanks, if they were wasting more 
wealth and sacrificing more lives in war, than we 


* Ibid., p. 28. 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ ' 337 


do now, especially seeing that the wars were 
carried on very much upon their own vernilorice, 
instead of being beyond their limits? 


‘““A4.—We have an expensive element which 
they were free from, which is the European ele- 
ment, civil and military, which swallows.up.so 
much of the revenue; from that cause our admin- 
istration is so much more expensive; that, I think, 
is the great reason.’ 


John Sullivan did not shrink from the logical 
conclusion of his opinions, when he was asked if 
he would restore British territory-to native rule, 
keeping the military control of the Empire in 
British hands. 


** You would restore a great deal of territory 
to native, rulers upon principles of justice ?” 


ce Yes. 2? 
** Because we have become possessed of them 


by violence or by other means without any just 
right or title ?’ 


“ T_would do so upon principles of justice and 
upon principles of financial economy.”* 


He also said: 


‘* As to the complaints which the people of 
India have to make of the present fiscal system, I 
do not conceive that it is the amount altogether 
that they have to complain of. I think they have 
rather to complain of the application of that 


* Third Report of the Select Committee, 1853, pp. 19-20. 
96 a 


338 UNHAPPY INDIA 


amount. Under their own dynasties, all the 
revenue that was collected in the country was 
spent in the country; but under our rule, a large 
proportion of the revenue is annually drained 
away, and without any return being made for ‘it; 
this drain has been going on now for sixty or 
seventy years, and it is rather increasing than the 
reverse... Our system acts very much like a 
sponge, drawing up all the good things from the 
banks of the Ganges, and squeezing them down on 
the banks of the Thames...” [Italics are ours. ] 


Sir John Malcolm, Governor of Bombay in 
1827 (one of the makers of the British Empire in 
India) was examined before the Select Committee 
of the House of Commons in 1832 : 


*‘In your opinion, was the substitution of our 
government for the. misrule of the native princes 
the cause of greater prosperity of the agricultural 
and commercial part of the population ?”’ 


“‘T cannot answer this in every province of 
India, but I shall, as far as my experience enables 
me. I-do not think the change has benefited or 
could. benefit either the commercial, the monied, 
or the agricultural classes of many of the Native 
States, though it may be of others. It has not 
happened to me ever to see countries better culti- 
vated and so abounding in all the produce of the 
soil as well as commercial wealth than the southern 
Mahratta districts when I accompanied the 
present Duke of Wellington to that country in the 
vear 1803... 


*‘ HOME OF STARK WANT ” 339 


“With respect to Malwa... And I do not 
believe that the introduction of our direct rule 
could have contributed more, nor indeed so much, 
to the prosperity of the commercial and agricul- 
tural interests as the establishment of the efiicient 
rule of its former princes and chiefs... 


‘* With respect to the southern Mahratta dis- 
tricts of whose prosperity I have before spoken... 
I must unhesitatingly state that the provinces 
belonging to the family of Putwarden-and some 
other chiefs on the banks of the Krishna present a 
greater agricultural and commercial prosperity 


than almost any I know in India... Above all — 


causes which promote prosperity is the invariable 
support given to the village and other native insti- 
tutions, and to the employment far beyond what 
our system admitsof-all classes of the popula- 
tion.’’* 


Sir George Wingate, who had held high posts 
in the Government of Bombay, recorded the fol- 
lowing observations for the consideration of his 
countrymen when the administration of the 
Empire passed to the Crown in 1858: 


“If, then we have governed India not merely 
for the natives of India but for ourselves, we are 
clearly blamable in the sight of God and man for 
having contributed nothing towards defraying the 
cost of that government... 


* Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee, 
1882, vol. VI, pp. 30-31. ; 


340 UNHAPPY INDIA 


‘* With reference to tts economic effects upon 
the condition of India, the tribute paid to Great 
Britain is by far the most objectionable feature in 
our existing policy. Taxes spent in the country 
from which they are raised are totally different in 
their effects from taxes raised in one country.and 
spent in another... 


‘* The Indian tribute, whether weighed in the 
scales of justice or viewed in the light of our true 
interest, will be found to be at variance with 
humanity, with common sense, and with the 
received maxims of economical science.” 


Again : 

' “Were India to be relieved of this cruel 
burden of tribute and the whole of the taxes raised 
in India to be spent in India, the revenue of that 
country would soon acquire a degree of elasticity 
of which we have at present no expectation.’’* 


On page. 126 of his book, India in the 
Victorian Age, Dutt quotes the opinion of Colonel 
Sykes, a distinguished Director of the East Indian 
Company, who ‘ spoke of the economic drain from 
India of £3,300,000 to £3,700,000 a year,’ and 
remarked that ‘it is only by the excess of exports 
over imports that India can bear this tribute.’ 


Henry St. John Tucker, Chairman of the 
East India Company (quoted by Dutt), said that 
this economic drain was an increasing quantity, 


“Our Financial Relations with India by Major Wingate, 
(London : 1859), pp. 56-64, quoted by Dutt: arly British Rule, 
Pp. 618-20. [Italics are ours.] 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 341 


“because our home charge is perpetually increas- 
ing,’ a prophecy which has been more than amply 
fulfilled. 


Similarly another East Indian merchant 
quoted in the Parliamentary Report of 1853, said : 


“IT may say generally that up to 1847, the im- 
ports (of India) were about £6,000,000 and the 
exports about £9,500,000. The difference : is the 
tribute which the Company received from the 
country which amounts to about £4,000,000.* 


Mr. Montgomery Martin, an historian of the 
British colonies and dependencies, wrote in 1838 : 


“* So constant and accumulating a drain, even 
on England, would soon impoverish her; how 
severe then, must bethe effect on India, where 
the wage of a labourer is from twopence to three- 
pence a day.” t 


Professor H. H. Wilson, author of History of 
India, says of the annual drain of wealth: 


** Tis transference to England is an abstrac- 
tion of Indian capital for which no equivalent is 
given; itis an exhausting drain upon the country, 
the issue of which is replaced by no reflux; it is 
an extraction of the life-blood from the veins of 
national industry which no subsequent introduc- 
tion of nourishment is furnished to restore.” 


Mr. A. J. Wilson in an article in the Fort- 
nightly Review of March, 1884, wrote: 


* First Report, 1858. 
+ History, etc. of Fastern India, vol. II, p. 12. See also 
Dutt: Larly British Rule, p. 609. 


342 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“‘In one form or another we draw fully 
£30,000,000 a year from that unhappy country 
(India), and there the average wage of the natives 
is about £5 per annum, less rather than more in 
many parts: Our Indian tribute, therefore, «re- 
presents the entire earnings of upwards of ‘six 
millions heads of families—say of 30,000,000 of 
the people. It means the abstraction of more 
than one-tenth of the entire sustenance. of India 
every year.” 


In 1875 Lord Salisbury, the great English 
statesman, spoke of India as a-—country from 
which ‘much of the revenue’ was ‘ exported 
without a direct equivalent.’ 


Dr. J. T. Sunderland, a Unitarian minister of 
the United States, in his pamphlet, The Causes 
of Famine in India (page 22), refers to the heavy 
drain of wealth that is going on as ‘ the greatest 
of all the causes of the impoverishment of the 
Indian people.’ 


This synopsis of opinions about the ‘ tribute’ 
which India pays, and has been paying for more 
than a-century and a half to England, or about 
the ‘drain’ of India’s wealth to England, is by 
no means exhaustive. In fact, one could fill a 
volume with such extracts. Besides, we have 
scrupulously kept back the opinions of those 
British statesmen (several of them very eminent 
Anglo-Indian. administrators like Sir Henry 
Cotton, late Chief Commissioner of Assam, and 
once an M.P.; Sir William Wedderburn, retired 
member of the Bombay Council and once an 


*‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 343 


M.P.; Mr. W.S. Caine, late M.P.; Mr. A. O. 
Hume, once a Secretary to the Government of 
India; and many others), who have openly and 
actively identified themselves in one way or other 
with the cause of Indian nationalism. Similarly, 
we have made no mention of the opinions of 
Indians themselves. 


It is clear that. the amount of the treasure. 
transferred from India to England during the 
century from 1757 to 1857 or to the present is not 
correctly represented by the excess of exports 
over imports; for, to this excess should be added 
the amount of public debt that the East India 
Company contracted during. this period, as also 
the treasure that was transferred in the shape of 
gold, silver and precious stones which entered 
into no atcount, - 


The beauty of the English conquest of India 
lies in the fact that. from the first to the last not 
‘one single penny was spent by the British on the 
conquest. India was conquered by the British 
with Indian-money and Indian btood: Further, 
almost all kinds of expenses incurred by the 
British in Asia, for the conquest of territories for 
the expansion of trade, for research and inquiry, 
were borne by the Indian exchequer. The profits 
almost went into the pockets of the Britishers. 
The expenses and losses were debited to India. 


R. C. Dutt points out how the total revenues 
of India have always been in excess of total ex- 
penditure incurred in India. 

“* The whole of the public debt of India, built 
up in a century of the Company’s rule was created 


344 UNHAPPY INDIA 


by debiting India with the expenses incurred in 
England.” 


The total Indian debt, bearing interest, was 
a little over 7 million in 1792. It had risen to 10 
millions in 1799. Then came Lord -Wellesley’s 
wars and the Indian debt rose to 21 millions in 
1805. In 1807 it was 27 millions. By 1829 it had 
risen to 30 millions. The total debt of India 
(registered debt plus treasury notes and deposits 
plus home bond debt) on April. 30, 1836 was 
£33,355,536.* By 1844-45 the total debt of India 
had reached the figure of 434 million pounds. 
This included the enormous .expense of the 
Afghan War to which England contributed only 
a small part of the 15 millions expended, although, 
in the words of John Bright, the whole of this 
expenditure ‘ought to have been thrown on the 
taxation of the people.of England, because it was 
a war commanded by the English Cabinet, for 
objects supposed to be English.’ 


The annexation of Sind, and the Punjab wars 
undertaken by Hardinge and Dalhousie, raised 
the debt to 55 million pounds by 1850-51. - Then 
came the great Mutiny in 1857 and the public 
debt. was increased by 10 million sterling. On 
April 30, 1858, the public debt of India stood at 
694 million pounds sterling. 


About the expenses incurred in putting down 
the Mutiny, it is interesting to note the following 
opinions of Englishmen : 


*R. OC. Dutt: India in the Victorian Age, pp. 215-16 and 
footnote. 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 345 


“Tf ever there was a case of justifiable 
rebellion in the world,” says an impartial 
historian,* “it was the rebellion of Hindu and 
Mussalman soldiers in India against the abomi- 
nation of cartridges greased with the fat of the 
cow and the pig. The blunder was made by 
British administrators, but India paid the cost. 


Before this the Indian Army had been employed 
in China and in Afghanistan; and the East India 
Company had received no payments for the - 
service of Indian troops outside the frontiers of 
their dominions. But when British troops were 
sent to India to suppress the mutiny, England 
exacted the cost with almost unexampled rigour. 


“The entire cost of the Colonial Office, or in 
other words, of the Home Government of all 
British colonies and dependencies except India, as 
well as of their military and naval expenses is 
defrayed from the revenues of the United King- 
dom; and it seems to be a natural inference that 
similar charges should be borne by this country in 
the case.of India. But what is the fact? Not a 
shilling from the revenues of Britain has ever been 
expended on the military defence of our Indian 
Empire. 


** How strange that a nation ordinarily liberal 
to extravagance in aiding colonial dependencies 
and foreign States with money in their time of 
need, should with unwonted and incomprehensible 


*Lecky: Map of Life, quoted by R. C. Dutt. 


. 346 UNHAPPY INDIA 


penuriousness refuse to help its own great Indian 
Empire in its extremity of financial distress. 


** The worst, however, is not yet told; for it 
would appear that, when extra regiments are des- 
patched to India, as happened during the. late 
disturbances there, the pay of such troops for six 
months previous to sailing is charged against the 
Indian revenues and recovered as a debt due by 
the Government of India to the British army pay- 
office. In the crisis of the Indian Mutiny then, 
and with the Indian finances reduced to an almost 
desperate condition, Great Britain has not only re- 
quired India to pay for the whole of the extra 
regiments sent to that country from the date of 
their leaving these shores but has demanded back 
the money disbursed on account of these regiments 
for the last six months’) service in this‘ country: 
previous to sailing for India.’’* [Italics are ours. | 


But a far greater man than Sir George 
- Wingate spoke on the subject of the Mutiny ex- 
penditure in his own frank and fearless manner. 

‘J think,” said John Bright, ‘‘ that the forty 
millions which the revolt will cost is a grievous 
burden to place upon the people of India. It has 
come from the mismanagement of the Parliament 
and the people of England. If every man had 
what was just, no doubt that forty millions would 
have to be paid out of the taxes levied upon the 
people of this country.”t 


“*Qur Financial Relations with India by Major Wingate 
. (London, 1859), 
¢t John Bright’s Speech on the East India Loan, March 1859. 


‘ HOME OF STARK WANT’ 347 


Surely very little of this debt, if any, re- 
presented British investments in public works as 
there were no railways in India before 1850. When 
the Empire was transferred to the Crown it was 
provided that the dividend on the capital stock of 
the East India Company and other debts of the 
Company in Great Britain, and all the territorial 
and other debts of the Company were to be 
‘charged and chargeable upon the revenues of 
India alone.’ Thus the annual interest which 
India had till then paid on the~ capital of the 
Company was made permanent: Is there any- 
thing parallel to this in the history of the world? 


By 1860 the public debt of India had risen to 
over 100 million pounds. Since then it has gone 
upward, by leaps and bounds. In 1913-14 the total 
liabilities of the Government of India stood at 
£307,391.121. The argument that the whole of 
this debt is a commercial transaction, from which 
India gota return in the shape of productive 
works, is on the face of it untenable. It is a pity 
that eminent-Englishmen, when dealing with the 
question.of ‘ drain,’ should ignore this phase of 
the question, and always harp on the misleading 
statement that the interest paid in England 
represents interest on capital invested in India on 
productive works for which India got a fair return 
in the shape of materials supplied by England. 
Productive works indeed! The stock of the East 
India Company and the expenses of wars in India 
and outside were all productive works! The 
Imperial Gazetteer makes the bald statement that 
out of the total Home Charges amounting to 17% 


4 


348 UNHAPPY INDIA 


millions (of what year it is not stated) nearly 
11 millions ‘ consist of payments on account of 
capital and materials supplied by England.’ As 
to the total amount ‘ drained’ various authorities 
have made various estimates. Mr. Digby 
estimated the drain up to the end of the nineteenth 
century at £6,080 million.* To this should--be 
added the figures for the last 27 ‘years. 
Mr. Hyndman fixed the amount in 1906 at £40 
million per annum. Mr. A. J. Wilson. fixed it 
vat. £35 million per annum.ft Sir. Theodore 
Morison, the official apologist, fixed the amount of 
what he calls ‘ potential drain’ at £21 million a 
year. Computed in rupees the figures would look 
enormous. 

Mr. K. T. Shah has. made a very careful 
analysis of the total wealth that goes out of India. 
Here is a summary of his conclusions : 


Political deduction or Home Rs. 


Charges re ... 50.00 crores. 
Interest on foreign capital register- 

ed in India re ... 60.00 _,, 
Freight _and- passenger carriage: 

paid.to foreign companies .. 41.63 ,, 
Payment. on account of banking 

commissions 15.00 __,, 


Profits, etc., of foreign business 
and professional men in India 53.25 _,, 


Total ... 219.88 ,, 
or a, total first charge of 220 crores in round figures. 


* Prosperous British India, p.230. _ 
t+ An Empire in Pawn by A. J. Wilson (London, 1911), pp. 64-65. 


* HOME OF STARK WANT ? 349 


Mr. Shah then discusses trade figures over a 
long period, and states his conclusion with regard 
to the present situation in these words :* 


“ At the present time (1923-24) the situation 
is this. Including and allowing for foreign pay- 
ments the trade balance in favour of India. may 
be taken at 150 crores against which the claims 
upon India aggregate 178 crores. _ India thus 
remains a debtor on the whole of some 30 crores 
per annum. The debt, however,-is apparently 
not collected; but the amount.is reinvested in the 
country thereby adding _ still further to the 
permanent mortgage on Indian resources.” 


* Wealth and Taxable Capacity of India, p. 236. 


CHAPTER XXV 


POVEBTY—THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 
OF INDIA’S ILLS: 


“Even as we look on, India is becoming 
jeebler and feebler. The very life-blood of the great 
multitude under our rule is slowly, yet ever 
faster, ebbing away.” 


—H. M. Hynpman in Bankruptcy of India, page 
152, 


Says Mr. W. S. Lilly in his book on India and 
its Probelms (pages 284-5) : 


“ The test of a people’s. prosperity is‘ not the 
extension of exports, the, multiplication of manu- 
factures, or other industries, the construction of 
cities. No. A prosperous country is one in which 
the great mass.of the inhabitants are able to 
produce with moderate toil, what is necessary for 
living hwman lives, lives of frugal and assured 
comfort. Judged by this criterion, can India be 
called prosperous ? 


‘“Comfort, of course, is a relative term. Ina 
tropical country like India, the standard is very 
low... Little clothing is required; simple diet 
suffices. An unfailing well full of water, a plot of 
land, and a bit of orchard—these will satisfy his 
desire. If needed, you add the cattle needful to 
him. Such is the ryot’s ideal—very few realize 
it. Millions of peasants in India are struggling to 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 351 


¥ 

live on half an acre. ‘Their existence is a constant 
struggle with starvation, ending too often in 
defeat. Their difficulty is not to live human 
lives, lives up to the level of their poor standard 
of comfort, put to live at all, and not die. We 
may well say that in India, except in the irrigated 
tracts, famine is chronic—endemic.” 


The people of India are the poorest on earth. 
If there existed such poverty in any other coun- 
try in. Europe or America, the government would 
have been turned out of office. “The foremost 
- and most important fact about the Indian people,” 
says Mr. Arnold Lupton,* ‘is this; out of every 
hundred, seventy-two are engaged in agriculture.” 


Thus engaged he tell us: tf 


“It tis quite easy to see why the Indian 
peasant is now excessively poor in most parts of 
India. It is simply this: the condition of the soil 
is too poor, it does not yield enough; it does not 
yield one-half of what the British soil yields. 
What would be the condition of the British farmer 
and the British labourer if for all their labour they 
only got. one-half of their present produce per 
acre? Yet the Indian labourer works very hard, 
and he and his family give minute and particular 
care, working often from morn till dark, and yet 
the produce per acre is not more than one-half of 
the British produce per acre. When one con-. 
siders that out of this half he has to pay rent, he 


* Happy India, p. 39. 
+ Tbid., pp. 36-37. 


352 UNHAPPY INDIA 


has to pay a salt tax and some other taxes, it is not 
surprising that his economic condition is extremely 
bad; the only wonder is that he can exist at all; 
and he exists simply because he has learnt to live 
in an exceedingly cheap manner. 


“His mansion is a mud hut with a roof of 
sticks and palm-leaves; his bedstead, if he has one, 
consists of twisted sticks which raise his mattress, 
if he has one, six inches from the. ground. 
He has no door or windows to his hut. He has 
a little fireplace and cooking place outside. The 
sofa upon which he can recline in leisure moments 
is made of mud outside his sleeping chamber. He 
has one garment round his loins and he has no 
other garment that he can wear whilst he is wash- 
ing that one garment. He neither smokes nor 
drinks nor reads the newspaper; he goes to no 
entertainments. His religion teaches him hu- 
mility and contentment, and so he lives con- 
tentedly until starvation lays him on his back.” 


On the poverty of Indian masses the evidence 
is so overwhelming that only a special apologist 
of the type of Miss Mayo could ignore it. A recent 
book which created quite as much sensation as 
Mother India is The Lost Dominion written by a . 
retired member of the Indian Civil Service under 
the nom de plume, ‘ Al. Carthill.’ 


Al. Carthill’s description of the Indian vil- 
lager is so relevant to our enquiry that we make 
no apology for quoting it:* 


* The Lost Dominion (London : Blackwood, 1924), pp. 305-6. 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 353 


‘The whole of India is divided into villages. 
There are hundreds of thousands of them. A 
cluster of mud huts, a temple or two, some old 
trees, a well; an open space in the centre is the 
nucleus. Round about lie the arable pasture and 
waste of the village. Here lives and dies: the 
peasant. The real Indian nation is here, that 
hardy patient folk whose labour pays the taxes, 
and whose blood has built up the Empire and kept 
the gates.” 


_ Mr. Arnold Lupton, to whose-book, Happy 
India, we have already referred, quotes ‘an 
English nobleman of great experience as the Gov- 
ernor of a great Indian Presidency,’ who, speaking 
in the early part of 1922; remarked of Indian 
cultivators that: ‘they do not live, they only 
exist.’* ° 


Sir William Hunter, one of the most candid; 
writers and a distinguished historian of India, - 
Director-General of Indian Statistics for many 
years, declared that 40,000,000 of. the people of 
_ India were seldom or never able to satisfy their 
hunger. 


Says Mr. J. 8S. Cotton :f. 


“Tf the security of British rule has allowed 
the people to increase, it does not follow that it has 
promoted the general prosperity. That could only 


* Happy India, p. 182. 

t Colonies and Dependencies, 1858, p. 68. For the citations 
that follow I have used the material in my book, England’s 
Debt to India. - 7 


27 


/ 
354 UNHAPPY INDIA 


be done in one of two ways—either by producing a 
distinct rise in the standard of living among the 
‘lowest classes or by diverting a considerable sec- 
tion of the people from the sole occupation -of 
agriculture... Neither of these things has .been 
done. Competent authorities indeed are of-opi- 
nion that the condition of the lowest classes has 
become worse under the British rule.” 


Mr. A. O. Hume, Secretary to the Government 
of India in the Agricultural Department, wrote in 
1880: ‘‘ Except in very good seasons, multitudes 
for months every year cannot. get sufficient food 
for themselves and family.” 


Sir Auckland Colvin, once a Finance Minister 
in India, describes the tax-paying community as 
made up in the main of ‘men whose income at 
best is barely sufficient to afford them the susten- 

* ance necessary to support life, living as they do 
upon bare necessities.’ 


Sir Charles Elliott, once Chief Commissioner 
of Assam, wrote in 1888: “I do not hesitate to 
say that.half the agricultural population do not 
know, from one year’s end to another, what it is 
to have a full meal.” 


The Indian Witness, a Christian paper, once 
remarked: “‘ It is safe to assume that 100,000,000 
of the population of India have an annual income 
of not more than $5.00 a head.” 


An American missionary wrote from Southern 
India in 1902: 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 355 


“The most trying experience I ever had was. 
athree weeks’ tour in September of last year 
(1901). My tent was surrounded day and night, 
and one sentence dinned perpetually into my 
ears: ‘ We are dying of lack of food.’ People are 
living on one meal every two or three days. I 
once carefully examined the earnings of a congre- 
gation of three hundred, and found the average 
amounted to less than one farthing a head per 
day. They did not live,‘ they eked out an 
existence. I have been in huts where the people 
were living on. carrion. Yet in all these cases, 
there was no recognized famine! In Heaven’s 
name, if this is not famine, what is it? The 

"extreme poverty of the poorer classes of India 
offers conditions altogether extraordinary. Life is 
the narrowest and hardest ‘conceivable, with no 
prospect df any improvement. For a family of 
Six persons, many an outfit, including house, 
utensils, furniture, clothing and all, is worth less 
than $10.00. The average income. for such a 
family will. not exceed 50 cents per head a. 
month, and.is frequently little over half that. It 
may therefore be surmised that not much of this 
income is spent upon cultivation of the mind, 
sanitation, or the appearance of the dwelling.”* 


The following observation was made in the 
Moral and Material Progress of India for 1874-75 
(Parliamentary Blue Book) :. 


“ The Calcutta Missionary Conference dwelt 
on the miserable, abject condition of the Bengal 


* Digby : Condition of the People of India, 1902, pp. 14-15. 


356 UNHAPPY INDIA 


ryots, and there is evidence that they suffer many 
things, and are often in want of absolute neces- 
sities... In the North-Western Provinces, the 
wages of agricultural labourers have hardly 
varied at all since the beginning of this century; 
and after the payment of the rent, the margin 
left for the cultivator’s subsistence is less than the 
value of the labour he has expended....., many live 
on a coarse grain, which is most unwholesome, 
and produces loin palsy... This extreme poverty 
among the agricultural population is-one of the 
reasons which makes any improvement in farm- 
ing and cultivation so difficult.” 


_Says Mr. H. M. Hyndman in his Bankruptcy 
of India, page 74: ; 


_. “ That the people India are growing poorer 
and poorer; that taxation is not only actually, but 
relatively, far heavier; that each successive 
scarcity widens the. area of impoverishment; that 
famines are more frequent; that most of the trade 
is but an index to the poverty and crushing over- 
taxation of the people; that a highly organized 
foreign rule constitutes by itself a most terrible 
drain-upon the country.” 


Said Sir William Hunter, former member of 

the Viceroy’s Council, in a speech in 1875: 
; “The Government assessment does not leave 
enough food to the cultivator to support himself 
and family throughout the year.” . 

- The Pioneer, the semi-official Allahabad daily 
of the British Indian Government, wrote in an 
article in 1877: 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 357 


‘“‘ Worried by the revenue survey, for heavily | 
enhanced public payments......the Deccan ryot 
accepted, for a third of a century the yoke of 
British mismanagement... Report upon report 
has been written upon him; shelf upon shelf in 
the public offices groaned under the story of his 
wrongs. If anyone doubts the naked accuracy of 
these words, let. him dip into the “pages of 
Appendix A: (Papers on the Indebtedness of the 
Agricultural Classes in Bombay.) A more damn- 
ing indictment was never recorded against a 
civilized government.” [Italics are ours. | 


Mr. Wilfred Scawen Blunt, in his India under 
Ripon, pages 236-38, observes: 


“No one accustomed to Eastern travel can 
fail to .see how poor the Indian peasant is. 
Travelling by either ofthe great lines of railways 
which bisect the continent, one need hardly leave 
one’s carriage to be aware of this... In every 
village which I visited I heard of complaints...of 
over-taxation. of the country, of increase and 
inequalities of assessment...complainis of the 
forest laws, of the decrease of the stock of working 
cattle, of their deterioration through the price of 
salt,.of universal debt to the usurers...”’ 


Says the same writer, earlier in his work, 
page 232: 


“India’s famines have been severer and fre- 
quent; its agricultural poverty has deepened, its 
rural population has become more hopelessly in 
debt, their despair more desperate. The system of 
constantly enhancing the land-values has not been 


358 UNHAPPY INDIA 


altered. The salt tax, though slightly lowered, 
still robs the very poor. Hunger, and those 
pestilences which are the result of hunger, are 
spread over an increasing, not diminishing area. 
The Deccan ryot is still the poorest peasant in the 
world. Nothing of the system of finance. is 
changed, nothing in the economy which favours 
English trade and English speculation, at the 
expense of India’s native industries. What was 
bad twenty-five years ago, is worse now. At any 
rate, there is the same drain of India’s food to 
alien mouths. Endemic famines and endemic 
plagues are facts no official statistics can explain 
away.” [Italics are ours. | 


In 1888 a confidential enquiry into the 
economic condition of the people of India was 
made by Lord Dufferin. The results of the 
enquiry have never been made public, but ex- 
tracts from the reports of the United Provinces of 
Agra and Oudh, and the Punjab, have been 
published by. Mr. Digby in his. monumental work. 
These reports _are well worth the attention of the 
student of. economic conditions in India. We can 
only refer to them briefly. One of the most 
interesting documents is the report of Mr. A. H. 
Harrington, Commissioner, of April 4, 1888. 
Mr. Harrington quotes Mr. Bennett, the compiler 
of.the Oudh Gazetteer, an offcer whom he calls 
‘ wholly free from pessimism,’ as to the condition 
of the lowest castes of Oudh. 


‘ The lowest depths of misery and degradation 
are reached by the Koris and Chamars,’ whom he 
‘describes as ‘ always on the verge of starvation.’ 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 359 


These represent: from 10 to 11 per cent. of the 
population of Oudh. Mr. Harrington then quotes 
from papers he himself contributed to The Pioneer 
in 1876, under the heading, ‘ Oudh Affairs’ : 


“It has been calculated that’ about 60 per 
cent. of the entire native population...are sunk in 
such abject poverty that, unless the small earnings 
of child labour are added to the scanty stock by 
which the family is kept alive, some members 
would starve.” 


As to whether the impression that: the greater 
number of the people of India suffer from a daily 
insufficiency of food is true-or untrue, he adds: 


‘* My own belief, aftera great deal of study of 
the closely connected questions of agricultural 
indebtedness, is that the impression is perfectly 
true as regards a varying but always considerable 
number throughout the greater part of India.” 


Mr. ‘A... J. Lawrence, then Commissioner, 
‘Allahabad Division, who retired in 1891, reports: 


“ T-believe there is very little between poorer 
classes\of the people and semi-starvation, but 
where is the remedy ?” 


Of Shahjahanpur, another district of the 
United Provinces, it is stated: ‘‘ The landless 
labourer’s condition is by no means all that could 
be desired. The combined earnings of a man, his 
wife and two children cannot be put at more than 
Rs. 3a month (less than a dollar in American 
money). When prices of food grains are low or 
moderate, work regular and the health of house- 


360° UNHAPPY INDIA 


hotd good, this income will enable the family to 
have one fairly good meal a day, to keep a 
thatched roof over their heads, to buy cheap 
clothing and occasionally a thin blanket. Cold 
and rain undoubtedly entail considerable suffer- 
ing, as the people are insufficiently clothed, and 
cannot afford fires. A few twigs or dried sticks 
constitute the height of their ambition, and these, 
owing to the increased value and scarcity of wood, 
are more and more difficult for the poor man to 
obtain.” [Ttalics are in the original. ] 


Mr. White, Collector of Banda, states : 


“ A large number of the-lower classes clearly 
demonstrate by their physique, either that they 
are habitually starved, or have been exposed in 
early years to the severity of famine; if any young 
creature be starved while growing, no amount of 
subsequent fattening will make up for the injury 
sustained.” . 


Mr. Rose, Collector of Ghazipur, says : 


“Where the holding is of average size, and 
the tenant unecumbered with debt, when his rent 
is not-excessive and there is an average outturn of 
produce; when in fact, conditions are favourable, 
the position of the agriculturist is, on the whole, 
fairly comfortable. But unfortunately these 
conditions do not always exist... As a rule, a very 
large proportion are in debt.” 


_Of the Jhansi Division, Mr. Ward, Commis- 
sioner, .Says : 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 361 


“ A very small proportion in this Division are 
habitually underfed.” 

Mr. Bays, Officiating Commissioner " for 
Sitapur Division, records particulars obtained 
from twenty families taken at random: 


‘* Nineteen shillings, twopence or less\-than 
five dollars per annum for each adult. 


“Nine shillings, sixpence, or less than two — 


and a half dollars per annum for each child.” 


He is of the opinion that this is sufficient to 
keep them in good health, and adds: “ For some 
reasons, itis not desirable.at present that the 
parry of comfort should. be very materially 
raised.” 


Mr. Irwin, Deputy Commissioner of Rai 
Bareli, says: 


“The mass of the agricultural population, in 
ordinary times, and the elite always, get enough 
to eat; but there is a considerable minority in bad 
seasons who feel the pinch of hunger, and a small 
minority...“ suffer from chronic hunger,’ except 
just at harvest time when grain is plentiful, and 
easily to be had. I do not understand that the 
indigent town population are intended to be in- 
cluded in this enquiry. There can be no doubt 
that they suffer much more than the agricultural 
classes for want of food, especially the unfortunate 
purdahnashin women, and indeed, men too, of 
good and impoverished families, who have sunk 
in the world, who are ashamed to beg, and live on 


362 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the remnants of their property, and whom every 
rise in prices hits cruelly hard. For such people 
dear grain means starvation, while to the pro- 
ducer, it of course means increased value of the 
produce.” 


Mr. Toynbee, C.S.I., former Member of the 
Viceroy’s Council and Senior Member of the Board 
of Revenue, said: 


‘“The conclusion to be drawn is that, of the 
agricultural population, 40 per cent. are insuffi- 
ciently fed, to say nothing of clothing and housing. 
They have enough food to support life and enable 
them to work, but they have.to undergo long fasts, 
having for a considerable part of the year to 
satisfy themselves with one full meal a day.” 


In Grierson’s statistics, as summed up in the 
Pioneer, in 1898, we have: 


“ Briefly, it is that all persons of the labouring 
classes, and 10 per cent. of the cultivating and 
artisan classes, or 45 per cent. of the total popula- 
tion, are insufficiently fed, or housed, or both. It 
follows that nearly one hundred millions of people 
in British India are living in extreme poverty.” 


The Punjab is supposed to be one of the most 
prosperous provinces of India. Mr. Thorburn, 
Member of the Punjab Commission, one time 
Financial Commissioner, says of the agriculturists 
of that province in his book entitled The Punjab 
in Peace and War:*. 


' * Page 175. 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 363 


‘It is worthy of note that the whole revenue 
of the Punjab, from the largest item, land revenue, 
to the smallest, stamps, £10,000, are practically 
drawn from the producing masses, whilst the 
literate and commercial classes, whom the new 
regime was to benefit at the expense of those 
masses, escape almost untaxed.” 


Again :* 


‘* Since the Mutiny, there have been in all 
seven years of famine, namely, 1860-61, 1876-78, 
1896-97, 1899-1901; in addition, scarcities from 
short droughts in semi-dependent tracis, have been 
frequent. During the earlier. famines, four years in 
all, out of the annual land revenue demand, apart 
from water rates and canal irrigated lands, hardly, 
two per’cent. were suspended, and the fraction 
ultimately remitted or written off as recoverable, 
was infinitesimal. Since 1896 the destitution of a 
large ‘et of the cultivators having been officially 
proved, the.Government has been less niggardly 
in granting \suspensions and remissions. Un- 
fortunately the relief given, coming too late, fails 
to reach the classes who most require it—the 
poorest of the peasant proprietary—and only saves. 
the pockets of the capitalist mortgagees and pur- 
chasers of holdings... 


“‘ Tf it be remembered that the average daily 
income per head of the Indian population is less 
than three halfpence, and that fully 25 per cent. 
of that population never attain that average, the 


*Thid., pp. 242-3. 


364 UNHAPPY INDIA 


hand to mouth existence of the Punjab peasantry, 
even in normal years, will be realized. If so, their 
general inability to pay, without borrowing, the 
land revenue, or to even avoid death from starva- 
tion whenever a scarcity from drought occurs, let 
alone a famine period, requires no demonstration.” 


Says Mr. Manohar Lal, late Minto Professor of 
Economics at the University of Calcutta, in the 
course of an article in the Indian Journal of Eco- 
nomics, for July 1916: 


“Poverty, grinding poverty, is a tremendous 
fact of our economic, and therefore national, posi- 
tion, and it is to the mind of the present writer an 
immeasurably more potent. fact than even the 
ignorance and illiteracy that prevails among our 
masses. This poverty exposes us to the havoc of 
disease and pestilence, famine and plague and it 
makes advance at.every step difficult...’ 


“It is a@ picture of literal starvation mentally, 
and all bui.so physically; it can represent the life 
of no unit of civilized humanity.” 


Mr. Manohar Lal is now a Member of the 
Punjab Government having been appointed to 
that office by the Governor of the province. 


On January 11, 1917, Mr. S. P. Patro, an 
investigator into economic conditions in the 
Madras Presidency, read a paper in a meeting 
presided over by His Excellency the Governor of 
Madras. We make the following extracts from the 
Press report of his paper : 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 365 


‘Mr. Patro found that in a particular village 
the budget of the ryot showed a deficit of Rs. 22-9: 
every year and it was not possible to obtain a full 
meai every day. Dealing similarly with a typical 
village in the Chicacole division, Mr. Patro found 
that the annual income of the family of a typical 
zemindar, who had wet and dry lands, was 
Rs. 129-8-0, and that the expenditure, including 
cost of rice, oil, clothing, etc., was Rs: 181-8, leav- 
ing a deficit of Rs. 52 a year. For marriage and. 
litigation the head of the family raised a loan of 
Rs. 380 in 1907, and discharged the same in 1913. 
by the sale of rice and by living on inferior corn 
and the profits of rice-pounding. The family had. 
full meals only from January to the month of May © 
according to the statement of the ryot. In a 
zemindani village the annual income of a typical 
family was Rs. 316 and the expenditure Rs. 321-6-0, 
and there was a debt outstanding against the 
family. In another zemindari village the income 
of a typical family was Rs. 786 and the expenditure 
Rs. 698-4-0, leaving a balance of Rs. 68 to the credit 
of the family, whose affairs were conducted in a 
most economic way. That was not a profit, but it 
~ represented the wages which the members of the 
family earned for their personal labour on the land 
at Rs. 14 a head per year.” 


* 


According to official estimates, the average 
annual income per head of the people of India. 
till some time back was Rs. 30. Lord Cromer, 
then Finance Minister for India, made the first 


366 UNHAPPY INDIA 


estimate in 1882, placing the average at Rs. 27; 
Lord Curzon, the late Viceroy, estimated the 
income of the agricultural population—85 per cent. 
of the whole—to be Rs. 30 per year. In his budget 
speech for 1901, Lord George Hamilton, then 
Secretary of State for India, said that the average 
income was Rs. 30 (£2); Mr. William Digby, 
C.LE., after a full and exhaustive study of the 
condition of the people, financially and industri- 
ally, furnishes overwhelming evidence to show 
that the average annual income of the people of 
India is not over Rs. 17-8 (about) six dollars). 
Considering the value of the rupee, which is 
equivalent to about 33 cents in American money, 
we have the startling condition of millions of 
people subsisting on from $6.00 to $10.00 per year, 
eden two cents a day—this according to official 
estimate. 


The Rev. Dr. Sunderland cites these facts and 
figures in support of his observations on Indian 
famines : 


‘* The truth is, the poverty of India is some- 
thing we can have little conception of, unless we 
have actually seen it, as alas, I have... Is it any 
‘wonder that the Indian peasant can lay up 
nothing for time of need...? The extreme destitu- 

“tion of the people is principally responsible for the 
devastations of plague; the loss of life from this 
terrible scourge is startling. It reached 272,000 in 
1901; 506,000 in 1902; 800,000 in 1903; and over 
1,000,000 in 1904. It still continues unchecked. 
The vitality of the people has been reduced by 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 367 


long semi-starvation. So long as the present 
destitution of India continues, there is small 
ground for hope that the plague can be overcome... 
The real cause of famines in India is not lack of 
rain; it is not over-population; it is the extreme, 
the abject, the awful poverty of the people.” 


One of the more recent investigators is 
Mr, Arnold Lupton, who thrashed out the whole 
subject in his book, Happy India, to which we 
have already referred. 


Mr. Lupton tries to compute the national 
income of India and concludes :* 


** Adding he] manufacturing value to the 
agricultural value, I get a total production of 
£1,900,000,000 worth, or adopting the figures in 
Table VII, £1,902,936,000 worth, for the work of 
the population of 247,000,000 people who are under 
the direct British Government. This gives a value 
per head of about £7-6s. or £7-12s. & year, or five 
pence a day for every day in the year, for every 
man, woman and child. 


“Taking the wealth production in the United 
Kingdom in the year 1920 as £2,500,000,000 and 
the population as 47,000,000, that would give for 
that year a production per head of about £53, or 
nearly eight times as much as the Indian income 
per head.” ; 


The following table taken from Professor 
K. T. Shah’s authoritative book, The Weaith and 


* Op. cit., p. 98. 


368 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Taxable Capacity of India* (Bombay, 1924) 
summarizes the different estimates of per capita 
income : 


Estimated by ari to jney 
Rs. 
Dadabhoy Naoroji ... ©. 1870 20 
Baring-Barbour sie 1882 27 
Digby 4h ... 1898-99 18.9 
Lord Curzon os: ..- ©C. 1900 30 
Digby se ... ©. 1900 17.4 
Mr. Findlay Shirras a 1911 50 
The Hon’ble Sir B. N. Sarmat 1911 86 
Professor Shah _... .s. | 1921-22 46 


An important index of the poverty of India is 
the total number of persons who pay the income- 
tax. In reply to a question put in the Legislative 
Assembly on March 8, 1924, the Finance Member 
gave the total. number of assessees in 1922-23 as 
238,242 out of a population of about 240 millions. 
The minimum taxable annual income is Rs. 2,000. 
Agriculturists pay land revenue and not income 
tax. 


Miss Mayo’s economic conclusions are based 
on evidence of a queer description. Thus, speak- 
ing of the economic condition of the masses, she 
Says on page 375 of her book : 


“As general circumstantial evidence of 
increased means, one sees the consumption by the 


*Page 68. 
T Quoted in the Council of State, March 6, 1921. 


89E—¢z 


‘L-a‘N ‘Ss 
: BT IG. “ad, GON 
“GZ6l BF Paysiqesy = “VWNOOd ‘NAINOAA YOs AD 


2. 
69Z—9L 

atidoy=sotpry puke spooyos ysiy Suyonpuoo ut peseSue oar soipey ey, Jo Auvyy ‘sorperyy ejenperyy Lg 

Atupy ayy savod ZI 4Se[ OY} SuluNp pue GET avoed oy, ul pozavzs SUM UOWIOAA JO} AZISIOALUL) OT, 


“LE6T tvok oyu SuovulUEXe soy} possed OYA ‘AqISIeAIUG) UPMIOAA URIPUT “, “‘M ‘N ‘§ JO sezenpesyy 


“wIpuy UL Sesseyo 
qyno ques sey Ay 


x 


soe 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 369 


peasants of non-essentials, once beyond their 
dreams. Thus, at the fair at Aligarh, in 
February, 1926, the turnover of cheap boots in 
one week amounted to £1,000, netting a profit of 
20 per cent. Boots, to the sort of people who 
snapped these up and put them on their own feet, 
were, twenty years ago, an unheard-of luxury. 
Big stocks of umbrellas, lamps, and gaily painted 
steel trunks were sold out and renewed over and 
over again, on the same occasion, the, buyers 
being the ordinary cultivators. Tea, cigarettes, 
matches, lanterns, buttons, _pocket-knives, 
‘mirrors, gramophones, are articles of commerce 
with people who, fifteen years ago, bought nothing 
of the sort. The heavy third-class passenger traffic 
by rail is another evidence of money in hand. 
For, railway travel to the Indian peasant takes 
the place that the movie fills in America. In 
1924-25, 581,804,000 third-class railway. travellers 
as against 1,246,000 of the first-class, proved the 
presence of money to spare in the peasants’ posses- 
sion. ‘Where are they all going?’ I repeatedly 
asked, watching the crowds packing into the 
third-clasg carriages. 


«Anywhere. Visiting, marriage parties, 
little. business trips—just ‘‘ there and back,” 
mostly for the excitement of going,’ was the 
answer.” 


Who supplied Miss Mayo with the informa- 
tion about ‘boots’? ‘Boots’ in India means 
Western footwear.' The villagers-of India and the 
masses do not use them. Who told her about the 
conditions that existed twenty years before, to 


28 


370 UNHAPPY INDIA 


institute the comparison! The British officers, of 
course. This is the language of official gl Honk eke 
Her ‘ glimpses through the economic lens’ are 
only distortions through the official lens. The 
railways have driven out old conveyances, but the 
poor people certainly. cannot afford to keep 
moving about merely for the fun of ‘ just. there 
and back.’ 


Speaking of the miserable economic condition 
of the peasantry in the Bombay Presidency, 
Dr. Harold Mann, the retiring. Director of Agri- 
culture in that province, in the course of an inter- 
view given to a representative.of the Times of 
India in October 1927 remarked : 


“ He had no hesitation in saying that although 
the standard of living of the agriculturists had 
undoubtedly improved, he could not say that the 
majority of the people were living up to that 
standard. His enquiries had shown, in fact, that 
- fully 75 per cent. of the people in the famine tracts 
were living somuch below their own standard 
that their economic position had to be reckoned as 
unsound,. whilst evenin the areas which were 
looked upon as reasonably prosperous, there was 
only 66 per cent. of the people in a sound economic 
position. He admitted that it was most difficult 
to make any detailed observations on this point 
because there was so litfle data to compare notes, 
but his candid opinion, after twenty years’ careful 
investigation and observation, was that in those 
two decades the standard of life in the villages 
had improved but the actual relationship of the 


THE ROCK-BOTTOM PHYSICAL BASE 871 


bulk of the people towards that standard had not 
improved.” 


. After putting forward Dr. Mann’s suggestions 
for possible improvements in agriculture that the 
villagers themselves could bring about without 
any large expenditure of money, the report. about 
the interview continues : 


“ But little could be done on an. extensive 
scale even along these lines, said Dr. Mann, until 
the Government and the social reformers re- 
cognized that the secret of the whole prosperity of 
the agricultural population was the filling of their 
stomachs. The empty stomach \was the greatest 
obstacle to progress in India, and he wished to 
emphasize before he left the country that all 
efforts should ultimately concentrate on filling the 
stomachs of the-—people. When asked what 
measures he would suggest for this great work of 
filling the empty stomachs of the’ people, 
Dr. Mann said that much could be done by the 
people themselves. They must put themselves to 
work, for no country could ever hope to be pros- 
perous ifthe majority of its population were idle 
for sixmonths in the year. The people must be 
given.some work, no matter how small the income 
derived therefrom, during the dry season, and 
Dr. Mann said that no matter in what other way 
Mr. Gandhi had gone astray, he had penetrated 
into the secret of the poverty of India when he 
advocated the spinning wheel, no matter if it did 
produce only a few annas a day. Dr. Mann there- 
fore thought Government should pay the closest 
attention to this phase of the problem if they ever 


372 UNHAPPY INDIA 


hoped to have a prosperous countryside, and he 
expressed bewilderment that so long a period had 
elapsed before Government had tackled the prob- 
lem in right earnest.” 


Dr. Mann’s last message to the people of the 
country was given in the following words: 


“Dr. Mann said that he. had-the greatest 
hopes of the Bombay Presidency reaching a very 
high standard of economic prosperity in which the 
ryots would participate, but no endeavour towards 
such better state could be made, said Dr. Mann, 
by a people with empty bellies, and so his last 
message to the people of this land, to all social 
workers, and to those in charge of the administra- 
tion was to devise means whereby the cultivators 
might be given sufficient food.” 


The crux ofthe matter has been given by 
Dr. Mann in the words italicized above. This is 
the language of an Englishman who has been in — 
‘intimate touch with village life for the last twenty 
years and has been a member of the bureaucracy 
which rules the country. This is not the language 
of any ‘ cursed’ Swarajist or Home Ruler or fire- 
eater, but of a high-placed official. j 


CHAPTER XXVI 
SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 


Miss Mayo’s avowed purpose in writing 
Mother India was to supply ‘test facts’ about 
India to the American citizen. One would think: 
that the American citizen would very much like 
to be enlightened about the economic situation 
and the economic potentialities of India. It 
ought certainly to be of interest to the American 
to know that with greater purchasing power India 
could become a very great customer. Miss Mayo, 
however, is a hopeless guide in the economic field. 
Her knowledge of economic . principles is of the 
crudest order, and.she has absolutely failed to 
grasp factors in the-Indian economic situation. 
She seems never.to have heard of the work of 
Indian economists: Dadabhai Naoroji, Ranade, 
Joshi, Wacha. . None of these names, regarded as 
classics in Indian economics, occurs in her index. 
Eminent living economists like Professor K. T. 
Shah-have also been entirely ignored by her. She 
has quoted some of my books, but I do not find 
my England’s Debt to India referred to even once 
in her book. 

' With such wide gaps in her knowledge of 
economic conditions in India, it was the height. 
of impudence for her to write a book about India 
for the benefit of the American reader who is 
above all interested in economic facts. The fact, 


374 UNHAPPY INDIA 


for instance, that the British Government to-day 
is thinking of adopting measures to hit the 
American film manufacturer in the Indian 
market, in order that his otherwise incompetent 
English competitor may thrive, is of greater 
importance to Americans than all the ignorant 
sexual and religious bunkum to which Miss Mayo 
treats her reader. The American manufacturer 
‘must naturally be curious to know whyvit is that 
India purchases more than half her requirements 
in Great Britain, whilst only six per cent. of her 
import trade falls to the lot of the United States; 
and also how it happens that India’s carrying 
trade is almost entirely confined to British 
bottoms. ‘We raise great crops of tea, and 
almost the whole is swept out of India—another 
exhausting drain upon the country,’ she makes 
the Indian economist complain; and in reply she 
asks, ‘Do you sell your tea, or give it away?’ To 
this the imaginary.Indian economist murmurs, 
‘Ah, ves—but the tea, you perceive, is gone.’ 
We ask what Indian economist could put the 
matter so crudely—and, excepting Miss Mayo, 
who could refute in such a naive fashion? 


Military expenditure. 


Miss Mayo’s discussion of the military ex- 
penditure is no better than it could be expected 
to be with her Knowledge of economics. She 
states the case and demolishes it in this summary 
fashion (pages 351-2) : 


*** The army is too big,’ says the politician. 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 375 


‘ Is it too big for the work it has to do in keep- 
ing your safety and peace?’ 


‘I don’t know. I have not looked into that,’ 
is the usual reply. ‘ But anyway it costs an out- 
rageous percentage of India’s revenue’.” 


It may be.a passable story stuff; but as_eco- 
nomic criticism it is hopeless. There are’ many 
who have ‘ looked into that’; why did. not Miss 
Mayo examine the case presented by them ? 


Amongst the more recent of such examina- 
tions is that by Mr. K. T. Shah, Professor of 
Political Economy in the Bombay University, in 
one of his standard works, Wealth and Tazable 
Capacity of India.* Mr, Shah had also prepared 
a minute for the Inchcape Committee (1923), 
which he summarises in-his book. 


First of all, is.it'sound economics to say that 
the expenditure on defence bears no relation to 
the taxable capacity of the country? The ex- 
pe on-defence, as on other things has to 
_ keep in.view the capacity of the national purse. 

The following table compiled by Professor Shah 
from the Statesman’s Year Book (1922) throws 
interesting light on this question: 


A far more important point to be noted is that 
India regards the military expenditure as a 
‘drain’ not merely because it is unbearably 
heavy but also because such a large part of it is 
spent on British soldiers and in Britain. Of the 


*London: P. 8. King & Sons, 1924. 


376. 


‘UNHAPPY INDIA 


04 pus ‘queo sod gg JO soUBAzY UOTT[IM Egg 


0'6F 
6'°9e 
0°06 
¥'GS 


88S 


GP 


008 


0°09 
0-op 


404 


or'si9 =: | 63'66EI 

Pros =| Irerie 
| LL EGE 8 P4708 
| °L609 O°se6rs 

98 '0SP 61,"099% 


vel 69'9% 

OLLI LFA 

| 0z'1e 09°59 
0°39 P9611 
0°616 6'82PT 


ty 


LT 9q 0} [8709 OY} oXeTT 
4q9q O49 epnpour jou op yng ‘syoZpng [easy pus AreUIpi0vagxg pus AIVUIPIO. oy} epnjoul 
BaINsy Youolg oyy, -eB1Vyo yqep [ez0} oy} J[VyY sopnjour oInSY oy} VpsuBy jo osvd 049 Ul y 


” 06 '6IET 
BL'SPEE 
“0's0941 

6'0G78 
99°9161 
19°63 
88°68 
eu'T9 

6°9GFT 


GBEEl 
‘SUOTITTA Ur soins gy 


‘spoatjoodsea ‘queo sed 
pinom yoryam ‘es1eyO 


WOR ueder 
“* savitod “sogeag pou 
ve ony Ayer] 
+ gouBd ay eouBi gy 
“* sBqeseg uredg 
$ eolyy Nog 
 ¢ epeuey 
s erpeayeny 
8 wopsnry portg 
agg erpuy 
Aayanog 
Tt 


SREEMATI LAJJAWATI. 
She was Honorary Principal of the Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jullunder. 


77—376 


LALA DEV RAJ OF JULLUNDER. 
Founder and Life Member of the Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jullunder. 


78—377 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 377 


total military services, expenditure in England 
amounted to— 


Rs. 18.16 crores in 1929-23 
Rs. 18.20 ss », 1923-24 
Rs. 15.03 2 », 1924-25 


The Esher Commitiee on military affairs 
wrote in a covering letter of their report: 


“We cannot consider the administration of 
the Army in India otherwise than as part of the 
total armed forces of the Empire. Novel political 
machinery created by the.peace treaty has en- 
hanced the importance of the Army in India 
relatively to the military forces in other parts of 
the Empire and more particularly to those of the 
British Isles.” , 


But if the Army is to be used for Empire 
purposes, in fairness the Empire should share the 
expenditure ‘also. At present Britain calls the 
tune for the delectation of the Empire, and India 
pays the. piper—who again generally is the 
Britisher himself. Even if sometimes part of the 
Indian Army that serves beyond the Indian 
frontiers to save the Empire be temporarily 
financed by Britain or the Empire, it must not be 
forgotten that no part of the permanent expendi- 
ee shared by the Empire. Says Professor 

hah : 


Tf the annexation of the frontier territories 
be an object of the Indian Army; if the mainten- 
ance of the balance of power in Asia is desirable— 


378 UNHAPPY INDIA 


these are objects imposed upon us by imperial 
considerations, which are, to say the least, as 
beneficial to England as to India. Of the total 
military strength of the British Empire, India has 
supplied the largest proportion and borne. the 
largest share of such expenditure, after England. 
The advantage of such armies is common to. the 
Empire, though its greatest benefit is to England. 
Why then should England not bear a share of such 
increased expenditure on the army maintained in 
Imperial interests ?... 


*‘ Geographically and politically India is so 
situated that we cannot conceive of India needing 
naval assistance from Britain for the exclusive 
benefit and defence of this country. Should she 
chance—against' all probabilities—to’ attract 
enemies from across the seas, she has a seaboard 
so effectually dominated by the ghats and 
protected by the deserts, that she need not 
apprehend any serious danger on that score. And 
as for her maritime commerce, though consider- 
able, it isnot entirely to her own benefit. The 
customers of India are more interested in keeping 
open the commerce of India than she herself. 
There is thus no ground to regard the military 
expenditure as in any way a substitute for, or set- 
off against, the absence of a naval budget in 
India.” 


Miss Mayo of course had no time and no 
inclination to go into these facts. But it is well 
to remember that in the Great War India sent no 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-Day «+ 379 


less than 1,338,620 men* to the different theatres 
of war, and that her direct money contribution 
has been officially put down at £146.2 million, 
besides indirect money help and immense help in 
‘material. What sacrifice has Britain ever made 
in the interests of India that can be put alongside 
of these figures? 


Britain keeps in India one British soldier for 
every two Indian soldiers. The British soldier is 
expensive and adds to the drain. 


De-Europeanization of the Army has been a 
plank of Indian politicians, Liberal as well as 
Nationalist, for a long time past. A few years 
ago the Government appointed a committee 
presided over by an.eminent British soldier, 
Sir Andrew Skeen, to consider some important 
questions in this -connection. The unanimous 
recommendations of this committee, appointed on 
Government’s initiative with a personnel of 
Government’s own choice and with an eminent 
British soldier as president, contemplated Indiani- 
zation at what the Nationalists regard at a 
decidedly. slow pace. But even these recom- 
mendations have been treated with scant respect. 


Britain as a buyer of Indian raw produce. 


That India is industrially backward is a 
commonplace of Indian life. Agriculture is 
Inida’s chief industry. The subject has been 
discussed in detail in Mr. Lupton’s book, Happy 


* India’s Contribution to the Great War (published by 
authority of the Government of India, 1923), pp. 98 and 160. _ 


380 UNHAPPY INDIA 


India, referred to already. In my book, England’s 
Debt to India, I traced the history of the land 
policy of the British Government from the earliest 
days of the East India Company up to the time of 
writing that book. I quoted therein figures about 
the raw produce of India exported to England 
from 1903-04 up to 1913-14. In 1913-14, the United 
Kingdom commanded 23.4 per cent. of. India’s 
total exports. No other country tookmore than 
10 per cent In 1924-25, the figure for the United 
Kingdom rose to 25.5 per cent.,-next in order 
coming Japan with 14.3 per cent.~ In 1913-14 the 
United Kingdom supplied 64.1/per cent. of the 
total purchases of India. In 1924-25 it supplied 
54.4 per cent. From the figures given in my 
England’s Debt to India, I deduced the following 
conclusions with regard to.some important: articles 
of produce ; 


Jute-—The United Kingdom is the largest 
importer of raw jute from India.. 


Wool.—The United Kingdom is not only the 
largest importer of raw wool, but practically the 
whole of the raw wool exported by India goes to 
the United Kingdom. Out of a total of £1,756,448 
worth.of raw wool exported in 1912-13, the United 
Kingdom took £1,704,785 worth. 


~~ Wheat.—The United Kingdom is not only the 
largest buyer of wheat from India but in some 
years takes practically the whole of the total 
quantity exported. That was so until 1908-09. 
In 1909 and 1910, she took more than £7,000,000 
worth out of a total. of almost £8,500,000 worth 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 381 


exported. In 1911-12 she took £6,741,190 worth of 
wheat out of a total of £8,898,972 exported and in 
1912-18 £8,380,422 worth out of a total of 
£11,795,816. 


Barley and Seeds—-The United Kingdom. is 
the greatest consumer of Indian barley. In seeds, 
again, we find that the United Kingdom heads the 
list of importers from India. 


Tea.—More than two-thirds of the tea ex- 
ported from India goes to the United Kingdom. 


Skins: and Hides.—Similarly; the United 
Kingdom gets the largest quantity of raw skins, 
dressed or tanned ‘hides. 


This shows the hollowness of Miss Mayo’s 
laboured plea that Great Britain gets no benefit 
from her connection with India. 


CHAPTER XXVII 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY—concld. 
Cheap capital for railways. 


That India has to-day nearly 40,000 miles of 
railways is a fact. But the story how these rail- 
ways were built, financed and worked is nothing 
short of ascandal. Indian railway policy has never 
shown much regard for India’s interests. Its 
chief concern has been Britain’s.strategical or 
commercial advantage. The Indian railways were 
built or worked by British companies who ran no 
risk whatever, but who fleeced the Indian tax- 
payer of crores of rupees. With all this their 
treatment of Indian passengers has in the past 
been full of contempt and insolence. Third class 
passengers, from whom they derived the bulk of 
their receipts, were always treated most shabbily. 
Some of these companies who fed fat on the third- 
class traffic;-contemptuously dubbed it the ‘ coolie 
class’. 


Miss Mayo asks us to be thankful to London 
for having given us capital for railways at such 
wonderfully cheap rates. ‘‘ India,” she says, 
“* borrowed from her cheapest market, London... 
paying from 2.5 to 5 per cent., with an average of 
3.5 per cent. on the loans—the lowest rates that 
the world knows.’ But there was no borrowing 
here in the ordinary sense of the word. What 


SOME ‘ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 383 


Miss Mayo is referring to is what they called the 
‘guarantee system.’ Under this system the 
Government of India guaranteed the railway 
companies a minimum rate of interest; it did not 
get the ‘cheap’ capital and build and own the 
railways itself. Nor did it prevent the companies 
from earning very high rates. The guaranteed 
trate was merely the lower limit. 


The companies ran no risks whatever. For 
all their extravagance and inefficiency the Indian 
tax-payer had to suffer. Besides the companies 
enjoyed several privileges in the shape of free 
land, etc. By several petty devices they managed 
to squeeze more money from India than was due 
to them, Thus, when the company had fat days 
in the first half of the year with a prospect of lean 
days ahéad, it could put off all expenses till the 
lean days—so that it would get good ‘surplus 
profits ’ during the-first half, while the losses en- 
hanced by the postponed expenditure were shifted 
on to the Indian revenues. Then there is the fact 
that the British Secretary of State for India could 
always-so. manipulate exchange as to allow his 
fellow-Britishers financing Indian railways in 
actual fact a much higher guaranteed minimum 
than that provided for in the contract. 


As a concrete example of this ‘ cheap loans’ 
system take the G.I. P. Railway. From 1849 to 
1900 this railway was worked under the guarantee 
system. In 1901 the Government bought up the 
railway, but, curiously enough, handed it over 
again to the same company to work as agents in 


384. 7 UNHAPPY INDIA 


its behalf. So the company -controlled huge 
properties without owning a mile of railway. It. 
has been calculated that during the guarantee 

period the working results of the G. I. P. Railway 

showed a nett loss of 14.91 crores. Interest on 

that loss calculated at 4 per cent. per annum works 
out at Rs. 93,20,37,781 from 1852 to 1924. During 

the agency period the nett loss from 1901 to.1923 

was 1.73 crores. The company came into existence 

in 1849. It was working at a loss but in\1855 its 

£20 share was sold at a premium of 25 to 30.62 

per cent. The extravagance under the guarantee 

system for which India had to pay may be gauged 

‘from the fact that up to the year 1880 the capital 

cost per mile on the G.I. P. Railway was 

Rs. 1,95,945, while the neighbouring lines, the 

Nagpur-Chhatisgarh and the Dhond-Manmad 

State Railways cost only Rs. 57,315 and Rs. 71,756 

per mile, respectively.* 


Such in briefis the story of cheap capital. 
No wonder the companies that invested at 
such philanthropic rates, and were supposed to be 
working at a loss, could still sell their shares at 
handsome. premia. 


Mr. Thornton, giving evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committee of 1872 said : 


“TI do believe unguaranteed capital would 
have gone into India for the construction of rail- 
ways had it not been for the guarantee. Consider- 
ing how this country is always growing in wealth, 


*See an article by Mr. ©. P. Tewari, author of Indian 
Railways, in The People, Lahore, for November 29, 1925. 


ueMiyyey ‘ieBeuaryg ul AjaID0g ejdoag ey jo syeAlag oy} jo 
yoquiow e Aq pelonpuoa (jooys¢ yaipy SprD) vAeyeApl A. ELYRIA iedeurryg ey} JO syuapnys 94} Aq pewlojiay 
“AONVG SVU VIGNVC AHL 


SATYAVATI SANATIKA. 
Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jullunder City. 


80—385 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 385 


and that an immense amount of capital is seeking 
investment which it cannot find in England and 
goes to South America and other countries abroad, 
I cannot conceive that it would presistently have. 
neglected India.’’* 


Says the Parsi economist, Mr. D. E. Wacha, 
who in politics is supposed to be a henchman of 
the Government : 


“As a matter of fact it is recorded in black 
and white in one of the important appendices to 
the report of the Royal Commission on Indian 
expenditure (1896-97), generally called the Welby 
Commission, that from 1848 to 1895, the whole 
system of Indian railways. cost to the State, that 
is the tax-payer, fully 55 crore rupees; and though 
since that date there have been gains, still in the 
railway ledger of the Government of India there 
is a debit balance against railways of as many as 
30 crore rupees. 


“ It is since 1899-1900 that Indian railways 
have turned the corner and earned something for 
the tax-payeron his colossal capital recorded in 
the administration report for 1910 at 480 crore 
rupees! The average gain since 1904-05 has come 
to 3 crore rupees per annum. There are no doubt 
paying railways; but there are also losing ones 
and these 3 crores are the net balance of gain after 
writing out the, losses. The large gains of the 
earning railways are absorbed by the losing ones, 
as could be easily discovered on a reference to 


* Quoted by R. OC. Dutt in his India in the Victorian Age, 
p. 354. . . 


29 


386 UNHAPPY INDIA 


appendix IX of the annual administration report 
which gives the financial operations of each system 
of railways.” 


Mr. Wacha ‘sums up his analysis in these 
words: ‘‘ It is a dismal tale, the history of Indian 
railway finanee, from first to last.” 


Regarding the indifference of the railway 
management to the needs of the Indian travelling 
public, Mr. Wacha says : 


“ The worst and most inexcusable feature of 
Indian railway policy is the supreme indifference 
and neglect of the authorities to the crying wants 
and wishes of the Indian. public—those vast 
millions of the population who travel about 36 
miles in a year and who now contribute the largest 
portion of the coaching) traffic amounting to 13 
crore rupees per annum. The interests of the 
European mercantile community are deemed of 
paramount importance while those of the Indian 
population at large have been uniformly held of 
secondary importance, if at all. At the beck and 
. nod of. the former, with their screaming organs of 
opinion behind, the Government readily spend 
millions like water on railways without an ulti- 
mate thought of the tax-payers and the return 
such capital would give. It is the greatest blot on 
Indian railway administration that it ignores the 
interests of the permanent population and is eager 
to satisfy first the cry of the interested and 
migratory European merchant. No private rail- 
way enterprise would spend such enormous sums 
of money and no proprietary body, however rich 


\ 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 387 


and influential, would tolerate in any part of the 
civilized world the loans after loans, ranging 
from 15 to 20 crores, which are annually borrowed 
and expended without let or hindrance, save for a 
kind of official control, which is no control at all.” 


Regarding railway finance, the following 
opinion expressed by the Inchcape Committee on 
Retrenchment is also significant : 


‘* We are of opinion that the country cannot 
afford to subsidize the railways and that steps 
should be taken to curtail working expenses in 
order to ensure that not only will the railways as 
a whole be on a self-supporting basis, but that an 
adequate return should be obtained for the last 
capital expenditure which -has been incurred by 
the State. We consider that, with economic work- 
ing, it should be possible for the railways in India 
to earn sufficient. net receipts to yield an average 
return of at least 54 per cent. on the total capital 
at charge. The average return to the State during 
the three years prior to the War was 5 per cent., 
and, in view of the fact that large amounts of 
additional capital are being raised at 6 per cent. 
or over, we think a return of 54 per cent. cannot 
be regarded as excessive.” . 


* Cheap ’ capital was awarded in yet another 
way. We refer to the fact that the purchase of 
stores was made in England even when it was not 
‘ India’s cheapest market.’ Thus says the Re- 
trenchment Committee :* 


*Part IV, para. 52. 


388 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“The High Commissioner has drawn our 
attention to the fact that indentors frequently tie 
his hands by restricting him, in spite of his 
protests, to a particular manufacturer or sources 
of supply. This inevitably connotes the payment 
of higher prices than would otherwise be neces- 
sary,,and the High Commissioner has furnished 
us with several instances where large sums of 
money have been lost both to the central and 
provincial Governments as the result of such 
restrictions, and also by indenters conducting 
initial negotiations with the representatives of 
particular firms. These practices are greatly to 
be deprecated, and we recommend that orders 
should be passed strictly “prohibiting them. 
Private communications. between indentors and 
suppliers should also not be permitted.” . 


To those acquainted with the customary 
reticence of official language, this cannot but 
sound as severe censure; and the practices must 
be far more. questionable than the letter of the 
. remarks would.imply. Every year, even now, the 
guardians or spokesmen of the Indian commercial 
interests have to draw the attention of the govern- 
ment departments concerned to discrepancies 
between the tenders received and. the orders for 
stores actually placed; and government explana- 
tions often merely explain away things. 


The story of railway finance in. the early 
‘cheap loans’ phase was told among others by 
A. J. Wilson in his book, An Empire in Pawn; by 
Digby in his Prosperous British India, and by 
Naoroji, Gokhale and Wacha and others before 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY ‘ 389 


the Royal Commissions of 1880 and 1897, Mr. A. 
K. Connell wrote thus on this question :* 


“The truth about the capital expenditure 
is as follows: Of the guaranteed railways capital 
‘of £96,794,226, spent up to the end of 1880-81, 
£46,918,177 were withdrawn in England and 
£49,876,049 in India, while the charge for interest, 
amounting, as shown above, to about £28,000,000, 
was almost entirely remitted to England.... Indeed, 
there was a deficit on the whole transaction of 
£8,000,000. So far, then, from this investment of 
foreign capital ‘leading to an ‘outlay of a larger 
sum than the interest sent away,’ it actually led to 
the outlay of a smaller sum-than would have been 
spent in the country if no guaranteed railways had 
ever been built. . 


“ Of the £32,000,000 odd raised for State rail- 
ways, 24 millions have been appropriated in India, 
and 74 millions in.England, while the charge for 
interest, between 2 and 3 millions to be added to 
the capital account, has also gone to England.” 


Mr. \Connell discussed also the question 
whether or not India was the better off because of 
the railways. His conclusions in his own words 
are «Tt 


“To sum up, the joint results of railways 
and free trade may be briefly stated in this way”: 
India used to clothe itself, now England sends 
clothes, and Indian weavers have lost an enor- 


*The Economic Revolution of India, 1888, p. 31. 
t Ibid., p. 53. 


390 UNHAPPY INDIA 


mous source of income, with the gain to the 
country of the difference in price between English 
and Indian goods. But to pay for these goods 
India has to export vast quantities of food, and 
those who sell this food make larger profits than 
before. Therefore a certain portion of the_com- 
munity gain by cheaper cotton goods and ‘higher 
prices for grain. But in order to attain this result 
they have had to pay the sums before..mentioned 
to build the railways. Besides that, they have to 
support in years of scarcity a gigantic system of 
outdoor relief. Is it not obvious that, taking the 
economic changes as a whole, the country has lost 
an enormous source of wealth? “If the import of 
cotton to India and the export of grain from India 
ceased to-morrow, the Indian people would be the 
gainers, though the Indian Government would be 
at its wit’s end. Infact, the interests of the two 
are not identical. The Indian Government is now 
doing its best to stimulate export of wheat in 
order to lessen its ‘ loss by exchange’; but this will 
only result in higher food prices in India. We 
now see the explanation of Mr. Hunter’s assertion 
that two-fifths of the people of British India enjoy 
‘a prosperity unknown under native rule; another 
two-fifths earn a fair, but diminishing subsistence; 
but the remaining fifth, or forty millions, go 
through life on insufficient food. And in ten 
years, according to Mr. Caird, there will be twenty 
‘millions more people to feed. Can _ it, then, be 
maintained that the condition of India has been 
improved by the enormous outlay on railways! 
‘** But you forget, replies the opponent of 
these heretical views, that in time of famine the 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 391 


railway brings food to starving districts. What 
would have become of the people of Madras, 
Bombay, and the North-West Province during the 
last famine if it had not been for the railways? 
My reply is: What did become of them? It is 
true, the railways brought grain; yet they had 
previously taken it away, and they brought it 
back at a quadrupled price, and the Government 
had to spend millions of pounds toenable the 
peasants to buy it, and even then could not 
prevent frightful mortality. 


“ What has been the native’s custom from 
time immemorial of providing against bad years? 
Why, the simple method of Joseph in Egypt—that 
of storing grain. This is what the official report 
on the Mysore famine tells us: ‘ The country had 
suffered in former years from deficient rainfall, 
but actual famine had been staved off by the 
consumption of the surplus ragi, a coarse millet, 
stored in underground pits, from which it is with- 
drawn in times of scarcity, as the grain will keep 
sound and.good for forty and fifty years. Only 
two of the Faminé Commissioners, Messrs. Caird 
and Sullivan, seem to have recognized the import- 
ance.of this custom... 


“Since the introduction of railways there is 
reason to believe that the ryot, tempted by 
immediate gain, or forced by taxation to sell his 
grain, is beginning to store rupees instead of food; 
but, as he cannot eat his rupees or jewellery, and 
cannot buy fuel so as to keep the manure for the 
land, and has, according to the Famine Commis- 


392 UNHAPPY INDIA 


sioners, to give in famine times a quadrupled 
price for his food, it is very doubtful whether he 
gains in the long run. Anyhow, the landless 
. labourer, who has no produce to exchange for 
rupees, finds the market price in time of scarcity 
utterly beyond his means. Then the Government 
comes to the rescue with relief works, the railways 

make roaring profits—in fact, famine and war, 

both exhausting for the country, are perfect god- 

' sends to the foreign investor—and the Indian 

Government complacently holdsup its Public 

Works policy to an admiring and interested | 
English public. It wholly omits to mention that 

in time past nearly £30,000,000 of taxation have 

been squeezed out of the country to pay interest 

charges, and that, if that_sum had been left in the 
agriculturist’s pockets,he might himself have 
been better able to face bad times and have helped 
the labourer to do the same. But Sir John 
Strachey utterly ignores this aspect of the ques- 
tion; he is quite content with pointing to the relief 
works, and then insists on the necessity of con- 
structing-more railways to meet the next famine 
cycle. \One would suppose that railways pro- 
ceeded_as a free gift out of the benevolent bosoms 
of British capitalists, instead of being paid for out 
of the hungry bellies of the Hindu ryots. The 
sum of £30,000,000, represents the amount which 
India has had to pay out of taxation to get its rail- 
ways built, and then it has paid £15,000,000 (part 
of which went to the railway shareholders) to keep 
the people alive, and after all has lost about five 
millions of human beings.” 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 393 
Public Services. 


A few facts and figures about. public services 
may fittingly close this chapter. There is no 
country on the face of the globe than India where 
superior public servants are paid so lavishly, and 
where the bulk of the savings of the public 
servants goes out of the country. 


The British Government in India-is generally 
called ‘bureaucracy.’ A certain. element of 
bureaucracy is of course unavoidable in all forms 
of Government. But in India the public services 
constitute the steel frame—to. use Lloyd George’s 
phrase—of Britain’s domination. The ‘ 1.C.S.” and 
other bureaucrats do not\merely carry out ad- 
aa policies, they very largely formulate 
them. - 


The Indian superior services are therefore 
very largely manned by Britishers. This means 
fine careers for British ‘lads ’—and a heavy drain 
on India’s public revenue. Merely to benefit the 
British lads.the cost of administration has been 
made to. increase exorbitantly. New jobs for 
young British bureaucrats are being created every 
now and then; and their emoluments are far 
beyond the capacity of Indian revenues. The 
services are a ‘drain’ in the real sense of the 
word. They are so expensive, and such a large 

~—portion of their income is spent outside India. The 
heavy amount remitted as pensions is a dead loss 
to the country. 


In April 1913, the proportion of Indians and 
Britishers including Anglo-Indians in different 


394 UNHAPPY INDIA 


departments of State service was as under.:* 


Total number of posts worth 
Rs. 200 per mensem or 


over — . 11,064 
Of these Englishmen and 

Anglo-Indians held ... 6,491 or 59 per cent. 
Whilst Indians held ... 4,573 or 41 per cent. 


A further analysis of this expenditure, as given 
by Professor K. T. Shah in a table, which we are 
reproducing on the next page, will be of interest 
to the reader : 


we Years of Indian Finance, K. T. Shah, 2nd edition, 


395 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 


%b 
%9 
%8 
%Ot 
IT 
%at 


%8I 
LHS Ploy sUVIpPUy-ojsuy “%F9 ploy suBipuy “%Zr_ poy wouysr[sugq ‘ooe—o0s “sy Burkareo sys0d IO 


6 


Ad 
%1B 
%FT 


698 


%Ie 
%6P 
%B9 


é 


%B6 
MEL 
%8L 
WPS 
%8S 
%9E 
%6I 


“ 


000‘T—006 
006-008 
008—-004 
004-009 
009-008 
009—00F 
00%—008 


ce 


ce 


396 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The Indian National Congress almost from 
its very start had been protesting against this 
deliberate exclusion of Indians from the superior 
services of their own country. The Congressmen 
pressed for simultaneous examinations (in India 
and England) for recruitment to the Imperial 
services. In 1893 Parliament accepted this 
principle, but no steps were taken to enforce it. 
The Montagu-Chelmsford report declared that the 
success of the new policy of progressive responsible 
government ‘must very largely depend on the 
extent to which it is found possible to introduce 
Indians into every branch of-the administration.’ 
At once a hue and cry was raised by the British 
“lads” And now the actual policy of the govern- 
ment has been found out in the acceptance of the 
proposals of the Lee Commission over the, head of 
the legislature. 


The salaries and allowances of the public 
services had been very considerably increased in 
the decade 1914-24, with further advantages in the 
shape of-more liberal pension rules, and passage 
allowances. According to the Inchcape Com- 
mittee of 1922-23, the total staff paid from the 
Central revenues (excluding railway staff), had 
increased in number from 474,966 in 1913-14 to 
520,762 in 1922-23—-an increase of nearly 10 per 
cent. The table on the next page will throw 
further light on this question : 


397 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE DRAIN TO-DAY 


or‘oo'n, =| a‘en‘et Z19"29 etra‘er | 34'66'9s | P9°er‘el 


86°F1 6F'OF 1ST osrat | ae‘eeT | G0°ST 
esre | seco | so'se fares §=— | toon ~—si|es‘og 
996 86°F BPG 89‘T ont 8 

BPOL £6°6S, 19‘eI 4 ‘Tort | PPT 
£0°CE GB‘OT Br =: | gore 6Z‘6IT | e9'Fe 
es‘si'g | OOTLEIT | 2e°ee'a | orpa'tt | 1e‘L9'es | o2‘er‘st 


SY SY 8Y 8y ‘sy YL 


esBarouy | SS-GS6E | FE-SIGLT | oseotouy | ez-Zz6et | PT-eI6T 


(p299tWI0 000) 


“sa9tala gy 7104) “sa9tetag Aan yy 


a IVLOL 


“it “* SqOUBMOT[® 10qIO 
ad SOUBMOT[S BUI[[IAVsy, 


ue oe quot osnoxy 


soUBMOTTE [BOOT] 10 ArOJeSUOdMOL) 


 gousmoyye 4ynq ao Avd jeroedg 


one ase - goedoud Avg 


a nr PEPE POETS SU OR TPS SSS GO A ve SSN TT 


398 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Note specially the increased expenditure 
umder special allowances, etc. Asif this were 
not enough the Lee Commission made further 
proposals for an all round increment. 


The total increase for the first year of the Lee 
regime has been estimated thus: — 


Pay and remittance 


concession... ICS. _ e_18.6 lakhs. 
I.P.S. » 12.7 ,, 
IMS. (Civil) ~ 70 ~«4, 
LE.S. (Men) ... 3.3 ,, 
LFS, . 84 ,, 
LS.E. 10.9 ,, 
LAS. So. gs 
EV.S 4 ,, 
Total Sei EAS 4 ys 

Other services (approximately) 13.0 to 15.0 lakhs. 
Pensions—Uncovenanted service ... 1.2. ,, 
I.C.S. officers holding ie posits... Ao. 4h 
Passages ae cov “250. 45 
Grand Total (First Year) 96.21 to 98.21 ,, 


This additional annual expenditure of a crore 
will no doubt strengthen the ‘steel frame’ but at 
the same time it must prove a heavy drain on 
India’s resources. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


‘ DIVIDE ET IMPERA ’ 


Miss Mayo chuckles over the Hindu-Muslim 
riots of recent years. Itis true that the Hindus 
and the Mussalmans have been fighting almost 
ferociously for the last 5 years. The position may 
briefly be stated thus: : 


In 1919, during the agitation over the Rowlatt 
Act, the Hindus and Mussalmans made a united. 
stand against the government. One of the counts 
in the indictment of the Punjab leaders in the 
Maritial Law summary trial.courts was the pro- 
motion ef unity. They were charged with having 
brought ‘about unity in order to overthrow the 
British Government! In 1920 and 1921, Hindus- 
and Muslims all over India united in the Non- 
co-operation Movement. This was an eye-sore to 
the foreign bureaucracy. Various steps were 
taken to kill. the Non-co-operation movement by 
destroying Hindu-Muslim unity. In this the 
government was substantially helped by the 
institution of separate Hindu and Muslim elec- 
torates for the elective bodies. To the separate 
electorates they had added a policy of communal 
preferment in the public services also. It was 
particularly the Hindus who were to be suppressed 
and made to feel the iron heel. ; 


The policy of divide and rule is the sheet- 
anchor of all Imperial governments. British rule 


400 UNHAPPY INDIA 


in India has been persistently following that 
policy. The evidence of British official records is 
conclusive on this point. In the earlier phase the 
slogan was * Mussalmans must be suppressed ’— 
to-day it is, ‘They must be won over and pitted 
against the Nationalists.’ This would be clear 
from the citations that follow.* 


Writing to the Duke of Wellington from Simla 
on October 4, 1842, after the fall of Kabul and. 
Ghazni, Lord Ellenborough, then. Governor- 
General of India observed : 


*“F could not have credited. the extent to 
which the Muhammadans desired our failure in 
Afghanistan, unless I had. heard here circum- 
stances which prove that the feeling pervaded 
even those entirely dependent upon us. 


aoe The Hindus, on the other hand, are 
delighted. It seems to me most unwise, when we 
are sure of the hostility of one-tenth, not to secure 
the enthusiastic support of the nine-tenths which 
are faithful.” 


Again Ellenborough to Wellington on January 
18, 1843; | 


**J cannot close my eyes to the belief, that 
that race (Muslims) is fundamentally hostile to us 
and therefore our true policy is to conciliate the 
Hindus.” 


.*The reader will do well to refer to Dr. J. T. Sunderland’s 
article on ‘Hindu and Muhammadan Riots’ in the Modern 
Review (Calcutta) for January 1928, and to Major B. D. Basu’s 
article, ‘Muhammadanism Must be Suppressed’ in the same 
journal for September 1925. 


Sir IBRAHIM RAHMITOOLAH. 


He presided at the Commercial and Industrial Congress of 1927. 


400 


81 


Mr. MOHAMAD ALI JINNAH, M.L.A. 
The leader of the Independent Party in the | 


-egislative Assembly. 


82—40] 


* DIVIDE ET IMPERA ” 401. 


Why the Muhammadans incurred the wrath 
of Englishmen was explained in a pamphlet 
published in 1858 and written by a retired member 
of the Bengal Civil Service, named Henry 
Harrington Thomas :* 


“ T have stated that the Hindus were not the 
contrivers or the primary movers of the (1857) 
rebellion; and I now shall attempt to show that it 
was the result of a Muhammadan conspiracy, 
which had been in agitation for a longer period 
than was generally suspected, though it was 
developed somewhat sooner than its authors had 
intended... But the question is, Who planned 
ahd organized this combined movement for the 
murder of every Christian man, woman, and child 
throughout the country? Left to their own will, 
and to’ their own resources, the Hindus never 
would, or could, have compassed such an under- 
taking... No; itis amongst the Muhammadans 
not the Hindus, that we must look for the real 
originators of this terrible plot!...... But, in order 


Caliphs to the present day, proud, intolerant and 
cruel, ever aiming at Muhammadan supremacy by 


*The Late Rebellion in India and Our Future Policy, 
pp. 13-17. Quoted by Basu. 


30 


402 UNHAPPY INDIA 


whatever means and ever fostering a deep hatred 
of Christians. They cannot be good subjects of 
any. government which professes another religion : 
the precepts of the Koran will not suffer it. They 
deem themselves placed in a false position under 
any but a Muhammadan dynasty. For ‘this 
reason, no favours or honours can conciliate them, 
but they can dissimulate to perfection, until their 
opportunity presents itself; and then their true 
character becomes manifest... But in India the 
Muhammadans had other motives. for seeking our 
destruction, besides their rooted anti-Christian 
feeling. They could not forget that they had been 
the masters of the country for many generations, 
and they never ceased to. persuade themselves, 
that if the British power\were thoroughly des- 
troyed they would recover their lost position, and 
once more lord it .over the’ Hinduse They 
perceived the disaffection which had been spread- 
ing among the native regiments and fanned the 
flame by their intrigues. Well aware that no 
decisive blow could be struck without the co- 
operation of the Hindu troops, and that the surest 
means of urging them to desperate measures was 
to convince the Brahmans, in the first place that 
their religion was in danger, the Muhammadans 
artfully circulated a report which was echoed by 
the Brahmans, that the British Government was 
undermining the Hindu faith, with the covert 
intention of converting the Hindus to Christianity 
In their determined character, their education 
and mental capacity, the Muhammadans are 
vastly superior to the Hindus, who comparatively 
speaking are mere children in their hands. The 


‘ DIVIDE ET IMPERA’ 403 


Muhammadans, moreover, on account of their 
higher qualification for business, have been more 
generally taken into public employ, which 
afforded them facilities for becoming acquainted 
with the measures of government and gave weight 
and importance to their assertions... the Muham- 
madans planned and organized this rebellion (or 
rather revolution) for their own aggrandizement 
alone, and that the Hindu Sepoys of the Bengal 
Army were their dupes and instruments.” 


For yet another reason, this writer refers to 
the impossibility of converting the Muhammadans 
to Christianity :* 


“* The missionary seldom convinces a Muham- 
madan; the very fact of his Christianity militates 
against his success. In general the Muhammadan 
avoids discussion with the missionaries and he 
listens with impatience to their arguments, if he 
-does not wholly turn a deaf earto them. Of a 
nature Jess stern and obdurate, the Hindus are 
frequently touched by the preachings of the 
missionaries.’ 


AS early as 1821, a British officer, signing 
himself ‘Carnaticus’ wrote in the Asiatic 
Journal :} 


“ Divide et Impera should be the motto of our 
Indian administration, whether political, civil or 
military.” 


* Op. cit., p. 26. 


t Quoted by Bees in his Consolidation of the Christian Power 
in India, pp. 74-5 


404. - UNHAPPY INDIA 


The same thing was put in as outspoken a 
-language by Lt.-Col. John Coke, Commandant at 
Moradabad, who, about the time of what the 
British historians have called the ‘ Sepoy Mutiny.’ 
of 1857, wrote :* 


‘“OUR ENDEAVOURS SHOULD BE TO 
UPHOLD IN FULL FORCE THE (FOR US, 
FORTUNATE) SEPARATION WHICH EXISTS | 
BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT RELIGIONS AND 
RACES, NOT TO ENDEAVOUR TO AMAL- 
GAMATE THEM. DIVIDE ET IMPERA 
SHOULD BE THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIAN 
GOVERNMENT.” , 


Lord Elphinstone, Governor of Bombay, in a 
minute, dated May 14,1859, wrote:t.‘ DIVIDE 
ET IMPERA WAS THE OLD ROMAN. MOTTO 
AND IT SHOULD BE-OURS.’ 


Sir John Strachey, an eminent British Indian 
Civilian and writer on India, said: ‘‘ The exist- 
ence, side by. side, of hostile creeds among the 
Indian people, is one of the strong points in our 
political position in India.” 


Contrast with this unimpeachable evidence 
the assertion of Miss Mayo that during the ‘ first 
half-century of Crown rule’ ‘ government was 
operated by British officers of the Civil Service, 
both in the administrative and in the judicial 
branches. These officers, in the performance of 


* Quoted by Basu, op. cit. 
Tt See Basu, op. ‘cit. 
{ Basu, op. cit. 


* DIVIDE ET IMPERA’ 405 


their duties, made no difference between Hindu 
and Muhammadan, holding the general interests 
in an equal hand’!! 


During that half-century, as to-day, divide 
et impera formed the corner-stone of British policy 
in India. 


. The only difference is that in the first phase 
the Muslims were to be ‘suppressed,’ now they 
are to be patted on the back and won over by 
favours. 


We have given some citations from British 
records about the earlier phase. But soon after 
the British found that the Hindu majority, once 
aroused from its slumber, would mean the surest 
death of foreign domination. As a make-weight 
the foreigners were to enlist the friendship of the 
Muslim minority.»-The last two decades of the 
last century witnessed this swing of the pendulum. 
The Civilian, H. H. Thomas, as we have seen 
above, had concluded that the Muslims ‘ cannot 
be good..subjects of any government which 
professes. another religion: the precepts of the 
Koran. will not suffer it. But why not make 
another effort with -the precepts of the Koran? 
So Hunter discussed anew the question whether 
Muslims could remain good Muslims and yet be 
good subjects of Queen Victoria—and he came to 
a different conclusion! . 


_ The divide et impera jack-boot is still there— 
only it is now on the other leg. 


406 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Some of the quotations in this chapter are 
disparaging to the Islam and Muslims. We have 
given them not because we share these opinions 
but because we want the world to know what kind 
of opinions the early British rulers of India held 
about the Muslims, in order that it may appraise 
correctly the opinions which they sometimes now 
propagate about the Hindus. 


“In 1900,” says Miss Mayo, “the wind 
switched to a stormy quarter.” She-is referring 
to the Minto-Morley Reform Act, which for the 
first time introduced communal electorates. 


“India owes to Lord Minto the system of 
communal representation,” said Sir Surendra 
Nath Banerjea.* Those who think that Lord 
Minto had merely to concede what. was thrust 
upon him by the Muslims would do well to ponder 
over the words of. the prominent Muslim leader, 
Mr. Muhammad Ali, who in his address at the 
ra session (1923) of the National Congress 
said : 


“Some months previously a Muslim deputa- 
tion had waited at Simla on the Viceroy, Lord 
Minto, to place before him and his Government a 
statement of the Muslim demands in connection 
with the Minto-Morley Reforms then _fore- 
shadowed. To follow the fashion of British 
journalists, during the War, ‘ there is no harm 
now in saying’. that the deputation’s was 4 
‘command’ performance! It was clear that 


*4 Nation in Making (Oxford University Press), p. 283. 


‘ DIVIDE ET IMPERA’ 407 


government could no longer resist the demands of 
educated Indians, and, as usual, it was about to 
dole out to them a morsel that would keep them 
gagged for some years. Hitherto the Mussalmans 
had acted very much like the Irish prisoner in the 
dock who, in reply to the judge’s enquiry whether 
he had any counsel to represent him in the trial, 
had frankly replied that he had certainly not 
engaged counsel, but that he had ‘ friends in the 
jury!’ But now the Muslims’ ‘friends in the 
jury,’ had themselves privately urged that the 
accused should engage duly qualified counsel like 
all others.” 


Lord Morley, joint author of the Minto- 
Morley reforms evidently took the same view. 
‘TI won’s follow you again into your Mahometan 
dispute,—said hein a letter* to Minto—‘ I 
respectfully remind you once more that it was 
your early speech».about their extra claims that 
first started the M. [Muslim] hare.’ 


The ‘extra claims’ rested partly on the 
Muslim loyalty to British rule! 


The dissension-creating device of the com- 
munal electorate has come in very handy to the 
British administrator, and it has not a little to 
do with the recent riots—as is clear even from 
Miss Mayo’s account. 


No wonder, therefore, that when Montagu 
and Chelmsford—and later on the Parliamentary 


* Morley: Recollections, vol. II, p. 325. 


408. UNHAPPY INDIA 


Commitiees—sat down. to shape the 1919 Reforms, 
“ the very idea of India vanished from the Bill,. to 
be replaced by the disunited communities of 
Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Mahratta, Brahmin, non- 
Brahmin, Indian. Christian, Anglo-Indian and 
English.’* 


It is because the Britishers are thoroughly 
aware of what to them are the helpful. effects of 
communal electorate that the Times and other 
Tory and anti-Indian papers of London so vehe- 
mently defend communal representation. 


The bona fides of the bureaucracy in india 
has been suspected by responsible British states- 
men. Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, late and future 
Premier of Britain, speaks of ‘the wide-spread 
suspicion : 


‘Sinister influences have been, and are, at 
work on the part of the Government; that Muham- 
madan leaders have been and are inspired by 
certain’ British, officials, and that these officials 
have pulled, and continue to pull, wires at.Simla 
and in London, and of malice afore-thought sow 
discord, between the Muhammadans and Hindu 
communities, by showing tothe Muhammadans 
Spectal favours.’ ft 


In a recent article contributed to the Foreign 
Affairs, London, Sir John Maynard, a retired 


*Josiah C. Wedgwood, M.P., in The People (Lahore), 
May 1, 1997. 


t Awakening of India, p. 283. 


Dr. Sir IQBAL. MOHAMAD. 


Mr. MOHAMAD YAKUB. 
Deputy President of the Legislative Assembly. 


84—409 


‘ DIVIDE ET IMPERA’ 409 


senior Member of the Executive Council of the 
Punjab says : eee, ; 


‘It is, of course, true. that British authority 
could not have established and could not now 
maintain itself but for a fissiparous tendency, of 
which the Hindu-Muslim. antagonism is one 
manifestation. It is also true that the mass 
rivalry of the two communities began under 
British rule. Persecuting rulers made their ap- 
pearance from time to time in the _pre-British era, 
levying tribute on unbelievers or punishing with 
fanatical zeal the slaying of kine: “But the Hindu 
and Muslim masses—before they had eaten of the 
tree of knowledge and become religion-conscious— 
pats a peacefully side by side at the same 
shrines.’ 


Sir Bampfylde Fuller, late Governor of the 
Curzon-created Province of ‘ East Bengal,’ in an 
oft-quoted address picturesquely referred to the 
British Government in India as having two wives, 
Hindu and Muslim, of which the Muslim was the 
* favourite’ wife. 


Writing only last year in the London Times, 
Lord Olivier, Secretary of State for India in the 
‘Ramsay Macdonald Government, observed : 


“No one with a close acquaintance with 
Indian affairs will be prepared to deny that on the 
whole there is a predominant bias in British 
officialdom in favour of the Muslim community, 
partly on the ground of closer sympathy but more 


410 UNHAPPY INDIA 


largely as a make-weight against Hindu 
nationalism.”’ 

This confession from high authority again 
reminded people of the ‘ favourite wife’ figure of 
Sir Bampfylde. 


CHAPTER XXIX 


‘ THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’” 


Miss Mayo’s book gives an impression that 
the ‘Sons of the Prophet’ are hostile to the 
political advancement of India and that they are 
entirely loyal to the British Government, so much 
so that they hate the Hindus for their political 
activities. Hence her general admiration of the 
Muslims and scrupulous avoidance ofany criti- 
cism of them. She has largely quoted from the 
speeches of anti-Hindu Muslim leaders. The 
Hindu-Muslim differences are ‘the great sheet- 
anchor‘of British policy in. India. They are the 
foundation of British rule. But the statement 
that the Muslims as a community are opposed to 
the emancipation of India is such a gross libel on 
their intelligence and patriotism ‘that we make no 
apology for giving long extracts from the speeches’ 
of representative Mussalmans made in the differ- 
ent conferences and. congresses held in the month 
of December, 1927. : 


Mr. Muhammad Ali Jinnah is a leading 
Muslim patriot. He was appointed by govern- 
ment a member of the Muddiman Committee which 
was asked to go into and report on the working 
of the Reforms in 1924. He was again appointed 
by the government a member of the Skeen 
Committee to which was entrusted the task of 
reporting on the question of the Indianization of 


412 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the officers of the Army. He thus enjoys official 
recognition as a Muslim leader of influence. Yet 
in the Assembly, as outside of it, his attitude has 
been as firm against foreign rule as that of any 
Hindu nationalist. 


On page 307 of her book, Miss Mayo observes 
that she talked with many ‘leading’ men of the 
North-Western Frontier Province. One wonders in 
what language she talked because there are very 
few ‘ leading ’ men in that province who can talk 
in English. However, that is only a trifle. She- 
says, ‘’ All seemed of one mind in the matter. 
The whole province is satisfied now and desires no 
change.” The All-India Muslim League, how- 
ever, passes a resolution every year demanding a 
reformed government’ in the Frontier Province. 
A resolution of the same kind was moved in the 
Legislative Assembly-in 1926 and carried. The 
‘ representative > whom Miss Mayo professes to 
quote in her book is also said to have remarked : 
“Tf the British withdraw...immediate hell will 
follow, in the-first days of which the Bengali and 
‘all his tribe will be removed from the earth.’ No 
‘such statement could have been made by an 
sensible man as the ‘ Bengali and his tribe’ had 
been in India for thousands of years before the 
British came. This talk concludes with the 
following gem: “ But without the British, no 
Hindus will remain in India except such as we 
keep for slaves.” Of course, it never occurred to 
Miss Mayo to enquire from her informant, if one 
such exists or existed in flesh and blood,—no 
names are given,—as to how the Hindus managed 


‘ THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’ 413 


to live free men for ages, before the British came. 
‘What is even more pertinent is, how did they 
‘manage to conquer and rule not only the areas now 
covered by the North-Western Frontier Province, 
but also Kabul and Kandhar which are wholly 
Mussalman and are included in the territory of 
the King of Afghanistan? At the time of the 
annexation of the Punjab in 1849, all these 
provinces were under the rule of the Sikhs. 
Several important towns in the provinces bear 
Sikh names, Haripur being one of them, named 
after Hari Singh, who spread terror among the 
entire Afghan population in that~ part of India. 
We are certain the whole statement is a figment 
of Miss Mayo’s brain or was passed on to her by a 
British officer to pull her leg or to prove that 
everybody in India except the Hindu was in love 
with British rule. 


* 


Sir Ibrahim, Rahimtoolla is a Muslim leader 
of Bombay... He is a great business man and has 
been the President of the Bombay Legislative 
Council for a number of years. At first he was 
nominated by the government, but when the rule 
of electing the president came into operation, he 
was unanimously elected to that office. Presiding 
over the last session of the All-India Industrial 
and Commercial Congress, held at Madras in the 
last week of December, 1927, he examined 
Britain’s claim of being a ‘ trustee for the people 
of India’ and said: 


“In view of this claim, it becomes desirable 
to examine how the ‘trustees’ have discharged 


414 UNHAPPY INDIA 


their duty by India during the century and a half 
they have been in supreme control of this 
country... If Britain was a disinterested ‘trustee’ 
animated by an earnest. desire to do her best for 
the people of India, is would redound to her great 
credit. If, as a result of her long trusteeship, 
there had been a happy and contented India, her 
association with this country would undoubtedly 
be regarded as providential. The question is 
whether Britain has proved a disinterested trustee, 
and whether the long association of this country 
with her in the economic sphere has made the 
people of India happy and contented. To anyone 
who has taken any interest in the public life of 
the country, there is only. one answer, and that 
answer is that Britain has throughout been 
primarily concerned with maintaining the Indian 
market for her manufactures. Her political power 
has been used for the promotion of this object. 
The small band of merchant adventurers who came 
out to India, we are told, intended only to carry 
on a lucrative trade. The political power which 
they acquired. was used by the East India Com- 
_pany for this purpose. It is true that in the year 
1858 the. Crown of Britain took over the direct 
control of the administration of India. The 
question is whether in the economic sphere any 
change took place from the assumption of responsi- 
bility by the Crown. The power which was 
centred in the Directors of the East India 
Company, was transferred to the British Parlia- 
ment in theory, but in practice the Secretary of 
State for India in Council has merely taken the 
place of the Board of Directors of the East India 


‘ THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’ 415 


Company. This Board, now called the Secretary 
of State in Council, still controls the fiscal policy, 
and the British officials who are carrying on the 
administration of the country are required to carry 
out the orders of the Board. A glaring instance of 
the real state of things has been recently 
furnished. Sir Basil Blackett, the Finance 
Member of the Government of India, with his 
high financial reputation, was obliged to go to 
England personally to place before the ‘ Board of 
Directors ’ his views with regard to the Reserve 
Bank controversy. The Government of India 
were unable, even by means of elaborate use of 
telegraphic wires, to persuade the Board to accede 
to the constitution of a Reserve Bank for India as 
suited to the requirements of the people of India. 
What usually happens in cases of a board of 
director$ of joint-stock companies located in 
London with overseas factories, has happened in 
the case of a vast country like India. The over- 
seas manager is called to headquarters to satisfy 
the board and the shareholders, who in this case 
are the British bankers, that the policy recom- 
mended is the best in the interests of the company. 
Can anything show more conclusively that the 
claim of a‘ sacred trust’ is a mere eye wash, and 
that British bankers and manufacturing interests 
are predominant in determining the policy which 
is pursued in this country?” 


Sir Ibrahim is as strong a critic of Britain’s 
economic policy in India as the Bengali and his 
tribe. He very aptly points out— 


416 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“ Agriculture, industry, transport, currency 
and exchange, and the fiscal policy should all form 
the subject of one or simultaneous enquiry having 
as its aim and object the economic growth of 
India. You will observe that, except in one 
solitary instance, all the commissions appointed 
by government have been constituted on. the 
basis of a European chairman and a European 
majority. The policy suitable to be applied to the 
economic problems of India is not determined by 
Indians but by Britishers, and itis but natural 
that, with the training they have received, they 
should visualize each problem from the point of 
view as to how it will affect Britain.” 


The only exception where an Indian was 
appointed as chairman. of an economic commis- 
sion, was that of Sir Ibrahim himself. Discussing 
India’s capacity to bear taxation, Sir Ibrahim 
observes : 


** It has been argued that, since the advent of 
the British, India has grown more prosperous and 
‘that it has more money now than it possessed 
before. Assuming it is a fact that India is better 
off, sofar.as the amount of money is concerned, 
it is to be remembered. that the cost of living has 
substantially increased, that the purchasing power 
of money has depreciated, that there are no 
appreciable accumulations of wealth as a result of 
savings, and that the masses are steeped in 
poverty. The average consumption of piece- 
goods, one of the necessities of life, was 18 yards 
per head of population before the ‘War and it is 
now reduced to 10 yards per head. If the position 


Dr. M. A. ANSARI. 
The Muslim President of the Indian National Congress for 1927-1928. 


85—416 


A Wy Pr 
$ < “tes ae 


MAULANA SHAUKAT ALI. 


86—417 


‘THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’ 417 


were different the state of diminishing returns on 
the present scale of taxation would not have been 
reached. Is there then any wonder that there is a 
persistent demand for retrenchment in the State 
expenditure? I admit that efforts have been 
made in that direction but they have not been 
sufficiently far-reaching. In considering the ques- 
tion of retrenchment we are confronted with the 
stock argument that administrative machinery 
must be maintained at a high pitch of-efficiency, 
the test of efficiency being determined by the 
authorities themselves. A great deal of harm has 
resulted from this slogan of efficiency. It must be 
obvious that a country can get only such efficiency 
as it can afford to pay for. The question, there- 
fore, arises whether India’s. economic -resources 
permit the maintenance.of ‘the standard of eff- 
ciency imposed upon it. No one can force for any 
length of time a standard of efficiency which is 
beyond a country’s means. The essential duty of 
a civilized government is to develop the economic 
resources of.the country in order to increase the 
tax-bearing capacity of the people and the supply 
of capital for its further progress.” 


Sir Ibrahim concludes his frank outspoken 
address with the following appeal to the British : 


‘* Britishers do not come to India on a mission 
of. philanthropy or for the benefit of their health. 
I will ask them to drop the pretence of holding 
India as a ‘ sacred trust’ and boldly to acknow- 
ledge the fact that they are here for promoting 
their trade interests. I would appeal to Lord 
Irwin to visualize the Indian economic problem in 


31 


418 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the same spirit in which he, with Lord Lloyd, has 
done for Birtain in the ‘Great Opportunity,’ and 
to lay down a policy for India consistent with the 
views he has pressed therein. I would ask him to 
call together the best brains of commercial India, 
to state the real object of Britain’s control of 
India’s destiny, and jointly to evolve measures for 
the prosperity of India.” 


It would be thus seen that there is not much 
difference between the Hindu view of British rule 
in India and that of an enlightened educated 
moderate Muslim leader. like Sir Ibrahim 
Rahimtoolla. 


The attitude of the Muslims towards the 
Simon Commission, which has been recently 
appointed by the British Government to enquire 
into the working of the Reforms of 1919, is also a 
fair index of their attitude towards the British 
Government. Almost all the all-India Muslim 
leaders who count in the public life of the country 
have joined hands with Hindu leaders in boy- 
cotting the Simon Commission. The All-India 
Muslim League, which held its session in Calcutta 
on December 30, 1927, passed a resolution to that 
efiect with only two dissentient votes. The 
session was presided over by Maulvi Muhammad 
Yaqub, the Deputy President of the Legislative 
Assembly, who made a strong speech against the 
policy of appointing an exclusively British com- 
mission. . 


_ ‘A rival meeting was held at Lahore on the 
same dates, professing to be an annual session of 


‘THE SONS OF THE PROPHET’ 419 


the All-India Muslim League. It was presided 
over by Sir Muhammad Shafi of Lahore. In this 
meeting the resolution objecting to the boycott of 
the Commission was declared passed by a narrow 
majority, but the minority demanded a recount- 
ing of votes, which was disallowed. The leaders 
of the alleged minority, Messrs. Muhammad. Alam, 
M.L.C., Abdul Qadir (President, Punjab Khilafat 
Committee), Afzal Haq, M.L.C., Mazhar Ali 
Azhar, and Muhammad Sharif, issued a state- 
ment to the Press, in which they complained of 
the high-handedness of the President and made 
out.a case to prove that the votes were almost 
equal. But even this reactionary and loyalist 
President said in his address: 


‘“‘ The existing control of the Secretary of 
State in the departments dealing with internal 
affairs was not conducive to the best interests of 
the administration. He suggested the Govern- 
ment of India be relieved of the irksome chains 
with which they were bound in this respect. 
Detailing his. suggestions for immediate reforms 
in the central and provincial machineries, he 
urged inter alia that the Foreign and Political 
Department in the Government be placed in 
charge of one member; an additional civilian 
member for the army be appointed to take his 
place within the Indian Cabinet; and membership 
of the Viceroy’s Executive Council be increased to 
eight, four of whom would be Indians. He also 
opined that in the central Government a member 
or members of Transferred Subjects be selected 
from among the elected representatives of the 


. 


420 UNHAPPY INDIA 


people in the central legislature and should be 
made responsible to it for their administration- 
As for dyarchy in the provinces, Sir Muhammad 
remarked that that interesting experiment should 
now be abandoned and they should revert to the 
principle of unitary provincial government.” 


This ought to be quite sufficient to break Miss 
Mayo’s heart who thought that the Muslims were 
good boys and wanted no changes in the existing 
machinery of the administration. We shall now 
give afew opinions regarding the much talked- 
about and advertised Hindu-Muslim quarrels. 
Speaking as President of the All-India Muslim 
League, Maulvi Muhammad. Yaqub, the Deputy 
President of the Legislative Assembly said : 

“ Dealing with Hindu-Muslim quarrels he did 
not wish to apportion blame, but their Prophet 
had left for them guidance. The action of His 
Holiness in making a settlement with the Jews of 
Medina in a spirit of give and take should regulate 
their conduct. Unity would not mean absorption 
of the community by another. They should, like 
a joint Hindu family, sit at home and mutually 
divide.property. Such an action would win for 
them the respect of the outside world but if they 
took recourse to litigation and decision by a third 
party the world would condemn them for casting 
a blot on the fair name of their ancestors. 
(Applause.) He opined that the Madras Congress 
settlement would be acceptable to 90 per cent. of 
the enlightened and educated Muhammadans.” 


The views of another Muslim leader, Sir Ali 
Imam, an ex-Member of the British Indian 


‘THE SONS OF THE PROPHET ’ 421 - 


Cabinet, on the subject of boycott, as expressed at 
the annual meeting of the Muslim League may be 
gathered from the following report: 


‘* Sir Ali Imam (Bihar) then, on behalf of the 
Subjects Committee, moved the boycott resolu- 
tion, which the President declared as the principal 
resolution of the morning. It ran: ‘ The. All- 
India Muslim League emphatically declares that 
the Statutory Commission and the procedure 
as announced are unacceptable to the people of 
India. It, therefore, resolves that Mussalmans 
throughout the country should have nothing to do 
with the Commission at any stage or in any form.’ 


. Sir Ali Imam said: “The Simon Commis- 
sion had become the subject of deep concern and 
anxiety to the people of India. The procedure 
was already known and did not require a detailed 
exposition. It.was clear, firstly, that Indians 
were excluded. from the Commission; and 
secondly, the procedure reduced them to a posi- 
tion of witnesses. The resolution dealt with both 
these points 


“*Sectarian interests were next trotted out 
for the exclusion. He did not believe that British 
statesmanship and intellectuality, which stood at 
such a high water mark, could not find representa- 
tive Indians. The British Cabinet could have 
taken the simple step of asking the provincial and 
central legislatures to elect finally from among 
their members or non-members, of whom five 
could be selected, two Hindus, one Muslim, one 
European non-official and one High Court Judge, 


422 UNHAPPY INDIA 


but all of these must first be elected by the popular 
legislature. The British Government would then 
have been absolved from any criticism about 
Indian representatives. 


““* As regards the accusation of preposses- 
sions there was no individual in the world without 
prepossessions. But if there were prepossessions, 
once the oath of office was taken by a man, be he 
British or Indian, he entered upon the. discharge 
of duties as an official who had got tobe dis- 
possessed of his prepossessions. Sir Ali ventured 
‘to think that there were many Indians who would 
act on that Commission with a sense of responsi- 
bility and not allow their prepossessions to come 
in just like any Britisher.. (Applause.) Has a 
single Indian Judge of the High Courts been found 
to show communal bias and not dispense impartial 
justice? Was membership of the Commission 
more honourable.and onerous than High Court 
judgeship? 


*** Are you going to submit to this indignity? 
(Voices, ‘ No, no’). I am a moderate of moderates; 
I was called a sundried bureaucrat; but my 
conscience finds it impossible to accept this 
Commission.’ (Applause.) ‘ The opposition’, said 
Sir Ali Imam, ‘ was not merely sentimental. He 
would not stand out on that ground alone. The 
real issue was: What was the relationship 
between India and England?’ ” 


Continuing, Sir Ali said: 
““* Our position is that of serfs who would 
gratefully pick up crumbs falling from the table of 


‘THE SONS OF THE PROPHET’ 423 


British statesmanship. It was another relation- 
ship to which we were lavishly treated during the 
War. We were called partners. We were told of 
a change in the angle of vision. We were told to 
hold together. Our blood had mixed in the battle- 
field of Flanders. . 


“* I frankly tell you I fully believed that there 
was a change in the angle of vision, but have been 
disillusioned. We are now told we are not fit to 
sit at the same table. Are you going to go down? 
No, no.). I, for one, an ex-sundried bureaucrat, 
refuse to take the insult lying down’.” (Loud 
applause.) 


The very plain fact is that whatever Muslim 
politicians may think of their communal claims, 
they cannot be friends ofthe foreign government 
in India. <A time was when they permitted them- 
selves to become the-ready tools of the foreign 
ruler. But the humiliation of that position has 
now dawned upon them. Disillusionment has 
come, as it was bound to. 


That. there is a change in the Hindu-Muslim 
relations, will be seen from the following quota- 
tions from the presidential address to the Indian 
National Congress which was this year presided 
over by a great Muslim, Dr. M. A. Ansari: 


** All schools of political thought in India are 
agreed that the goal of our activities is a free, a 
self-governing India, offering equal opportunities 
to all, and recognizing and guaranteeing the just 
and legitimate rights of all sections and classes at 
peace within herself and friendly with the rest of 


424 , UNHAPPY INDIA 


the world. «Indians do not claim anything more 
or less than. that they shall occupy the same posi- 
tion and enjoy the same rights in their country as 
free people do in their own. If this can he 
achieved within the Empire, they have no desire 
to break away from it, but if the Imperial connec- 
tion stands in the way of our reaching the goal we 
should not hesitate to sever that connection.. Our 
motto in the words of Mahatma Gandhi, should 
be, ‘ Within the Empire if possible, without if 
necessary.’ 


‘‘I do not minimize the difficulties in our 
path. They are many; but none so fomidable as 
the one arising out of the aggressiveness of 
Imperialism and the greed of High Finance, the 
two most fruitful sources of trouble and misery 
in the world to-day. Empires are carved and 
nations are deprived of their liberties to satisfy 
the imperialist ambition and to monopolize 
resources in raw materials to feed the factories in 
Europe and to secure exclusive markets for their 
output... 


“ Politicians and statesmen wax eloquent 
over the ‘ mission of civilization ’ and the ‘ white 
man’s burden,’ but none has exposed the hollow- 
ness of these professions better than Cecil Rhodes, 
the great pioneer of imperialism in South Africa, 
when he said ‘ Pure philanthropy is very well in 
its own way, but philanthropy plus five per cent. 
is a good deal better.’ Joseph Chamberlain, the 
High Priest of Imperialism, was more outspoken. 
‘The Empire,’ he said, ‘is commerce ’—and 
India, he was frank enough to add, was ‘ by far 


‘ THE SONS OF THE PROPHET’ 425 


the greatest and the most valuable of all the 
customers we have or ever shall have. The 
history of this philanthropic burglary on the part 
of Europe is written in blood and suffering from 
Congo to Canton. The steel frame theory of 
government, the arrogant claims to trusteeship of 
dumb millions and the newly invented illusion to 
cloak the pre-War Concert of Europe, known as 
the League of Nations, are but different manifesta- 
tions of the same spirit. So long as_ these 
dangerous doctrines are pursued, the sources of 
human misery shall endure. India holds in her 
hands the remedy for this universal misfortune, 
for she is the keystone of the arch of imperialism. 
Once India is free, the whole edifice will collapse. 
The best guarantee for the freedom of Asia and the 
peace of the world is a free self-governing India...” 


In what respect does)the attitude of the Hindu 
politician towards British rule differ from this, as 
expressed by a great Muslim leader, Dr. M. A. 
‘Ansari? 


CHAPTER XXX 
BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 


Political propaganda is the beginning and the 
end of Miss Mayo’s book. Every chapter _has 
something to say about the excellence of Great 
Britain’s work in India, and of the popularity of 
the British officer. Every chapter contains reflec- 
tions on the Indian, showering ridicule and 
contempt on his life and aspirations. Read the 
book from cover to cover and you will not find one 
word of praise for Indians as a class and not one 
of blame for the British. The book is unique in 
this respect. Britishers have written numerous 
books on India, but there.is not one which is so 
sweepingly anti-Indian,.and so sweepingly pro- 
British. Their books generally justify British 
policy in India, admitting its foibles and faults 
here and there. But for Miss Mayo British rule 
in India is perfect, and yet India is a hell of a 
country which is a menace to the world. The 
fault is wholly that of Indians and not in the least 
of the Government or the Britisher. She has out- 
heroded Herod. She has outdone the most 
shameless apologist of British rule. ‘A perfect, 
efficient, honest, humanitarian administration; 
and a thoroughly corrupt, immoral, dirty, 
inefficient, diseased, debased, and ignorance and 
poverty-ridden people—that is Miss Mayo’s 
picture of India. Never for a moment does it 
enter into her head that the two things are entirely 
incompatible. 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 427 


All foreign rule, whether of a democracy or of 
a bureaucracy, is immoral, unnatural and 
demoralizing. From the very nature of things, it 
cannot be anything else. The English may be a 
highly moral people but they are after all men, 
and even the best of men cannot rule over others 
for the good of the latter. That is why ‘people 
condemn the monarchical system of government. 
But if a monarchical government, though national 
in its character, is bad and does not always lead 
to happiness and prosperity of the-people, the rule 
of a foreign democracy or autocracy (as the author 
of The Lost Dominion calls the British system in 
India) can hardly be better.. The best of English- 
men have admitted that English rule in India is 
no exception to the general-rule. Professor J. 
Seeley, in his Expansion of England has expressed 
grave doubts about the beneficent nature of 
English rule in India. He very significantly 
remarks ‘subjection for a long time to a foreign 
yoke is one of the most potent causes of national 
deterioration.’ In the Montagu-Chelmsford Report 
of 1918; the joint authors described the then 
Government of India as a ‘ benevolent despotism,’ 
but according to Mr. Ramsay Macdonald, the 
Imperialist leader of the British Labour Party, in 
all attempts to govern a country by a ‘ benevolent. 
despotism,’ the governed are crushed down. 
‘They become subjects who obey, not citizens 
who act. Their literature, their art, their spiritual 
expression go.’* 


* Awakening of India, p. 213. 


428 UNHAPPY INDIA 


But instead of advancing our own arguments 
and opinions on this matter it would be better to 
put together the testimony of British writers and 
administrators who, in any case, knew India and 
and the Government ruling it better than the pre- 
sumptuous Miss Mayo does.* 


Mr. G. Lowes Dickinson, well-known English 
thinker and author, discusses the question of the 
competency of the British people to rule India in 
his Essay on the Civilization of India, China and 
Japan, which he wrote after his Eastern tour. 
Here is his conclusion in his own words: 


“ Of all the Western nations the English are 
the least capable of apprengnng the qualities of 
Indian civilization. Of all.the races they are the 
least assimilable. They carry to India all their 
own habits and ways of life; squatting, as it were, 
in armed camps; spending as in exile twenty or 
twenty-five years;-and returning, sending out new 
men to take their place, equally imbued with 
English ideals and habits, equally unassimilable. 
Facility of communication has only. emphasized 
and strengthened this attitude. The Englishman 
sends his children home to be educated ; commonly 
his wife will spend at least half her time at home; 
he himself returns every few years: his centre is 
not.India, but England. Between him and the 
Indian the gulf is impassable.” 


- _*¥For part of the material used in this chapter I am indebted 
to Rev. 3. T. Sunderland’s article entitled, ‘Are the British (or 
any other Foreigners) Fit to Rule India? which appeared in the 
Modern, Review (Calcutta) for December, 1927. 

t Essay on the Civilization of India, China and Japan 
(London: Dent & Sons), pp. 18-19. 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 429 


In his Studies of Indian Life and Sentiment, 
Sir Bampfylde Fuller, the Lieutenant-Governor of 
Eastern Bengal who resigned. when Lord Morley 
was the Secretary of State, says: a 


‘* Young British officials go out to India most 
imperfectly equpees for their responsibilities. 
They learn no law worth the name, little Indian 
history, no political economy, and gain a.smatter- 
ing of one Indian vernacular. In regard to other 
branches of the service, matters are still more un- 
satisfactory. Young men, who are) to be police . 
officers, are sent out with no training whatever, 
though for the proper discharge of their duties an 
intimate acquaintance with Indian life and ideas 
is essential. They land in India in absolute 
ignorance of the language. So also with forest 
officers; medical officers, engineers, and (still more 
surprising) educational officers... It is hardly too 
much to say that this is an insult to the intelligence 
of the country.” 


Mr. H:-M: Hyndman, the well-known British 
Socialist who always took a keen interest in 
Indian affairs, wrote : 


“The British: who come to India to rule it: 
have been brought up and educated in accordance 
with methods as remote from, and as irreconcil- 
able with, Asiatic ideas as it is possible for them to 
be. In their work and in their pleasure they keep 
as aloof as possible from the people they. govern. 
The head of the government, who himself is 
brought out fresh from Europe and_ entirely 
ignorant of India, does not remain in office more 


430 UNHAPPY INDIA 


than five years (thus leaving as soon as he begins 
to get a little knowledge). His subordinates 
return ‘home’ frequently for their holidays, and 
go back to England permanently, to live on a 
considerable pension paid by India after their 
term of service is completed. The longer this 
reign of well-meaning but unsympathetic carpet- 
baggers continues, the less intimate do their 
general relations with the Indian people become. 
The colour and race prejudices which were only 
slight at the beginning of English dominance, now 
become stronger and stronger every year. In 
India itself, men of ancient lineage, beside which 
the descent of the oldest European aristocracy is 
@ mushroom growth, are considered in the leading 
cities, as well as on. the railways, unfit to 
associate on equal terms. with the young white 
bureaucrats just arrived in the country.”* 


Mr. Hyndman quotes a prominent British 
official in India as saying : 


“It is.sadly true that the Englishmen in 
India live totally estranged from the people. This 
estrangement is partly unavoidable, being the 
result of national customs, language and caste, 
and. largely it is contempt, growing out of 
ignorance. This tendency to aloofness is increas- 
ing.” 


Speaking of the ignorance of India seen in 
many. government officials; Mr. Ramsay Macdonald 
Says : 


*“The Truth About India,’? New York, Series I, p. 10. 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 431 


“T have met men in the Indian Civil Service 
who had been there for a score of years. They 
knew few Indians, they had rarely discussed 
public affairs with them, they could not answer 
accurately some of the most elementary questions 
about Indian life, their opinions on current affairs 
were obviously the parrot repetitions of the club 
talk or newspaper statements. In fact, they were 
as separate from India as I am at home in London, 
and took their opinions of India in an even more 
second-hand way than I had taken mine before I 
ever set foot on Indian soil.”* 


Mr. Macdonald quotes Lord. Curzon as saying 
that in former days the assumption of everybody 
who went to India to take part in the government 
was that he must learn what languages were 
necessary to enable him to speak with the people: 


“But the arrogance of these modern days 
assumes that that is quite unnecessary. The 
number of officers now who speak the vernaculars 
with any facility is much smaller than fifty or 
even twenty-five years ago, and the number 
devoting themselves to anything like a serious 
study of the literature of the country is diminish- 
ing year by year.”t 


In The Bookman of February, 1926, an 
Englishman of letters (Mr. Aldous Huxley) gives 
the following description of the arrogance and 
egotism of his countrymen who are ruling India: 


* Awakening of India, p. 261. 
+The Awakening of India, p. 238. 


432 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“A young man goes out from a. London 
suburb to take up a clerkship in the Indian Civil 
Service. He finds himself a member of a small 
ruling. community; he has slavish servants to 
order about, dark-skinned subordinates to whom 
it is right and proper to be rude. Three hundred 
and twenty million Indians surround him; he 
feels incomparably superior to them all, from the 
coolie to the Maharaja, from the untouchable to 
the thoroughbred Brahman, from the illiterate 
peasant to the holders of half a dozen degrees from 
European universities. He may. be_ ill-bred, 
stupid, poorly educated; no matter. His skin is 
white. Superiority in India is a question of 
epidermis.” 


Mr. George Lansbury, late Editor of the 
London Daily Herald, said in a speech in Essex 
Hall, December 11,1920: 


~ “There are more than three hundred million 
people in India; there are forty million of us 
English in the» British Isles. We claim to know 
what is.good for those people better than they do 
themselves. Was there ever impudence more 
colossal? Because our skin happens to be white 
we claim more brains than those whose skin has 
been browned by the sun. Whenever I look at 
Indians I feel ashamed of myself. How can I 
know more about India than they do?” 


The Rt. Hon. Edwin 8. Montagu, Secretary of 
State for India, said in a speech in the House of 
Commons in July, 1917: 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 433. 


“The Government of India is too wooden, too- 
iron, too inelastic, too antediluvian, to be of any 
use for modern purposes. The Indian Govern-: 
ment is indefensible.” 


On the whole, the people of India regard the: 
government under which they’ are compelled_to- 
live to-day as little, if any, better than that which. 
was condemned so severely by Mr. Montagu in 
1917. 


Sir Louis. Mallet, when Under-Secretary of: 
State for India, was reported as saying : 


-“* Nothing but the fact that the present system. 
of government in India is almost secure from all 
independent and intelligent criticism has enabled. 
it so long to survive.” . 


Even the Viceroys, as a rule, know no Indian. 
' language when they come to India, and seldom. 
during their stay-do. they acquire anything more: 
than the merest smattering of any. Such contact. 
with the people as they have is mostly second- 
hand, through English subordinates or through 
Indians _who speak English. 


Said John Bright in a speech in Parliament: 


“The Governor-General of India (the Viceroy) 
goes out knowing little or nothing of India. I 
know exactly what he does when he is appointed. 
He shuts himself up to study the first volumes of 
Mr. Mill’s History of India,.and reads through 
this laborious work without nearly so much effect. 
in making him a good Governor-General as a man 
might ignorantly suppose. He goes to India, a 

32 


' 434 UNBAPPY INDIA 


land of twenty nations, speaking twenty 
languages. He knows nothing of these nations, 
and he has not a glimmer of the grammar and 
pronunciation or meaning of these languages... 
He knows nothing of the country or the people. 
He is surrounded by an official circle, he breathes 
an official air, and everything is dim and dark 
beyond it. You lay duties upon him which are 
utterly beyond the mental and bodily-strength of 
any man who ever existed, and which he therefore 
cannot perform... He has a power omnipotent to 
crush everything that is good. If-heso wishes, he 
can overbear and overrule whatever is proposed 
for the welfare of India, whilevas to doing any- 
thing that is good, I could show that with regard 
to the vast countries over which he rules, he is 
really almost powerless to effect anything that 
those countries require... I do not know at this 
moment, and never have known, a man 
competent to govern India; and if any man says 
he is competent, he sets himself up as of much 
higher value than those who are acquainted with 
him are likely to set him.” 


Thisfrom John Bright, a man as careful in 
his. speech and as just in his judgments as 
England ever knew. 


Dr. Sunderland illustrates Bright’s conclusion 

by quoting from a letter which Col. Josiah C. 

Wedgwood, M.P., wrote to me (and this was 

* printed in my Lahore weekly, The People), about 

Lord Irwin when he was appointed Viceroy of 
India. Says Col. Wedgwood : 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 435 


“He will be very uncomfortable in India—an 
obvious martyr to duty. It is a grave drawback to 
him that he knows nothing whatever of India, 
and is therefore all the more helpless in the hands 
of the bureaucratic experts... I do not remember 
him ever even being present at an Indian 
debate.”* 


Think of a man who can be thus described by 
a distinguished Member of Parliament. being 
appointed Viceroy to govern the vast Indian 
nation. 


Premier Asquith declared in 1909 that there 
were great numbers of Indians’ who were well- 
qualified to fill high official positions in India. 
He also called attention to the low and inadequate 
qualifications that were thought sufficient to fit 
Englishmen for those -positions; and he affiirmed 
that if high places were given to Indians half as 
unfit as were many Englishmen who occupy them, 
it would be regarded as a public scandal. t 


In_ his recent book, Modern India: its 
Problems and their Solution} (p. 161), Dr. V. H. 
Rutherford examines the character and_ results of 
British efficiency, and pronounces it ‘ one of the 
chief causes of India’s poverty. He declares that 
the British Government in India is efficient only 
on behalf of British interests, only in carrying on 
the government and managing the affairs of the 


*The People, December 25, 1925. 
t See India (London weekly), April 9, 1909, p. 209. Quoted 
t 


by Sunderland, op. cit. 
tLabour Publishing Co., 1996 . 


436. UNHAPPY INDIA 


country for the benefit of Great Britain. As 
regards promoting the welfare of India and the 
Indian people, he declares it to be strikingly and 
shamefully inefficient; in proof of which he cites 
the Government’s : 


** Neglect of education of the masses; neglect of 
sanitation and medical services in the. villages; 
neglect to keep order; neglect of housing of the 
poor; neglect to protect the peasants from the 
money-lenders; neglect to provide agricultural 
banks; comparative neglect to improve and 
develop agriculture; neglect to foster Indian 
industries; neglect to prevent British profiteers 
from capturing the tramways, electric lighting 
and other public services; and neglect to prevent 
the manipulation of Indian currency in the 
interests of London.” < 


In the light ofthese facts can we wonder at 
the words of Dr. Rutherford ?— 


“ British rule, as it is carried on in India, is. 
the lowest and most immoral system of govern- 
ment in the world—the exploitation of one nation 
by another.”* 


Mr. Edward Thompson in his book, The Other 
Side of the Medal,t says: 


“We (British) would repudiate the suggestion 
that our Indian Empire is a rule of masters over 
slaves. Yet we judge as slave-drivers would, and 


* Modern India, p. 77. 
ft Page 118. 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 437 


we assess the virtues of our (Indian) fellow-citizens 
as a hunter assesses the virtues of dogs.” 


Some years ago, at the time of the Congo 
atrocities, an Irish author wrote :* 


“The English people love liberty for them- 
selves. They hate all acts of injustice, except 
those which they themselves commit. They are 
such liberty-loving people that they interfere in 
the Congo and cry, ‘Shame!’ to the Belgians. 
But they forget that their heels are on the neck of 
India.” 

In his book, Secret History of the English 
Occupation of Egypt, Mr. Wilfrid Scawen Blunt 
gives some strong and important testimony 
regarding British rule. in India as seen close at 
hand and under the most favourable light. He 
was an intimate personal friend of Lord Lytton, 
who at that time. was the Viceroy of India. 
Mr. Blunt cameto India to make a study of the 
condition of things here. He belonged to the 
Conservative party in British politics, and 
expected. to find the British conduct of affairs in 
India. worthy of the warmest approval. More- 
over, he was taken charge of by the Viceroy and 
the highest officials, and was shown everything 
from their standpoint. What was the result? In 
spite of his prejudices in favoyr of the British— 
his own countrymen—and in spite of the pains 
taken to insure that he should see India as fully 
as possible from the English side, he was soon 
disillusioned. He found that British rule in India, 


*See Sunderland, op. cit. 


438 UNHAPPY INDIA 


instead of being a blessing, was working India’s 
ruin. Of the British -imperial system in general 
he writes :* 


* It is one of the evils of the English Imperial 
system that it cannot meddle anywhere among 
free peoples, even with quite innocent intentions, 
without in the end doing evil. There are too 
many selfish interests always at work not to turn 
the best beginnings into ill endings.” 


Of India he writes: 


**T am disappointed with India, which seems 
just as ill-governed as the rest of Asia, only with 
good intentions instead of bad ones or none at all. 
There is just the same heavy taxation, govern- 
ment by foreign officials,. and waste of money, 
that one sees in Turkey. The result is the same, 
and I don’t see much difference between making 
the starving Hindus pay for a cathedral at 
Calcutta. and taxing Bulgarians for a palace on 
the Bosphorus... In India the ‘ natives,’ as they 
call them, area race of slaves, frightened, un- 
happy, terribly thin. Though myself a good 
Conservative and a member of the London Carlton 
Club, Lown to being shocked at the bondage in 
which they are held, and my faith in British 
institutions and the blessings of English rule has 
received a severe blow. I have been studying the 
mysteries of Indian finance under the ‘ best 
masters,’ government secretaries, commissioners, 
and.the rest, and have come to the conclusion 


* Page 47. 


BRITISHERS ON BRITISH RULE 439 


that, if we go on developing the country at the 
present rate, the inhabitants will have sooner or 
later, to resort to cannibalism, for there will be 
nothing but each other left to eat.” 

Mr. C. F. Andrews in his recent book, India’s 
Claim for Independence, says: 


“We see in the Italy and Austria of last 
century a signal instance of the fallacy of 
imperialism—of foreign rule. The Austrian 
Empire, with its Italian appendage—with Italy 
held in subjection by force—was a monstrosity. 
It could produce only hate, ever deepening hate, 
between two nations which ought to have been 
friends. The British Empire to-day with its 
Indian appendage—with India held in subjection 
by force—is also a monstrosity. It can produce 
only bitterness, ever-increasing bitterness, and 
estrangement, between India and England, two 
peoples that ought to be friends.” 

Concludes Dr. Sunderland : 

“ There is not a myth on the earth more base- 
less or more-cruel than the claim put forth to the 
world. that England is ruling great, distant India 
well, or. that she can by any possibility rule it 
well, or without constant blunders and injustices 
of the most serious and tragic. nature.” 


But Miss Mayo knows India much better than 
Macaulay or Fuller did, or than Macdonald, or 
Rutherford or Dickinson or Sunderland do. 
Evidently she is the most competent and the most 
truthful observer of Indian conditions that the 
world has produced in the last two centuries! 
Vanity, thy name is Katherine Mayo! 


CHAPTER XXXI 
THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 


Miss Mayo devotes one. whole chapter to the 
reforms introduced .in the Indian system of 
‘Government by the India Government Parlia- 
mentary Statute of 1919. She is evidently of 
Opinion that it was a mistake to have introduced 
these so-called reforms, and that the Indian 
“system of government prior to 1919 was perfect 
and needed no changes. 


That seems to be her general thesis, but 
treading the chapter through, it is difficult to say 
what she exactly means. It is full of inconsistent 
and unintelligible statements. The only thing 
consistent and intelligible is her unqualified 
hatred of the Indian Nationalist and her desire to 
paint him as black, absurd, untruthful, ignorant 
and petulant as she can. In the opening sentence 
we are told, ‘the roots of the form of government 
now gradually working out in British India 
ramify into past centuries.and are visible through 
continuous growth ’—[italics are ours]. A little 
later in the same chapter ‘ the scheme in its shape 
of to-day,’ is criticized as lacking the ‘ stability of 
the slow-growing oak.’ It is condemned as ‘a 
hothouse exotic, weedy, a stranger in its soil, 
forced forward beyond its strength by the heat of 
a generous and hasty emotion.’* 


* Page 265. 


PANDIT MOTILAL NEHRU, M.L.A. 
The veteran leader of the Swaraj Party in the Legislative Assembly. 


87—440 


PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU & HIS SISTER. 


They are devoting their lives to the service of their country. 


88—44] 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 441 


Then on page 268 ‘without presuming to 
offer a criticism of the Reforms Act,’ she ventures 
the criticism that the ‘ chief obstacle lies deeper in 
the roots of things than any enmity can reach. 
The whole structure of the reforms is planned: to 
rest on the foundation, of a general electorate... 
And the difficulty is that, while the structure 
hangs waiting in mid-air, the foundation designed 
to sustain it yet lingers in the blue-print stage— 
does not in fact exist.’ 


The whole chapter is a jumble of rambling 
statements and ideas, which have no sequence, no 
relation to one another, no clarity of thought, 
except that there is to be found therein the 
unqualified praise of the British official and a 
merciless condemnation of the Hindu Nationalist. 
Stories and descriptions are interposed which are 
only the products of imagination, and from them 
‘are made deductions, sweeping: and absurd’ on 
their very face. Dialogues with anonymous 
persons cannot be verified. But most of those 
reported. by Miss Mayo expects a good deal of 
gullibility in the reader. Again and again she 
tells the reader that the Indian Nationalist does 
not mean what he says. One day, she tells us 
‘on page 267, she took the matter up with a notable 
‘anti-British member of the Legislative Assembly, 
‘and asked him if his fellow-legislators, who ‘ make 
terrible accusations against the good faith of 
Government’, really meant what they said. ‘How 
could they? he replied. ‘Not a man in the 
_ House believes anything of the sort.’ But if the 
members of the Assembly were really such. 


442 UNHAPPY INDIA 


hardened hypocrites they would surely not so 
frankly own up before a foreign tourist unknown 
or almost unknown to them. Again, on page 266 
is a statement which none hut those utterly 
devoid of a sense of proportion could make: 


“A village headman fnine to ten he is 
illiterate] knows and feels infinitely more than do 
these elected ‘ representatives’ as to the duties 
and responsibilities of government.” !! 


In the circumstances, it is best to-leave Miss 
Mayo alone and to give as briefly-as possible a 
connected story of the Reforms—their genesis, 
and their working. The space.at our disposal 
here forbids our tracing the history of British rule 
in India, the different evolutionary stages through 
which it has passed, eventually culminating in 
the Reforms of 1919... That story has been told by 
me in my books, Young India and The Political 
Future of India, both originally published in the 
United States of America, the former in 1916 and 
the latter in 1919.* 


Before the Great War started in 1914, parts 
of India-were honeycombed with revolutionary 
societies. India as a whole was very much 
agitated over her political status. During the 
War the pronouncements of the statesmen of the 
allied countries and of President Wilson as to the 
aims and objects of the War, raised hopes in the 
minds of the Indian Nationalists of justice being 
done to India in case the Allies came out 


*Both published by B. W. Huebsch, New York. Young 
India has recently been reprinted by the Servants of the People 
Society, Lahore. ; ; 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 443 


victorious. In 1916 when the War was at its 
worst fury, the Indian National Congress and the 
All-India Muslim League prepared a joint scheme 
of such political reforms as they wanted to be 
immediately introduced into their country. 
Along with this, they gave their unstinted support 
to the British Government in its war projects. © 
Mahatma Gandhi went about recruiting soldiers 
for the British Army and organizing ambulance 
corps, etc. India was literally ‘bled white’ in 
order to win the War. But for Indian support in 
men and money and arms and. supplies, Britain 
would have terribly suffered in prestige, and the 
Allies might have been unable to check the 
German advance to Paris. 


“With regard to her troops,” the admission 
will be found in the official publication, India’s 
Contribution to the Great War, “ the Indian Corps 
reached France in the nick of time and helped to 
stem the great German thrust towards Ypres and 
the Channel Ports during the autumn of 1914. 
These were the only trained reinforcements 
immediately available in any part of the British 
Empire and right worthily they played their part. 


“Tn Egypt and Palestine, in Mesopotamia, 
Persia, East and West Africa and in subsidiary 
theatres they shared with their British and 
‘Dominion comrades the attainment of final 
victory.”* - 


In April 1916 came the disaster in Lower 
Mesopotamia, the responsibility for which was 


-* Page 221. 


444 UNHAPPY INDIA 


thrown on the Government of India. After a 
careful and rapid enquiry the Commission 
appointed to investigate into it pronounced that 
the ‘Mespot muddle’ was due to the inefficiency 
of the Government of India. When a debate was 
raised in the House of Commons on this report, 
Mr. 8. E. Montagu, who was.then the Minister of 
Munitions, made a trenchant speech in the course 
of which he declared : 


‘* Fhe Government of India is too wooden, too 
iron, too inelastic, too antediluvian, to be of any 
use for the modern purposes we have in view. I do 
not believe that anybody could ever support the 
Government of India from. the point of view of 
modern requirements. Butit would do. Nothing 
serious had happened since the Indian‘ Mutiny, 
the public was not interested in Indian affairs, 
and it required a crisis to direct attention to the 
fact that the Indian Government is an indefen- 
sible system of government.” 


Further on he added: 


“{ tell this House that the statutory organiza- 
tion of the India Office produces an apotheosis of 
circumlocution and red tape beyond the dreams 
-of any ordinary citizen.” 


The red tape had been there all the time, but, 
as Disraeli pointed out long ago, it requires a 
disaster to attract the attention of England. 


: In the speech from which we have quoted 
above Mr. Montagu went on to say: 


THe Late DESHBANDHU C. R. DAS. 
The greatest political leader of Bengal who gave away all he possessed. 


89—444 


Mr. SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE. 


THE PRESIDENT OF THE BENGAL PROVINCIAL CONGRESS. 
He refused the Indian Civil Service to give his whole time to the 


service of his country. 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 445 


“But whatever be the object of your rule in — 
India, the universal demand of thoSe Indians | 
whom I have met and corresponded with is that 
you should state it. Having stated it, you should 
give some instalment to show that you are in real 
earnest, some beginning of the new plan which 
you intend to pursue: that gives you the oppor- 
' tunity of giving greater representative institutions. 
in some form or other to the people of India... 


“But I am positive of this, that-your great. 
claim to continue the illogical system of govern- 
ment by which we have governed India in the 
past is that it was efficient. It has been proved to 
be not sufficient. It has been proved to be not 
sufficiently elastic to express the will of the Indian 
people; to make them into a warring nation as 
they wahted to be. The history of this war shows 
that you can rely upon the loyalty of the Indian 
people to the British Empire—if you ever before 
doubted it. If you want to use that loyalty, you 
must take advantage of that love of country 
which is a religion in India, and you must give 
them that bigger opportunity of controlling their 
own destinies, not merely by Councils which 
cannot act, but by control...of the Executive itself. 
Then in your next war—if we ever have war—in 
your next crisis, through times of peace, you will 
have a contented India, an India equipped to 
help. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, it is not a ques- 
tion of expediency, it is not a question of. desir- 
ability. Unless you are prepared to remodel in 
the light of modern experience this century-old 
and cumbrous machine, then, I believe, I verily 


446 UNHAPPY INDIA 


believe, that you will lose your right to control the 
destinies of the Indian Empire.” 


In the meantime the war was taking a grave 
turn. Russia wason the verge of collapse. It 
_Wwas apparent that unless India’s man power and 
material power was tapped, the Allies might lose 
the war. Mr. Lloyd George decided what to do. 
He put Mr. Montagu in charge of the India office 
and authorized him to make the famous announce- 
ment of August 20, 1917, which ran thus: 


“The policy of His Majesty’s Government 
with which the Government.of India are in com- 
plete accord, is that of the increasing association 
of Indians in every branch of the administration 
and the gradual development of self-governing 
institutions with a view to the progressive ‘realiza- 
tion of responsible. government in India as an 
integral part of the British Empire. They have 
decided that substantial steps in this direction 
should be taken as soon as possible, and that it is 
of the highest importance, as a preliminary to 
considering. what these steps should be, that there 
should be a free and informal exchange of opinion 
between those in authority at home and in India. 
His Majesty’s Government have accordingly 
decided, with His Majesty’s approval that I 
should accept the Viceroy’s invitation to proceed 
to India to discuss these matters with the Viceroy 
and the Government of India, to consider with 
the Viceroy the views of local Governments, and 
to receive with him the suggestions of representa- 
tive bodies and others. 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 447 


“ T would add that progress in this policy can 
only be achieved by successive stages. The 
British Government and the Government of India, 
on whom the responsibility lies for the welfare 
and advancement of the Indian people, must. be 
judges of the time and measure of each advance, 
and they must be guided by the co-operation 
received from those upon whom new opportunities 
of service will thus be conferred, and by the 
extent to which it is found that confidence can be 
reposed in their sense of responsibility.” 

Whatever may have been inside the crooked 
mind of the British Premier, itis evident that the 
announcement was not the résult of ‘a hasty and 
generous emotion. It was a calculated step 
considered necessary and expedient in the 
interests of England and the Empire. If there 
was “ hasty generosity’ in the transaction any- 
where it was on the Indian side. The Indian 
leaders took the promises of British statesmen at 
face value, little knowing that the ‘ art of lying’ 
had not yet decayed, and little anticipating that 
one day. Anglophils of the Katherine Mayo type 
would jeer at their ‘ outburst of loyalty.’ Indians 
.did not take to the policy of the Irish Nationalists, 
whose motto had always been ‘ England’s 
difficulty is Ireland’s opportunity.” They stood by 
England in her hour of need. Britain in 
inaugurating the Reforms was only yielding an 
inch lest an ell be wrested, and her statesmen 
were giving a good appearance to things because 
they needed Indian co-operation so badly. ‘As 
far as Mr. Montagu was concerned, he was in all 
probability sincere. 


448 . 7 UNHAPPY INDIA 


The announcement of 1917 had its effect in 
India. The politically-minded Indians were not 
satisfied with its language and reservations and 
they. made no secret of their dissatisfaction, but 
they decided to accept it as a proof of England’s 
desire to do justice to their claims for.being 
masters of their own house, just as the Canadians 
were in Canada, the Australians in Australia, and 
the South-Africans in South Africa. 


To translate his promise into action, 
Mr. Montagu visited India, and, jointly with the 
then Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford,. wrote the report 
which is associated with their joint names. 
Commenting on this announcement and report, 
in my book, The Political. Future of India, in the 
early part of 1919 I observed :* 


' “It is obvious that the content of the: second 
sentence of paragraph two in the above announce- 
ment is in fundamental opposition to the right of 
every nation to. self-determination, a principle 
now admitted, to be of general application 
(including, according to the British Premier, even 
the black races inhabiting the colonies that were 
occupied. by Germany before the War, within its 
purview). The people of India are not on a level 
with. these races. Even if it be assumed that 
they are not yet in a position to exercise that right 
fully and properly, it is neither right nor just to 
assume that they shall never be in that position 
even hereafter. Besides the qualifications 
implied in that sentence are quite needless and 


* Page 9, et. seg. 


GOSWAMI GANESH DUTTA. 


General Secretary, All India Sanatan Dharma Maha Sabha, Benares 
and Sanatan Dharma Pratinidhi Sabha, Punjab, Lahore. 


91—448 


Basu RAJENDRA PROSAD, 


The political and educational leader of Behar who gave up 
his profession for the service of his country. 


92—449 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS - 449 


superfluous. As long as India remains ‘an 
integral part of-the British Empire’ she cannot 
draft a constitution which does not meet with the 
approval of the British Parliament and the British 
Sovereign. It is to be regretted that the British 
statesmen could not rise equal to the spirit of the 
times and make an announcement free from-that 
spirit of autocratic bluster and racial swagger 
which was entirely out of place at a time when 
they were making impassioned appeals to Indian 
manhood to share the burdens of Empire by 
contributing ungrudgingly in men and money for 
its defence. This attitude is somewhat incon- 
sistent with the statements in paragraph 179 of 
the Montagu-Chelmsford Report,- wherein, after 
referring to the natural evolution of.‘ the desire 
for self-determination,’® the distinguished authors 
of the Report concede that ‘the demand that now 
meets us from the educated classes of India is no 
more than the right and natural outcome of the 
work of a hundred years.’ 


“In spite of this uncalled for reservation in 
the announcement, it is perfectly true that ‘ the 
announcement marks the end of one epoch and 
the beginning of a new one.’ What, however, 
makes the announcement ‘ momentous,’ is not the 
language used, as even more high-sounding 
phrases have been used before by eminent British 
statesmen of the position of Warren Hastings, 
Macaulay, Munro, Metcalfe and others, but the 
fact that the statement has been made by the 
Secretary of State for India, as representing the 
Crown and the Cabinet, who, in their turn, are 

33 


450 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the constitutional representatives of the people of 
Great Britain and Ireland.” 


Further on, I emphasized : 


“ What differentiates this announcement from 
the statutory declarations of the Act of 1833 and 
the Royal Proclamation of 1858 is not the language 
used ‘but the step or steps taken to ascertain 
Indian opinion, to understand and interpret it in 
accordance with the spirit of the times and the 
frankness and fairness with which the whole 
problem is stated in the joint report of the two 
statesmen, who are the present official heads of 
the Government of India. Nor can it be denied 
that the announcement and the report have 
eoeives the cordial appreciation of the Indian 
eaders.” ; 


We have made these lengthy excerpts to give 
the reader an adequate idea as to how we, Indian 
Nationalists, received the announcement az the 
time it was made. 


Even\the Anglo-Indian official world put a 
liberal. interpretation on the action of the Secre- 
tary of State. One of their chief and trusted 
spokesmen, Sir Harcourt Butler, the then Lieu- 
tenant-Governor. of the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh, emphasized the need for a new order 
of things. ‘Nothing will ever be the same,’ 
philosophized Sir Harcourt, and went on to orate: 


“This much is certain, that we shall have to 
shake off all our old ideals and begin afresh...we 
have crossed the watershed and are looking down 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 451 


on new plains. The old oracles are dumb. The 
old shibboleths are no more heard. Ideals, 
constitutions, rooted ideas are being shovelled 
away without argument or comment or 
memorial...” 


Like Mr. Montagu he realized the too wooden, 
too inelastic, too antediluvian character of the old 
machine. In his own words: 


: “Qur administrative machine belongs to 
another age. It is top-heavy. Its.movements are 
cumbrous, slow, deliberate. It. rejoices in delay. 
It grew up when time was not the object, when no 
one wanted change, when financial economy was 
the ruling passion.of Governments, imperial and 
provincial. Now there are the stirrings of young 
national life, and economic springtime, a calling 
for despatch, quick response, bold experiment.” 


Speaking of.red tape, Sir Harcourt recalled 
the remarks of an ecclesiast who had told him 
‘that Rome had, by centuries of experience, 
reduced delay to a science; he used to think her 
mistress of postponement and procrastination, but 
the Government of India beat Rome every time.’ 


On this utterance I made the following com- 
ment,* which was typical of the mood then 
prevailing : 


“ Coming, as it does, from a member of the 
Anglo-Indian bureaucracy, this. statement means 
much more to the Indian people than even the 


*Ibid., pp. 13-14. 


452 UNHAPPY INDIA 


words of the British Premier. If this statement is 
not a mere camouflage, but represents a genuine 
change of heart on the part of the British bureau- 
cracy in India, then it is all the more inexplicable 
_ to us why the new scheme of the Secretary of State 
for India and the Viceroy should breathe so much 
distrust of the educated classes of India... Any- 
way, we have nothing but praise for the spirit of 
frankness and fairness which generally charac- 
terizes the report. However we might disagree 
with the conclusions arrived at, it-is but right to 
acknowledge that the analysis of the) problem and 
its constituting elements is quite masterly, and the 
attempt to find a solution which will meet the 
needs of the situation, as understood by them, 
absolutely sincere and genuine. This fact makes 
it all the more necessary that Indian Nationalists 
of all classes and all-shades of opinion should give 
their best thought.to the consideration of the 
problem in a spirit.of construction and co-opera- 
tion as distinguished from mere fault-finding.” 


All this happened in the early part of 1919, 
before the. Rowlatt Bills had become law, and 
before Mr. Gandhi had launched his passive 
resistance movement. Even then there was a 
section of the bureaucracy gnashing its teeth and 
swearing at Montagu, and fully determined to 
undo even the little the Secretarv of State was 
doing. This class was represented by Sir Michael 
O’Dwyer and General Dyer. The former manu- 
factured a rebellion, and the latter proceeded to 
place the Indians where, according to his idea. 
they belonged. The massacre of Amritsar and 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 453 


the Martial Law atrocities were the outcome of 
that mentality. 


But even then the Congress held at Amritsar 
(December, 1919), although holding that the 
Reforms were inadequate, unsatisfactory and dis. 
appointing, resolved to work them for what they 
were worth. They had, however, counted: with- 
out their hosts. In a moment of ‘hasty and 
generous emotion’ they had believed. that the 
announcement of August, 1917, was honest and 
sincere, and that the British meant to stand by 
their word. They deliberately chose to ignore the 
lessons of British dealings with the Colonies and 
Ireland, and in their attitude towards Great 
Britain they credulously gave the first place to 
hope and trust. They forgot that gratitude was 
a word’unknown in the dictionary of imperialism, 
and that vested interests were yet strong enough 
to defeat them at every step. The hour of need 
was now over. New codes for new times. The 
War had been won, the Empire was safe, so the 
British were once more free to manipulate things 
in sucha way as to nullify even the meagre 
reform that Montagu had been permitted to 
introduce. They wanted to continue the policy of 
exploitation. The British Government in India 
was more or less an impersonal machine, wooden 
as Montagu said, and soulless, exacting and cruel, 
and it was only waiting for an opportunity to re- 
new the old policy for which Sir George Chesney 
pleaded in his book, India under Experiment,* 
The closing words of that book reveal the real 


* Published by John Murray, London, 1919. 


454 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Anglo-Indian mind, and are a crushing reply to 
that part of Miss Mayo’s book wherein she tries to 
prove that Britain derives no material benefits 
from her rule in India. 


To Sir George ‘there is a certain sense of 
futility’ in all talk of- constitutional reform, all 
‘ suggestions of improvement or palliatives’; as he 
calls it, for the ‘main question’, in his words, 
is, ‘ Whose is to be the rule? Sir George puts 
Britain’s foreign policy ever since the days of 
Napoleon in the witness-box and exclaims : 


“ A singular situation it’ would be if the 
British power in India, which has outridden so 
many emergencies, which before it was securely 
established found itself confronted with the ambi- 
tions of Bonaparte, which within present memories 
was cheerfully bracing itself to meet the 
apparently inevitable onset of the Muscovite—if 
this power should be discovered to have been 
surrendered. away ina fit of national absent- 
mindedness.” 


As-alast word Sir George entreats the British 
public. ‘to dismiss for once confused politico- 
moral ideas as to natural rights, self determina- 
tion, and what not, and to look at the matter from 
the point of view of its own interests.’ This does 
not sound as philanthropic as Miss Mayo would 
make out British rule to be. The question of 
philanthropic motives is discussed by Sir George 
in such unambiguous and outspoken a manner 
that no apology is needed for the lengthy quotation 
from his book that follows: : 


: ‘ 
THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 455 


* India cannot serve two masters, and if 
Britain stands aside she will have to cleave to the 
men on the spot. She will not like it, but the . 
election will not be hers, it will have been forced 
upon her by the people of England, who therefore 
should surely weigh well the consequences of the 
innocent-looking step that they are invited. to 
take. That they are indifferent to the subject can 
scarcely be believed, seeing that the preservation 
of India against the Russian menace was the 
pivoting point of our foreign policy from the 
middle of the nineteenth century to its close, 
seeing even at the present moment what costly 
and distracting efforts are imposed upon Britain’s 
sorely taxed energies by the necessity of preserv- 
ing her dominion in Asia. What other meaning 
_has the campaign in Mesopotamia except that of a 
precaution to keep the enemy’s influence at a safe 
distance from India? It would seem, therefore, 
that after all we are very much of the same 
conviction.as those before us who judged that NO 
SACRIFICE OR EXERTION OR PERSONAL 
HAZARD WAS TOO GREAT IF THEY HELPED 
THEIR COUNTRY TO WIN THIS GREAT 
PRIZE AND--TO HOLD IT AGAINST THE 
ENVY OF THE WORLD. But if in these last 
days the democratic mind has become insensible to 
the appeal of national prestige, THE MERELY 
MATERIAL CONSEQUENCES THAT WOULD 
FOLLOW TO EVERY HOUSEHOLD IN THE 
COUNTRY FROM ALLOWING INDIA TO SLIP 
OUT OF OUR KEEPING SHOULD BE WELL 
APPRECIATED. They cannot, of course, be 


456 UNHAPPY INDIA 


tabled out in: advance, but their general effect 
could not fail to be immense. 


“ CONSIDERING THE ARRAY OF VEST- 
ED INTERESTS INVOLVED, THE CAPITAL 
SUNK, THE NUMBERS DEPENDENT ON.ITS 
RETURNS, THE IMPORTANCE OF INDIAN 
PRODUCTS TO BRITISH INDUSTRY, \ THE 
NUMBERS OF BRITISH EMPLOYED IN THE 
COUNTRY EITHER OFFICIALLY OR COM- 
MERCIALLY, THE ARMY OF PERSONS ON 
THIS SIDE—MERCHANTS, SHIPPERS, DIS- 
TRIBUTORS, PRODUCERS, AND CONSUM- 
ERS—WHOSE PROSPERITY AND CONVENI- 
ENCE ARE MORE OR LESS.BOUND UP WITH 
THE INDIAN CONNECTION, IS IT NOT 
PLAIN THAT THE-EFFECT UPON THEM, 
AND BY CONSEQUENCE UPON THE WHOLE 
PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY, OF ANY RUP- 
TURE OF THE.TIE WOULD AMOUNT TO A 
SOCIAL DISASTER OF THE FIRST MAGNI- 
TUDE? THE INSTALMENT OF A HINDU 
GOVERNMENT IN INDIA, WHETHER IT LED 
UP TO INTERNAL CHAOS OR TO INTERNAL 
PASSIVITY WITH EXCLUSIVENESS AGAINST 
THE OUTER WORLD, WOULD IN FACT BE 
THE BEGINNING OF A REVOLUTION IN THE 
MATERIAL CONDITION OF THE ENGLISH 
PEOPLE.” [Capitals are ours. | 


Some time ago, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, 
Home Minister in the Baldwin Government, dis- 
missed ‘philanthrophic’ motives in quite as 
outspoken a language as this. Here is the 
relevant passage from his speech : 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 457 


“ We did not conquer India for the benefit of 
the Indians. I know. it is said in missionary 


meetings that we conquered India to raise the: 


level of the Indians. Thatis cant. We conquered 
India as the outlet for the goods of Great Britain. 
We conquered India by the sword and bythe 
sword we should hold it... I AM NOT SUCH.A 


HYPOCRITE AS TO SAY WE HOLD INDIA’ 


FOR THE INDIANS. WE HOLD IT.AS THE 


FINEST OUTLET FOR BRITISH GOODS in > 


general, and for the Lancashire cotton goods in 
particular.” 


We maintain, and most of the Nationalists 
are of the same opinion, that besides the inherent 
defects, in the Reforms, they have not been worked 
in the spirit in which they were inaugurated. 


From the very outset,-the British Government in | 


England and in India have been trying to wriggle 
out of the dilemma in which they were placed by 
the Reforms. Even the letter of the law has not 
been always observed, The whole history of the 
working of the Reformed Governments, whether 
in the provinces or in the national sphere, betrays 
an anxiety to prove (a) that it was a mistake to 
have given the Reforms, (0) that the Reforms have 
failed, (c) that there was not only no case for an 
advance. but that there were reasons for taking 
back what had been conceded. In any event, it 
is clear that the high hopes raised by the Reforms 
in the national mind, and even in the mind of 
genuine internationalists interested in the peace 
and progress of the world, have not been realized. 


458 UNHAPPY INDIA 


. When the Reforms were being shaped I was 
in the United States. The impression left upon 
me by the Montagu-Chelmsford Report was 
reflected in the last book I published in the United 
States under the title, The Political Future of 
India. In that treatise I discussed the bearing of 
the proposed reforms on the polity of India in all 
_its aspects. I have also stated how in spite of the 
Punjab wrongs the Indian National Congress held 
at Amritsar reconciled itself to the Reforms. The 
Amritsar resolution was a compromise between 
those who wanted to boycott the Reforms because 
they were ‘ unsatisfactory, inadequate and dis- 
appointing’, and those who wanted to work them 
notwithstanding their defects. The resolution was 
a personal triumph of. Mahatma Gandhi. The 
late Lokamanya Tilak and the late Mr. C. R. Das 
had favoured the idea of rejecting the Reforms 
and fought for their view rather strenuously. 


1920 changed the situation almost completely. 
The Hunter Committee’s report on the Punjab 
atrocities, and the parliamentary debate and the 
action of-the Government thereon gave us the first 
indication of the change that had already begun 
in ‘the mentality of the British rulers of India. 
In September 1920 the Congress at its special 
session held in Calcutta passed by a large majority 
the famous Non-co-operation resolution by which 
it resolved to boycott the Councils and _ the 
Reforms. This again was a personal triumph for 
Mahatma Gandhi. Lokamanya Tilak was dead, 
. but before he breathed his last he was said to have 
given an indication of his mind to the effect that 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 459 


he was opposed to the boycott of the Councils. 
Mr. C. R. Das, Babu Bepin Chandra Pal, and all 
those who had till then been prominent in the 
political world of India were opposed to it. 
Pandit Motilal Nehru was with the Mahatma. 
The resolution reflected the mass mind rather 
than the ‘ balanced’ political mind. 


The last elections under the Reforms took 
place in November 1920. No Congressman sought 
election. The Liberals, till then “known as 
Moderates, went into the Assembly and the 
Councils in large numbers. They were till then 
the favourites of British statesmen. Lord Morley 
had left a legacy in their favour. The Govern- 
ment still believed in them, and many of their 
leaders were appointed as Ministers and Executive 
Councillors in the. various provincial Govern- 
ments. One of them-was even appointed as the 
Law Member of the Government of India. Thus 
the Reforms were inaugurated in 1921 in an 
atmosphere of hope on the part of the Moderate 
politicians of India, and of suspicion on the part 
of the-—Congress Nationalists. Non-co-operation 
was atits height in 1921. Towards the end of 
1921.it culminated in the imprisonment of about 
40,000 Nationalists, including most of the topmost 
leaders of Northern India. Mahatma Gandhi 
himself was put out of the way in March 1922. 
The Liberal leaders, Ministers and Executive 
Councillors, were still with the Government, and 
generally speaking supported the latter in all the 
measures which they adopted to repress and 
suppress the Non-co-operation movement. This 


460 : UNHAPPY INDIA 


is not the place to discuss the why and wherefore 
of the Non-co-operation movement and what it 
did. But there is no denying the fact that it 
created an unprecedented political awakening in 
the country, accompanied by an unprecedented 
bitterness against, and mis-trust of, the British. 
If the Liberals had joined the Non- co-operation 
movement the Government would surely have 
collapsed and capitulated. But throughout the 
struggle they backed the Government. 


The first Reformed Administration lasted for 
three years, 1920-23, and* whatever success it 
achieved, was mainly due to the wholehearted co- 
operation of the Liberals. In the general elections 
of 1923, Liberals were defeated by Congressmen. 
In their own words it was’ more a rout than a 
defeat. But curiously enough, it was just then 
that the Government also began to desert them 
and to replace them with men who had till this 
period little or no. part in the political life of the 
country and who were known for their reactionary 
views. 


This started the downward march of the 
Reforms... The Non-co-operation movement had 
by .this time weakened. The Hindu-Muslim 
tension, manufactured and nurtured by the 
political moves of the Government and _ the 
deliberate efforts of officials and interested people, 
was increasing. The bureaucracy was recovering 
its lost or dwindled influence. It was just at this 
juncture that the authorities contracted an unholv 
liaison with the reactionary forces, and began to 
utilize them as ready and willing tools for a “policy 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS 461 


of backsliding. After that the Reforms became 
synonymous with reaction, and decisions were 
taken that not only reduced the Reforms to a farce 
but gave a clear indication of the future intentions 
of British statesmen with regard to the demand of 
Indians for Home Rule. Considerations of space 
forbid our giving a detailed account of these re- 
actionary measures. We can only refer to them 
by merely stating them in general terms. 


The first in importance and time may be 
mentioned the decision of the Government on the 
report of the Lee Commission on Public Services. 
This decision has involved the’ country in an 
additional annual expenditure of one crore of 
rupees. But that is not the worst of it. It has 
strengthened the ‘ steel frame’ of British rule in 
India. + Mr. Lloyd George was still at the head of 
the government in Great Britain when this 
happened and his. speech was the most pronounced 
evidence of what was in the mind of the Brifish 
people. He has a reputation for brazen-faced 
opportunism—which is sometimes only a polite 
word for hypocrisy—and for pharisaism of the 
worst.kind. He has no use for a conscience nor 
does he care for the sanctity of promises and 
pledges. His own colleagues consider him to be 
unreliable. 


But in this matter what he expressed was 
really the imperial mind of Great Britain. The 
action taken by the Government-on the Lee 
Commission Report has tightened the chains. 
around India for decades to come, and no Indian 
can ignore it. There can be no Home Rule in 


462 UNHAPPY INDIA 


India, no advance towards real self-government 
as long as the superior services are manned by the 
British. On this point even Al. Carthill, the 
anti-Indian author of The Lost Dominion, holds 
the same view as Indians do. 


Then,. again, the finance and the Military 
departments are the key-stones of an administra- 
tion. The Reformed Government has miade itself 
notorious for its maladministration of. Indian 
finance and a deliberate misuse of its. statutory 
powers. The Governor-General -has_ restored 
taxation proposals turned down by the Legislative 
Assembly. He. has sanctioned expenditure dis- 
allowed' by the popular~.and representative 
chamber. Moreover, the Government has mani- 
pulated exchange, and_by clever handling of the 
currency fleeced the Indian taxpayer of billions of 
pounds. It has -treated the decision of the 
Assembly and the intelligent non-official opinion 
of the country with supreme contempt. 


India’s.carrying trade is done. mostly in 
‘British bottoms. The policy of the British Govern- 
ment towards efforts at encouraging Indian 
navigating companies has always been one of 
‘opposition. The British vessels do not care for 
the interests of the Indian manufacturer, and yet 
India is not allowed to organize a mercantile 
marine of her own. The recommendations of the 
Indian Mercantile Marine Committee of 1924 have 
been quietly shelved. 


The policy underlying this attitude is still in 
the ascendant, The Government holds tight the 


THE STORY OF THE REFORMS . 463 


reins of railway administration, and manages 
tariffs in such a way as to help British trade and 
retard the progress of industrial development in 
India. The railway administration is completely 
in the hands of Europeans, and the refusal to 
appoint even one Indian member to the Railway 
Board, on the monstrous plea that throughout. the 
length and breadth of this country there is not one 
Indian who is qualified for the job, has further 
convinced Indians that the Government is not 
sincere in its profession of sympathy for Home 
Rule for India. 


The new feature of the tariff policy is that 
preference for British and. Empire goods is being 
introduced by back-parlour. methods. Although 
the British officials were so nice and hospitable to 
the author of Mother India, the greatest slanderer 
of this country, they are hypoeritically telling us 
that the American films sometimes depict Indian 
life in an offensive way and that therefore India 
should accord preference to British films. This is 
being preached merely because the British film 
manufacturer is on his merits no match for his 
American competitor. 


Turning from the Finance deparment to the 
Military we find that while on the one hand we are 
charged with inability to defend India and told 
that thatis a ground for the continuance of the 
British in India, on the other hand, we are, 
deliberately and persistently denied the oppor- 
tunities of qualifying for that task. The Military 
department is sacrosanct. Its expenditure is non- 
votable and its higher ranks are guarded against 


464 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Indians. From a population of 315 millions only 
nine cadets are taken avery year for the King’s 
Commission. 


In 1925, -on the persistent demand of. the 
Assembly, the Government appointed a committee 
of officials and non-officials, of Military experts 
and representative Indians, to go into the question 
of Indianizing the Army. The committee was 
presided over by one of their own officers. This 
committee made a unanimous report on which 
orders were delayed for over ayear, and even- 
tually the chief recommendations of the committee 
have been turned down by.Whitehall. Indians 
are denied all opportunities in the artillery and 
' air forces. 


The culminating point of the policy of re- 
action is the appointment of an exclusively ‘British 
Statutory Commission to enquire into the work- 
ing of the Reforms and to recommend a constitu- 
tion for India. Is it any wonder then that Indians 
have lost all trust in the good faith of the British, 
and that.they often express their lack of faith in 
bitter “words at the meetings of the central 
legislature ? 


The Hon. Mr, Y. J, Patel m. L. A. 


First elected President of the Indian Legislative Assembly. He was 
unanimously re-elected to this high office in 1927 when every section of the 
House expressed confidence in Mr. Patel in the task of upholding dignity 
and integrity of the Chair. Mr. Patel was formerly Chairman of the Bombay 
Municipal Corporation and a prominent Congressman. 


Sirdar Ballabhai Patel 


A leader of the orthodox non-co-operation movement, Sirdar 
Patel has devoted his energies to the cause of national regeneration 
through silent village reconstruction. He successfully lead the 
Bardoli peasants in their Satyagraha campaign against enhancement 
of revenue attempted by the Bombay Government. 


CHAPTER XXXII 


“ CUMBROUS, COMPLEX, CONFUSED SYSTEM ’ 


We have seen that the Reforms associated 
with the names of Montagu and Chelmsford did 
not spring from a ‘hasty and generous emotion’. 
Even so, the reader will like to know how they 
have worked. Indians are sometimes accused of 
being perverse obstructionists who would not co- 
operate in inaugurating a democratic_regime by 
working the ‘ democratic’ reform measure. Such 
judgment is very misleading.. The plain fact is 
that the Reforms Act is not a democratic measure 
—it enfranchises barely 2.per cent. of the popula- 
tion; and it: does not create a workable 
constitutional machinery. The little that there 
was of the progressive spirit in it has. been 
whittled down bythe illiberal Anglo-Indian 
officialdom and by the India Office. Even those 
who were enthusiastic over the Reforms have 
found them to be unworkable... That was the 
burden ofthe evidence given by many of the 
Indian ministers and ex-ministers before. the 
Reforms Enquiry Committee of 1924 presided over 
-by Sir Alexander Muddiman: Even British ad- 
ministrators had been driven to that conclusion 
from their experience of it. Sir Henry Wheeler, 
Governor of Bihar and Orissa, expressed himself 
thus about the Montagu-Chelmsford dyarchical 
system : “Whatever defects exist are inherent in 
the system itself... It is workable now, though 


34 


466 UNHAPPY INDIA 


creakily.” The Governor's European executive 
councillor, Sir Hugh McPherson, concurred in 
this view. . 

Sir William Marris, Governor of Agra and 
Oudh, who was associated with the reforms from 
their very inception as the Reforms Secretary, 
described dyarchy as ‘obviously a cumbrous, 
complex, confused system.’ 


Eminent Indians associated with working the 
dyarchic machine have expressed» themselves in 
no unambiguous terms about it.. Sir Muhammad 
Fakhruddin, senior minister in Bihar and Orissa, 
said about a year ago in the Patna Council : 


“ The classification of transferred subjects is 
seriously defective. There is no reason why you 
should give the minister Agriculture ». without 
Irrigation. Why should you give him the ad- 
ministration of the.spending department without 
any control over finance? Without a purse others. 
consider me simply a clerk to prepare a certain 
scheme, and after the scheme is ready the Finance 
Department is entitled to knock it down on the 
ground-of want of funds.” 


Sir K. V. Reddi, when he was yet a minister 
in Madras, the province in which it used to be 
said the reforms’ were being worked in the best 
spirit, said in 1923: 


“TIT am Minister of Development minus 
Forests, and you all know that development 
depends a good deal on forests. I am Minister of 
Industries without Factories, which are a reserved 


* CUMBROUS, COMPLEX, CONFUSED SYSTEM’ 467 


subject, and industries without factories are un- 
imaginable. I am Minister of Agriculture minus 
Irrigation. You can understand what that means. 
How agriculture can be carried on extensively © 
without irrigation, in the hands of those who are 
responsible for it, is hard to realize. I am_also 
Minister of Industries without Electricity, which 
is also a reserved subject. The subjects of Labour 
and Boilers are also reserved.” 


The minister rightly concluded by saying: 
“* But these, after-all, are some only of the defects 
of the Reform scheme.” 


Sir K. V. Reddi’s sentences quoted above 
furnish a good commentary on the story of the 
‘ transferred’ departments. The ‘ responsible’ 
ministers are not quite responsible. Besides, as 
Mr. Sachchidananda Sinha, who himself belonged 
to the ‘ reserved’half of the Bihar and Orissa 
Government, points out that ‘the newest executive 
councillor is\ senior to the oldest minister.* In 
the ‘ executive ’ or reserved half it is the European 
member.that dominates. In one case we are told, 
though. an Indian executive councillor was 
labelled the ‘Home Member,’ the main work of 
the Appointment Department was entrusted by 
the Governor not to him but to his Civilian 
colleague. When the point was raised in the 
legislature, the answer was given that the transac- 


* See his paper on ‘Dyarchy in Indian Provinces in Theory 
and Practice’ read last year before the East India Association, 
‘London. Some of the material used in this chapter is taken 
from that paper. 


468 UNHAPPY INDIA 


tion of official business was a domestic concern of 
the Government! 


The transferred departments are very often 
controlled not by the Indian ministers, but by 
their permanent Secretaries who are generally 
European. 1.C.S. men. Says Sir Ali Imam who 
has held the highest judicial and executive offices 
under the Crown : 


“The transferred departments are in the 
hands of ministers who are supposed to be 
responsible to the House. But, while all the 
. appearance of democracy is there, it is a shell 
without the kernel. The minister has to\run his 
departments, but he must have a permanent 
secretary over whom he has no control. If the 
minister wants anything to be done, the secretary 
can go beyond him to the Governor, and the latter 
can ‘overrule the minister. The result is that 
although the minister is said to be responsible to 
the House, he has to carry out the orders of the 
Governor. The danger lies in this that a form 
has been given to the constitution but without the 
substance.” a 


Mr. E. Villiers, who twice represented Bengal 
Europeans in the legislature, in his manifesto 
declining to seek re-election in the last general 
election, said : 

**T hold them [the reforms] to be wrong in 
practice, since, if we are going to carry out the 
policy of teaching India how to rule herself with 
the maximum of efficiency and at the minimum 
of cost, if we are to teach her a sense of ‘ political 


Mrs. ANNIE Besant 
The world famous head of the Theosophical Society. 


Mrs. Sarosrunt Naru 


A Poetess of rare sweetness of verse, a speaker 
who can move thousands to tears ; an_ex-president 
‘of the Indian National Congress, Mrs. Sarojini 
Naidu has gone to America to lecture before 
various Societies and the American public. 


* CUMBROUS, COMPLEX, CONFUSED SYSTEM’ 469 


responsibility,’ we are going the wrong way to do 
it. Instead of teaching her responsibility we are 
teaching her irresponsibility. In these circum- 
stances, then, feeling as I do strongly on the 
question, I do not think that I can any longer 
serve your interests or the interests of the provinces 
to advantage.” 


Prominent British statesmen have expressed 
their misgivings about the workability of the 
dyarchical system. Lord Curzon, in the Lords’ 
Debate on the reforms, accepted the decision of the 
House, but did not fail to remark that personally 
he abominated the system. Lord Ronaldshay, 
former Governor of Bengal, has recorded about this 
system that it is a‘ complicated constitutional 
machine.’ Even Lord Birkenhead has said that he 
was ‘ very distrustful-of the dyarchial, principle.’ 
He pronounced it to be ‘ pedantic and hide-bound.’ 


Why blame Indians when they endorse this 
verdict about the system they are asked to work? 


CHAPTER XXXIII 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 


Towards the conclusion of her book Miss Mayo 
declares that, being the home and the source. of 
epidemics, India is a world-menace. We. agree 
that India is a world-menace. Only we/look at it 
in a different way. We have proved.from facts 
and figures given in this book that the responsibi- 
lity for such a state of things rests with the 
British, who hold India in a state of political 
subjection and who use their, political dominance 
for the economic exploitation of India. Unless, 
therefore, India’s political helplessness is removed 
and she is given thé freedom which is enjoyed by 
other self-governing nations, India must continue 
to be a danger to the world from both the health 
and the peace points of view. India is the pivot 
of the British Empire; -and India and China 
between them hold the key of world peace. From 
time immemorial India has been the goal of 
empire-builders’ ambitions. Whoever holds India 
holds the-key to world dominance and prosperity, 
particularly in modern times. Before Great 
Britain. acquired India she was rather a poor 
country without very notable resources and with- 
out any empire. Indian wealth enabled her to 
bring about the industrial revolution and to amass 
wealth. Indian gold and Indian troops enabled 
her to conquer the world. Almost every bit of 
territory she holds in Asia and Africa was 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 471 


acquired after she had secured the mastery of 
India. India has been, and is, the base of the 
empire in the orient. This is a fact which no 
amount of verbal jugglery can change. Most of 
Britain’s wars with the other Powers of Europe or 
Asia were directly or indirectly connected with 
her rule in India. Ever since she established her 
rule in India she has been quarelling with Russia. 
For over a century the Russia of the Czars was on 
the brains of British diplomats and journalists, 
just as Soviet Russia is to-day. This opinion is 
shared by many competent observers—among 
them Mr. Herbert Adams Gibbons, an American 
writer of repute. His book, The New Map of 
Asia* opens with this thesis. According to 
Mr. Gibbons, all through the nineteenth century— 
as in the twentieth—Britain’s foreign policy was 
governed by considerations of the safety of the 
British Empire in India. The «lifferent phases of 
British foreign policy fully bear out this conten- 
tion. Mr. Gibbons has admirably summed up and 
explained.these phases in the opening chapter of 
his book. We prefer to let the story be narrated 
by this-American author: 


‘‘None can understand the foreign policy of 
Great Britain, which has inspired military and 
diplomatic activities from the Napoleonic wars to 
the present day, who does not interpret wars, 
diplomatic conflicts, treaties and alliances, terri- 
torial annexations, extensions of protectorates, 
with the fact of India constantly in mind. 


* Century Co., New York, 1919: 


472 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“It was for India that the British fought 
Napoleon in the Mediterranean, Egypt, and Syria. 
At the Congress of Vienna, Great Britain, asked 
for nothing in Europe. Her reward was the 
confirmation of her conquest of Malta, the Cape of 
Good Hope, Mauritius, the Seychelles, and 
Ceylon. After 1815, Great Britain became 
champion of the integrity of the Ottoman Empire 
in order to bar to any other Power the land route 
to India. When Muhammad Ali, starting from 
Egypt, sent his armies to overthrow the Ottoman 
Empire, he found a British fleet’ and army in 
Syria, just as Napoleon had found them. Against 
the natural instinct of the British people, the 
Foreign Office consistently. opposed the affran- 
chisement of the Balkan States, and condoned the 
massacres of Christians by Moslems. The Crimean 
War was fought to. protect Turkey, and if the 
treaty of San Stefano had not been renounced, 
Lord: Beaconsfield would have started another war 
with Russia in 1877. The British Government 
opposed the piercing of the Isthmus of Suez. But 
when the canal was an accomplished fact, control 
by the Suez Company was acquired. The British 
then -did, themselves, what they would have 
fought any other European nation for trying to 
do. They made the first breach in the integrity 
of the Ottoman Empire by the Cyprus convention 
and the occupation of Egypt. With Egypt safely 
in British hands, the Foreign Office did not 
hesitate to change its Balkan policy. The incor- 
poration of eastern Rumelia in Bulgaria was 
supported in 1885. Eight years before, British 
statesmen would not have hesitated to plunge 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 473 


Europe into a bloody war to prevent the formation 
of a large Bulgaria. 

“The occupation of Egypt was to have been 
provisional. The British Government solemnly 
declared to the other Powers that it had no inten- 
tion of settling permanently on the Nile, and that 
it would evacuate Egypt ‘at an early moment.’ 
The occupation dragged on. There was always a 
good reason for not leaving. At the-end of the 
nineteenth century, the British reconquered the. 
Sudan to assure their position in-Egypt and the 
Red Sea, and fought the Boer War to prevent 
South Africa from passing out of their hands. 
The idea of the Cape-to-Cairo Railway—‘ all 
British —was launched... By pushing up the 
Nile, the British came into contact with the 
French at Fashoda. If the French had thought it 
possible, or if they had had allies to help them, 
they would have declared war against Great 
Britain. Instead of fighting, the statesmen of the 
two countries came to an understanding on all 
colonial questions. This was not hard to 
accomplish, because the French had set their 
hearts on Morocco and did not claim any of the 
approaches to India. On May 8, 1904, an agree- 
ment was signed between Great Britain. and 
France, settling their disputes throughout the 
world. The basis of the compromise was mutual 
disinterestedness in Egypt and Morocco. The 
principal factor which led Great Britain into the 
entente cordiale was a desire to get rid of French 
intrigue in Egypt. This was necessary to hold 
pomenenny the route to India by the Suez 
Canal... 


474. UNHAPPY INDIA 


“ To protect India by sea, the British decided 
to control the Arabian Sea on the west, the Gulf 
of Bengal on the east, and all the passages from 
the Indian Ocean to these waters. In the mind of 
the British Foreign Office, unquestioned supre- 
macy of the seas meant the occupation of islands, 
and supremacy of the straits leading tothe 
Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Siam, the occupation 
of the mainlands bordering them.-Later, the 
policy of control was .extended to include the 
littoral of the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of 
Siam. Then, it was evident, that the littoral 
could be made secure only -by occupation 
of the hinterland! From London and Liverpool 
to Hongkong, the control of the sea could not be 
maintained by a fleet alone. The result? 
Gibralter, Malta, Cyprus, Egypt, Aden, Perim, 
the Sudan on the route to India from the west; 
Sokotra. the Seychelles, and other islands guard- 
ing the Arabian Sea; the Bahrein Islands dominat- 
ing the Persian Gulf, Ceylon at the tip of India; 
the islands.and mainland of the Gulf of Bengal; 
Singapore and the Malay Peninsula, and the 
northern-side of Borneo on the route to India 
from the east.” 


Turning to land, the same authority con- 
tinues : 


“On land, India is surrounded by Baluchi- 
stan; Afghanistan; the Russian provinces of 
Bokhara and Turkestan; the Chinese provinces 
of Sinkiang and Tibet; Nepal; Bhutan; and 
Burma. Since the Government of India annexed 
Baluchistan and Burma, Persia, the Szechuan 


‘INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 475 


and Yunnan provinces of China, French Indo- 
China, and Siam have had common boundaries 
with India. 


“The sovereignty of British India was 
extended over Baluchistan from 1875 to 1903, 
and over Burma from 1879 to 1909. Because 
Baluchistan and Burma were on the sea coast, 
the British were satisfied with nothing less than 
actual political control and effective military 
occupation. But, once started, there is no limit 
to ‘safeguards.’ The appetite grows in eating. 
When the recent war broke out, Great Britain ' 
was ensconcing herself in southern Persia, not 
with the consent of the Persians, but by reason 
of an agreement with Russia. Afghanistan was 
forced toeaccept British control. In Egypt, not 
the consent of the Egyptians, but an agreement 
with France, gave Great Britain what she 
considered her ‘rights’ on the Nile, and those 
rights were never satisfied until the head-waters 
of the Nile were reached. 


“As-the control of southern Persia followed . 
logically the incorporation of Baluchistan into 
India, expansion at the expense of Siam followed 
the absorption of Burma. In 1909, Great Britain 
achieved command of the coast of the Gulf of 
Bengal by wresting from Siam the tributary 
states of Kelantan, Trengganu, and Keda. To 
protect India on the land side, military occupa- 
tion has followed the sending of punitive 
expeditions to punish tribesmen for raiding pro- 
tected states. New territories occupied became in 


476 UNHAPPY INDIA 


turn protected, and so the process continued until 
the great mountain frontiers were reached. 


*““On the confines of India only three in- 
dependent states remain, Nepal, Bhutan, and 
Afghanistan. But these states are not independ- 
ent in fact. They are bound hand and foot tothe 
Govérnment of India. There has been a British 
Resident in Nepal for a hundred years. The 
British are allowed to recruit freely ‘for the Indian 
Army from among the splendid dominant race of 
Gurkhas, and the Prime Minister, who is all- 
powerful, holds the rank of Lieutenant-General in 
the British Army. The rulers of Afghanistan and 

‘Bhutan receive, large subsidies on condition of 
*‘ good behaviour,’ which means doing always what 
the Government of India says, and treating with 
the outside world only through the Government of 
India.* Part of Bhutan was annexed to Bengal 
in 1864, and the.country has received a British 
subsidy since 1865. In 1907, the dual control of 
clergy and laity, which had been in force ever since 
the British began to occupy India, was done away 
with in Bhutan. The difficulties in Tibet were a 
warning that could not be disregarded. A Maha- 
raja was elected, and this gave the British the 
opportunity to get effective control of the country 
without conquering it. In consideration of doubl- 
ing the subsidy, the Bhutan Government surrender- 
ed control of foreign relations to the British in 1910, 
and allowed them. to occupy two strong positions 
inside the Bhutan frontier. Judging from the 


*The position regarding Afghanistan has now altogether 
changed. ; 


INDIA-—-A WORLD-MENACE 477 


history of the formation of British India, unless we 
are on the threshold of a radical change in inter- 
national relations, one is safe in predicting that 
both Nepal and Bhutan will become integral parts 
of India in the near future.” 

‘The situation in regard to Afghanistan,’ 
continues Mr. Gibbons, “‘has been different. The 
treaty of 1893, which followed long and costly wars, 
gave the Btirish predominance in Afghanistan. 
But Russia, in her Asiatic expansion, was not dis- 
posed to allow Afghanistan to become British with- 
out a struggle. Russian imperialism turned 
against British imperialism its own argument... 
After penetrating Mongolia, the Russians desired 
to extend their influence. over Tibet—and, for 
exactly the same reason as the British, had been 
following out their own imperialistic policy. In 
the minds of British. statesmen, Afghanistan and 
Tibet became the two-shields of India. During the 
first decade of the-twentieth century, these two 
countries, as well as Persia, became—to the Gov- 
ernment of India and the British Foreign Office 
'—‘ safeguards’ which must be added to the British 
Empire... War with Russia was avoided because of 
the Convention of 1907. In the same decade 
Germany became a menace to India through the 
Bagdad Railway conception. Great Britain had 
determined to allow neither Russia nor Germany 
to reach the Persian Gulf. Having compounded 
colonial rivalries with France and Russia, she had 
no way of arriving at a diplomatic understanding 
with Germany. The Bagdad Railway question 
was decided on battlefields from Flanders to 
Mesopotamia.” 


> 


\ 


478 UNHAPPY INDIA 


_ The statement of facts and events in the 
sequence in which they have been put by Mr. 
Gibbons, is based on history which cannot be con- 
tested. The Great War has not ended wars. At 
one time it was claimed that it would. Europe is 
even now sitting on the crest of a volcano and a war 
in the near future is certain. India, being a huge 
source of British wealth and British man-power, 
is looked upon with great suspicion and distrust 
by all the Powers of Europe and Asia. The Orient 
is in revolt against the authority of Europe. The 
Soviet is busy trying to alienate from Great Britain 
the European working-man and the Asiatic Nation- 
alists of different countries.. India is also ablaze 
with the fire of a spirit of independence. In the 
circumstances much political sagacity is not re- 
quired to predict that India cannot very long be 
held in bondage as it-has been for the last 150 years. 
Even British interests require that the British 
. should come to anoagreement with India as to the 
future relations of Britain and India. China is 
already ablaze. Afghanistan has become indepen- 
dent. Persia-is organizing herslf into an efficient 
nation...Russia is almost on the borders of 
Afghanistan. In these circumstances, it is for Great 
Britain to see what the consequences of a discon- 
tented and unhappy India can possibly be to her 
political future. Britain’s imperial rivals are in- 
terested in inflaming Indian Nationalists. They 
will leave no stone unturned to make India unsafe 
for England in the next war. England is popular 
nowhere in the world, and, although we hear so 
much of ententes and treaties and understandings, 
they are not worth the paper on which they are 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 479 


written. The history of the past 200 years has 
shown that treaties have been treated like scraps of 
paper whenever they stood in the way of imperial 
ambitions of any great Power. The League of 
Nations, really speaking, commands no influence. 
It is completely under the thumb of the two or three 
great Powers of the world. It is abundantly 
clear that even these two or three Powers: are 
not quite happy with each other, much less 
so are those who either stand out or have to get 
compensation for past wrongs. India will thus be 
always an object of solicitude, a field for intrigue 
to Britain’s enemies. But a contented India may 
safely keep out of all wars between the European 
Powers. England’s military arrogance against 
other countries is very much dictated, or at least 
influenced, by her resources in India. Once those 
resources are gone or-decreased or placed out of 
reach, Britain will become a chastened nation and 
treat with other people on terms of justice and fair 
play. As long as she can count upon India, India’s 
material resources and her man-power, she is 
bound to maintain her present aggressive attitude, 
whichis» often reflected in the speeches of her 
statesmen like Lord Birkenhead and Mr. Winston 
Churchill. An aggressive, defiant, insolent Great 
Britain, with India at her beck and call, is a danger 
to world peace. With India self-governing that 
danger will disappear. The point is so clear that 
one need not labour it any further. . 


It is also abundantly clear that, as long as 
India does not become free, she cannot very much 
‘improve those departments of her national life that 


-480 UNHAPPY INDIA 


‘could secure for her freedom from disease. Diseases 
and epidemics, as we have already shown, are the 
product of ignorance and poverty. And ignorance 
and poverty are bound to continue as long as 
Britain holds India in the hollow of her palms, and 
as long as Britain’s fiscal policy is determined. by 
British interests—imperial, military and economic. 

It is too mueh to expect that England will forego 
‘any fraction of them. The fact, that in this intoxi- 

cation of power the British Cabinet and the British 

Parliament should be defying .Indian public 

opinion in the matter of the constitution of the 

Statutory Commission, also gives“support to the 

same view. We may here fittingly quote another 
American authority, who hails from New York. 

Reverend Dr, Charles Cuthbert Hall, late President . 
of the Union Theological Seminary of New York, 
and Burrows Leturer on the Orient, remarks: 


“ There is no.denying the fact that England is 
administering India for England’s benefit and not 
India’s. Itis hard for me to say this, because until 
I went to India’ my sympathies were all on the 

. English side. My early education was much in 
England and I have many dear personal friends 
there. But what I am saying now is the truth, and 
the truth must be told... 


** The obvious fact stares us in the face that 
there is at no time, in no year, any shortage of food- 
stuffs in India. The trouble is that, the taxes 
imposed by the British Government being fifty per 
cent. of the produce, the Indian starves that 
England’s annual revenue may not be diminished 
by a dollar. Eighty per cent. of the whole popula- 


‘INDIA~A WORLD-MENACE 481 


tion has been thrown back upon the soil because 
England’s - discriminating duties have ruined 
practically every. branch of native manufacture; 
and these tillers of the soil, when they have sold 
themselves for the last time to the money-lender, 
when they have over and over again mortgaged: 
their crops and their bit of land, are sold by the tax- 
collector to wander about until they drop of starva- 
tion... We send shiploads of grain to-India,. but 
there is plenty of grain in India.. The trouble is 
the people have been ground down until they are 
too poor to buy it. Famine is chronic there now, 
though the same shipments of food-stuffs are made 
annually to England, the same drainage of millions 
of dollars goes on every year..., ”* 


Dr. Paul S. Reinsch, who served as an 
American Minister in China, observes in his book 
called the Intellectual. and Political Currents in 
the Far East: 


“The present situation in India illustrates 
some of the. unfortunate results of the political 
dependence of a civilized people. Not only politi- 
cally-but also in economic matters, India is kept 
in a state of dependence on the metropole. But the 
most hopeless feature of the situation’ is that the 
men who would naturally be leaders in government 
and enterprises find themselves excluded from 
opportunities for exercising legitimate power in 
their own country. Such a decapitation of an entire 
people is a great sacrifice to impose, even in return 


*From a speech in the Bar Association Club House, New 
York, quoted in The Public, Novemebr 20, 1968. 


35 


482 UNHAPPY INDIA 


for the blessings of peace and an efficient policing 
of the country. The continuance of this policy 
would mean either the total destruction and 
degradation of Indian national life, or the end of 
the British Raj.” 


It may be’ argued that in order to protect her- 
self from foreign aggression, India cannot. do with- 
out British help. This is again an unwarranted 
assumption. Here is the testimony of General Sir 
Ian Hamilton about the military possibilities of a 
free India: 


_ “There is material in the north of India, suffi- 
cient and fit, under good leadership, to shake the 
artificial society of Europe to its foundation once 
it dares to tamper with that militarism which now 
alone ed oa it with any higher ideal than money 
and the luxury which that money can purchase. It 
is heroism, self-sacrifice and chivalry which redeem 
war and build up national character. What part 
do these heroic qualities find in the ignoble struggle 
between nations for commercial supremacy, with 
stock exchanges and wheat-pits for their battle- 
fields? If then it is a question of finding leaders, a 
gradual diffusion of knowledge will produce those 
leaders, and once they have been found, how can 
England hope to retain under the British crown 
this vast empire permanently—unless the Indians 
are exactly in the same position of independence as 
Canadians and Australians to-day occupy ?’’* 

The possibility of India being conquered by 
any other Power also may be dismissed without 


*Sea Japan’s Foreign Policy, by A. M. Pooley. 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 483 


much discussion. The world situation would 
not allow any other Power: taking possession of 
India. The European Powers may not feel any 
danger from India if she is self-governing. But 
any attempt on the part of any other Power to 
take possession will be resented ‘and resisted by 
the Powers of Europe in their own interests and 
for reasons that have already been. stated in the 
opening part of this chapter. Of course, if India 
remains within the Empire, as she at present 
might be contented to be, she may be a source of 
strength to Great Britain as against her enemies. 
But if she is compelled to leave the Empire, then 
one source of danger to the peace of the world | 
would be removed. 


In the post-War world a keen struggle has 
been going on between the principles of imperia- 
lism and socialism. The War has produced a 
revolution in Russia, the like of which has never 
been known in history. The Russian revolution 
has been opposed and the Soviet has been 
attacked in many ways by the capitalistic 
empires-of Europe. We have been from time to 
time told that Russia’s dissolution was imminent, 
yet it-has survived all those attacks and is very 
much alive, so much so that British diplomacy and 
even British Foreign Office have to take note of the 
influence of Russia, both political and economic, 
in Asia and in Europe. We may or may not agree 
with Bolshevik ideas, but itis certain that the 
experiment that is being triedin Soviet Russia is 
going to influence the life of the world in a great 
measure. There is no doubt from what one can 


484 UNHAPPY INDIA 


observe in Europe and America that the tide 
against imperialism is rising. A struggle between 
imperialism and socialism, or say, between 
capitalism and socialism will take some time, but 
by all portents eventually the new spirit is bound 
to triumph. The only way to meet Bolshevism. is 
to concede rights to the different peoples of. the 
earth—India among them—now being bled and 
exploited by the imperial races. Otherwise the 
discontented and exploited countries of the world 
will be the breeding centres for it. India must 
come into her own, else not even the Himalayas 
can effectually bar the entry of Bolshevism into 
India. 

Then, again, let us look at the question from 
the commercial point of view.. By its geographical 
situation India is a connecting link between the 
Near East and the Far East, and a clearing house 
for the trade of the world. Racially it holds the 
balance between the European Aryans and: the 
yellow races. In any military conflict between the 
white and the yellow races the people of India. will 
be a decisive factor. In peace they will be a 
harmonizing element. Racially they are related 
to Europeans. Religiously and culturally they are 
nearer to the Chinese and Japanese. 


Yet another aspect of it: With 70 millions of 
Moslems, India is the most important centre of 
Islamic sentiment. At present the British Govern- 
ment is trying to keep the Moslems contented and 
on its side, by raising up the Hindu-Muslim conp- 
flict in various forms, and by doles of favour, but 
this policy is eventually bound to fail because the 


INDIA—A WORLD-MENACE 485 


pan-Islamic element is growing stronger. Among 
the Moslem population of India a large number of 
Indian Moslems are alive to the importance of 
India to the cause of Islam in the world. The 
freedom of Islamic Powers, so to speak, depends 
upon the freedom of India. The present tem- 
porary tension between the Hindus and Mussal- 
mans is bound to end some day—at least when the 
fact dawns on the millions of Indian Moslems that 
Islam cannot be revived or strengthened or made 
independent of European influence until India is 
again free, Islam is not dead. It cannot and will 
not die. The only way to make it a force of 
harmony and. peace is to recognize its potentiali- 
ties and to respect its\ susceptibilities. The 
political. independence .of Islamic countries is a 
basi¢ foundation for-such a state, and India is 
destined to play avery important part in the 
future developments of Islam. 


Looking at the progress of humanity, it cannot 
be ignored that India, inhabited by one-fifth of the 
human _.race; and China, with its even greater 
population, are the greatest stumbling-blocks in 
the way of rapid human progress.. Both the 
countries are alive to that fact. Both the great 
populations are conscious of their present dis- 
abilities—and also of their immense potentialities. 
They are at present spokes in the wheel of 
progress. But a self-governing India will be a 
great help to the advance of human progress. 
With a republican China in the north-east, an 
independent and progressive Persia in the back- 
ground, and a Bolshevik Russia on the north up 


486 _° UNHAPPY INDIA 


_ across the Hindu Kush, it is extremely foolish to 
attempt to rule India despotically. Not even the 
gods could do so for a considerable length of 
time. It would not be possible even ifthe 
British Parliament and the Indian legislatures 
were to devote all their sittings to the drafting 
and passing of a hundred coercive’ Acts. The 
peace of the world, international harmony and 
goodwill, the reputation of the English nation, 
the progress of mankind and the economic welfare 
of the world, all demand the peaceful introduction 
‘and development of the democratic form of 
government in India, and the sooner the English 
realize that patent fact the better it will be for all 
concerned. 


APPENDIX I 
SOME OPINIONS ABOUT ‘ MOTHER INDIA’ 


The following is the full text: of the letter 
written by Dr. Rabindranath Tagore from Bali to 
the Manchester Guardian Weekly for October 14, 
1927 : 


** May I appeal to your sense of justice and 
claim a place in your paper for this letter of 
mine, which I am compelled to write in vindica- 
tion of my position as a representative of India 
against a most unjustifiable attack ? 


‘While travelling inthis island of Bali I 
have just chanced upon a.copy of the New States- 
man of July 16, containing the review of a book 
on India written by a tourist from America. The 
reviewer, while supporting with an unctuous 
virulence all the calumnies heaped upon our 
people by ‘the authoress, and while calling 
repeated attention to the common Hindu vice of 
untruthfulness even amongst the greatest of us, 
has made public a malicious piece of fabrication, 
not as one of the specimens picked up from a 
show-case of wholesale abuse displayed in this or 
some other book, but as a gratuitous information 
about the truth of which the writer tacitly 
insinuates his own personal testimony. It runs as 
thus: ‘The poet Sir Rabindranath Tagore ex- 
presses in print his conviction that marriage 


488 - UNHAPPY INDIA 


should be consummated before puberty in order to 
avert the vagaries of female sexual desire.’ 


“We have become painfully familiar with 
deliberate circulation of hideous lies in the West 
‘against enemy countries, but a similar_pro- 
paganda against individuals, whose countrymen 
have obviously offended the writer by their 
political aspirations, has come to me as.a surprise. 
If the people of the United States had ever made 
themselves politically obnoxious to England, it is 
imaginable how an English writer of this type 
would take a gloating delight in proving, with 
profuse helps from the news columns in the 
American journals, their criminal propensity and 
quote for his support their constant indulgence in 
vicarious enjoyment of crimes through cinema 
pictures. But would he, in the fiercest frenzy of 
his rhetoric running amok, dare to make the 
monstrous accusation, let us say, against the late 
President Wilson, for ever having expressed his 
pious conviction that the lynching of the Negroes 
was a moral necessity in a superior civilization 
for cultivating Christian virtues? Or would he 
venture to ascribe to Professor Dewey the theory 
that_centuries of witch-burning have developed in 
the Western peoples the quick moral sensitiveness 
that helps them in judging and condemning others 
whom they do not know or understand or like and 
about whose culpability they are never in lack of 
conclusive evidence? But has it been made so 
easily possible in my case, such a deliberately 
untruthful irresponsibility in this writer, con- 
doned by the editor, by the fact that the victim 


APPENDIX f 489 - 


was no better than ‘a British subject who by 
accident of his birth. has happened to be a Hindu 
and not belonging to the Muslim community, 
which, according to the writer, is specially 
favoured. by: his people and our Government? 


‘May I point out in this connection that 
selected documents of facts generalized into an 
unqualified statement affecting a whole large 
population may become in the hands of the tourist 
from across the sea a poison-tipped_ arrow of the 
most heinous form of untruth to which the British 
nation itself may afford a broadly easy target? 
It is a cunning lie against.a community which 
the writer has used when she describes the Hindus 
as cow-dung eaters. If is just as outrageous as to 
introduce Englishmen to those who know them 
imperfectly as addicted‘ to the cocaine habit 
because cocaine is commonly used in their 
dentistry. In Hindu India only in rare cases an 
exceedingly. small quantity of cow-dung is used 
not as an ingredient in their meals but as a part 
of the performance of expiatory rites for some 
violation of social convention. One who has no 
special interest or pleasure in creating ill-feeling 
towards the Europeans will, if he is honest, 
hesitate in describing them, though seemingly 
with a greater justice than in the other case, as 
eaters of live creatures or of rotten food, mention- 
ing oyster and cheese for illustration. It is the 
subtlest method of falsehood, this placing of 
exaggerated emphasis upon insignificant details, 
giving to the exception the appearance of the rule. 


490 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“The instances of moral perversity when 
observed in alien surroundings naturally loom 
large to us, because the positive power of sanita- 
tion which works from within and the counteract- 
ing forces that keep up social balance are not 
evident to a stranger, especially to one who has 
the craving for an intemperate luxury of moral 
indignation which very often is the sign of the 
same morbid pathology seen from behind. When 
such a critic comes to the East not for truth but 
for the chuckling enjoyment of an exaggerated 
self-complacency, and when he underlines some 
social aberrations with his exultant red pencil, 
glaringly emphasising them out of their context, 
he goads our own young critics to play the 
identical unholy game. ._They also, with the help 
of the numerous guide-books supplied by un- 
impeachable agency. for the good of humanity, 
explore the dark recesses of Western society, the 
breeding-grounds of nauseous habits and moral 
filthiness, some of which have a dangerous cover 
of a respectable exterior; they also select their 
choice specimens of rottenness with the same 
pious zeal. and sanctimonious pleasure as_ their 
foreign models have in besmearing the name of a 
whole nation with the mud from ditches that may 
odie an undoubted fact yet not the complete 
ruth. . 

“ And thus is generated the endless vicious 
circle of mutual recrimination and_ ever-ac- 
cumulating misunderstandings that are perilous 
for the peace of the world. Of course our young 
critic in the East is under a disadvantage. For 
the Western peoples have an enormously magni- 


APPENDIX I 491 


fying organ of a sound that goes deep and reaches 
far, either when they malign others or defend 
themselves against accusations which touch them 
to the quick, whereas our own mortified critic 
struggles with his unaided lungs that can whisper 
and sigh but not shout. But is it not known that 
our inarticulate emotions become highly inflam- 
mable when crowded, in the underground cellars 
of our mind, darkly silent? The whole of the 
Eastern continent is daily being helped in the 
storage of such explosives by the critics of the 
West, who, with a delicious sense of duty done, 
are ever ready to give vent to their blind pre- 
judices while tenderly nourishing a comfortable 
conscience that lulls them. into forgetting that 
they also have their Western analogies in moral 
licence, only in different garbs made in their 
fashionable establishments or in their slums. 
However, let me strongly assure my English and 
other Western readers that neither I, nor my 
indignant Indian friends whom I have with me. 
have ever-had the least shadow of intimation of 
what has been described in this book and quoted 
with a grin of conviction by this writer as the 
usual practice in the training of sexual extra- 
vagance. J hope such Western readers will 
understand my difficulty in giving an absolute 
denial to certain facts alleged when they 
remember the occasional startling disclosures in 
their own society in Europe and America, allow- 
ing to the unsuspecting public a sudden glimpse 
of systematic orgies of sexual abnormality in an 
environment which.is supposed not to represent 
‘ sub-human ’ civilization. 


492 ‘ UNHAPPY INDIA 


“The writer in the New .Statesman has 
suggested for the good of the world that the people 
in India condemned by the tourist for malpractices 
should never be assisted by the benevolent British 
soldiers. safely to preserve their existence and 
continue their race. He evidently chooses. to 
ignore the fact that these people have maintained 
their life and culture without the help of the 
British soldiers for a longer series of centuries 
than his own people has. However that may be, 
I shrink from borrowing my wisdom from this 
source and make a similarly annihilating sugges- 
tion for this kind of writers, who spread about the 
malignant contagion of race-hatred: because, in 
spite of provocations, we should have a patient 
faith in human. nature for its unlimited capacity 
for improvement, and let us hope to be rid of the 
lurking persistence..of_ barbarism in man, not 
through elimination of the noxious elements by 
physical destruction but through the education of 
mind and a discipline of true culture.” 


RABINDRANATH TAGORE. 


Moendock, Bali, Sept. 6, 1927. 
og 


“ Ditcher ”"—to his friends, the late Mr. Pat 
Lovett—who had 40 years’ journalistic experience 
in India, and edited the leading Anglo-Indian 
commercial weekly, Capital of Calcutta, wrote in 
his paper on September 8, 1927 : 


‘It was not until the end of last week that I 
got a loan of a copy, which I read through as a 


APPENDIX I 493. 


matter of duty, but with increasing disgust. In 
the first place it confirmed the opidion.of one of 
the greatest of living essayists, that a “ best seller ’ 
nowadays is not, in nine cases out of ten, a good 
book; in the next place the intellectual dishonesty 
of La grosse Americaine was appalling; and in’ the 
last place her ghoulish propensity of frequenting 
hospitals to discover inhuman cruelties to indict 
a whole people borders on stark pornography. 
The book is devoid of literary merit. It is the 
crudest form of transpontine journalism. It sold 
like hot cakes partly because ofits morbid sensa- 
tionalism, but mostly because it was unscrupulous 
propaganda against the claim of India for Home 
Rule published at the ‘ psychological moment’.” 


* 


Mr. A. H. Clark;an American missionary 
in India, writes to the Indian Social Reformer of 
Bombay about the missionary feeling regarding 
Mother India: ; 


“ T hope that you will give me spade for a brief 
reply to-a.communication from Mr. 8. Veerabhadra 
published in the Reformer.of November 26th. ' In 
this. communication the author, while acknowledg- 
ing» that some American missionaries in India 
have condemned Miss Mayo’s book, asserts that 
some share her point of view. Personally I doubt 
whether there are American missionaries in India 
who really share Miss Mayo’s point of view or 
fully endorse her repulsive charges. In general 
we Americans have probably been at fault in the 
matter of making public in India our attitude to 


494 UNHAPPY INDIA 


this book, confining our efforts too largely to 
counteracting its effect in America. 

** The very day on which I first had opportu- 
nity to read Mother India, I sent to Americaa 
brief review. of it, which has just been published, 
in which I said, among other things, that Iwas 
ashamed that a fellow-American should write a 
book whose picture of India was a ‘slimy cari- 
cature.’ All of us Americans on the Executive 
Committee of the National Christian Council, 
except Bishop Robinson, whose objection I under- 
stand to have been largely technical, approved 
the statement condemning Mother India issued by 
the secretaries of the Council. I myself had 400 
copies of this statement struck off and am sending 
them to a wide constituency in America. A group 
of American missionaries from all over Jndia is 
issuing a statement, repudiating Mother India and 
sending it broadcast to the American Press. I 
have myself gathered what seems to me to be 
conclusive evidence against many of Miss Mayo’s 
worst mis-statements and have sent it to Miss 
Mayo in the form of a letter, with an appeal to 
her, in the name of truth and goodwill, to with- 
draw the book: Mr. K. T. Paul happened to see a 
copy of this letter and urged me to let him print 
itin The Young Men of India, but I had pre- 
viously put in into the hands of a representative 
in America for publication there, if, as I fear may 
be the case, Miss Mayo’s reply is unfavourable. 
To my personal knowledge a stream of articles 
and letters designed to offset the effect of Mother 
India is going to America from the American 
missionaries in India. 


APPENDIX I 495 


“It is hard for me to believe that any such 
warped and hideous presentation of India as Miss 
Mayo’s can long have much influence for evil in 
the world. It is bound to lead to reaction in which 
the great gifts of India for world civilization will 
again have emphasis. I share the hope of 
Mahatma Gandhi that India may be large-spirited 
enough to accept whatever there is in Miss Mayo’s 
book of stimulus to fresh efforts for reform. 
Truth is still stronger than falsehood. Goodwill 
is more powerful than pee. No single book, 
however disgusting and untrue, can long stand in 
the way of the movement of the peoples of the 
earth toward better mutual understanding and 
greater mutual respect. 


In confidence that-you share this faith.” 


AHMADNAGAR, ' Yours etc., 
5th December,-1927. A. H. Crarx. 
* 


Lord Sinha, who has held the highest offices 
under the Crown—being the only Indian ever 
appointed the Governor of a province, and who at 
the time of his death, which occurred recently, 
was a Member of the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council, on landing in Bombay (December 
30, 1927) was interviewed by a representative of the 
Indian Daily Mail. We copy below that part of 
the interview which is relevant here: 


' T entirely agree with Mr. Gandhi that Miss 
Mayo has had a good sniff at all the filthy drains 
of India, that her picture is totally out of focus 


496 UNHAPPY: INDIA 


and I am sorry to say that the book is a deliberate, 
calculated lie. 


j z 
‘* The whole of it?’ asked our representative 
—“ Yes, the whole of it,” declared Lord Sinha with 
emphasis, ‘‘ the whole of it as is pictured. Itis.a 
lie, and a false picture.” 


_-* But I think undue prominence has been 
given in India to her exploit. It has helped her to 
sell her book and to further her propaganda. 
When I say all this I should like to.add that it is 

foolish to suggest that either Government of India 
‘or the India Office in London has had any hand in 
the publication of this book».I am sure that the 
book has caused great embarrassment to the 
British Government. You are giving that book 
the prominence which it;does not deserve. She 
has eee and maligned almost every great man 
in India. 


‘“There have been several Americans on 
board and they all said that the picture made by 
the book cannot be true. I also know every single 
Anglo-Indian official who has lived in India 
considers that the book is not only false but even 
mischievous.” 


_ Asked to point out instances from the book 
which he held to be absolutely false, Lord Sinha 
replied that he just remembered one statement 
made by Miss Mayo which was a lie, namely, that 
Indian mothers taught their children unnatural 
vice. “ I can conceive of nothing more atrociously 
false. I asked half a dozen English members of 


APPENDIX I 497 


the Indian Medical Service, who have spent, each. 
of them, more than 25 years in India as to whether 
they have ever heard of such a thing and they all 
said that they have no more heard of them than I, 
and they are convinced that it is absolutely false.” 


* 


Dr. James H. Cousins, Irish poet and author, 
who is a keen student of Indian culture; and 
knows this country intimately by long. residence 
and educational experience, writes in a prefatory 
note to an essay on The Path to Peace:* 


“The whole edifice of falsehood erroneously 
labelled Mother India rises naturally from a 
foundation of race prejudice and mental dis- 
honesty which is none the less dangerous and 
reprehensible because it may be subconscious. 
The post-script expression of friendliness to India 
in the book is a thin apologia for the manipulation 
of pathological elements in a nation’s life in order 
to make a case for her continued retention in a 
state of political dependence. This thesis emerges 
as the actual, if it was not originally the deliberate, 
intention of the book; and it is supported by the 
ancient and dishonourable expedients of suggestio 
falsi and suppressio vert. The authoress atiri- 
butes to all India certain customs that belong only 
toa section of the people. She calls India a 
“world-menace ’ because of certain elements in her 
sanitary habits, but gives no hint that the ‘ world- 
menace’ of the influenza epidemic of 1918 that 
cost India six million lives arose outside India. 


, * Madras: Ganesh & Co. 
36 


498 UNHAPPY INDIA 


She criticizes the water supply of Madras, but is 
silent on the disclosure last year that milk watered 
with dirty stable hose had been responsible for 
typhoid fever in New York. She pillories the 
sacrifice of goats in a Kali temple, but approves of 
the practice of flesh eating which condemns an 
infinitely larger number of animals to torture and 
death in Europe and America for the satisfaction 
of appetite... 


“Tt would be quite easy, quite futile, and quite 
criminal, for me to take from my file of cuttings 
from American papers (with, their records of 
bribery and corruption, vulgarity, impurity, 
robbery, smuggling, adulteration and murder) a 
case in proof of the recent declaration of an 
American judge that America is the most criminal 
country in the world, and to shape this case 
towards an expressed or subtly implied conclusion 
that the United States should be reverted to the 
state of affairs before the Declaration of Independ- 
ence. I agree in advance with the reply that these 
things do not represent the United States; and I 
claim the same logic in regard to India... 


‘*The fact that there are glaring evils in India 
needed no ‘ordinary American citizen’ for its 
demonstration. Indians have been working for 
their removal for generations with as much zeal as 
“reformers in America have been working to 
eliminate the scheduled six thousand murders per 
annum, and reformers in England have been try- 
ing to remove the canker of venereal disease. I 
know well all that can be catalogued in Iaboratory 
manner regarding human depravity in India, for 


APPENDIX I -499 


I have worked for twelve years in humanitarian 
causes in the country and am as familiar with its 
statistics as with its reality. But I cannot prosti- 
tute my intelligence to the inept conclusion that- 
because there are sins in India, the people should 
therefore be kept in political subjection. I am_not 
a politician in the political sense. I am a student 
of human evolution and a searcher for the perfect 
way towards human perfectness, and I-assert that 
‘the needs of the case in India are just the reverse 
of the implications of Mother India. Human 
experience has always shown, and modern psycho- 
logy confirms it, that responsibility is the parent 
of efficiency, not its offspring...” 


* 


A statement with regard to Miss Mayo’s book, 
Mother India, signed by Rev. Dr. N. Macnicol and, 
Mr. P. O. Philip, Secretaries, and Miss A. B. Van 
Doren, Hon. Officer, has been issued to the Press © 
in the name’ of the Executive Committee of the 
National Christian Council of India, Burma and 
Ceylon, the only dissentient member being Bishop 
J. W. Robinson, ‘who does not find that he can 
assent to its terms.’ The Lord Bishop of Calcutta 
and Metropolitan of India is the Chairman and 
Dr. S. K. Dutta is the Vice-Chairman of the 
Council, and the Executive Committee includes 
Rev. Chitamber, Bishop of Dornakal, Rev. J. F. 
Edwards, Dr. C. R. Greenfield, Bishop of Madras, 
Rev. J. Mackenzie, Rai Bahadur A. C. Mukerji, 
Messrs. K. T. Paul, B. L. Rallia Ram and Rev. H. 
C. C. Velt. We take the following from that 
statement : cals 


500 UNHAPPY INDIA 


“It has never. been denied either by Indians 
or by foreign missionaries that great social evils 
exist in India, and it is a matter of common know- 
ledge that strenuous and organized efforts are being 
made by groups of Indian reformers to get rid of 
them. Yet we, representing a body of men and 
women who are in close touch with the people and 
are conversant with their every-day life,» un- 
hesitatingly assert that the picture of India which 
emerges from Miss Mayo’s book is untrue to the 
facts and unjust to the people of India. The 
sweeping generalizations that are~ deduced from 
incidents that come to the notice of the author, or 
that are suggested by the manner in which these 
incidents are presented are entirely untrue as a 
description of India as awhole. At the end of the 
book Miss Mayo admits that she has left untoyched 
other sides of Indian life, and for that very reason 
we can affirm that Indian life does not present the 
dark and the evil aspect which this book suggests, 
and that the ugly and repulsive and disgusting 
aspects of it that: are emphasized in the book are 
not the predominant things in Indian society. 


‘* Beauty and culture, kindliness and charm, 
religion and piety are to be found alike among the 
highest and the humblest. Miss Mayo leaves no 
room for these in her picture.” 


¥ 
In a communication to the Press, Mrs. 
Margaret E. Cousins, Secretary to the Women’s 


Association in India, referring to Miss Katherine 
Mayo’s Mother India, says: 


APPENDIX I 501 


“ Although the authoress has made the 
wrongs done to women in India as the subject of 
the major portion of her indictment, yet Miss 
Mayo did not have an interview with any re- 
presentative Indian woman, like Mrs. Naidu or 
others. If she had, she should have been wiser. 
Indian women feel they are being exploited for the 
delay of self-government to their country.” 


Mrs. Cousins repudiates the charge that 
Indian women look. for motherhood within nine 
months after reaching puberty, and says the 
majority of millions of oa pe do not allow mother- 
hood until after 16. If it were. otherwise India 
would have perished centuries ago. She con- 
cludes: “ While we repudiate her book, we must 
turn every ounce of our zeal towards the rooting 
out of those social evils which are undoubtedly in 
our midst.” 

: * 


Rev. Stanley Jones, a missionary with con- 
siderable Indian experience, in the course of a 
letter to the Leader of Allahabad, says: 


«My views of Mother India may be summed 
up briefly as follows: 


“(1) Taking the individual statements up one 
by one, it is not easy to disprove them. Here and 
there inaccuracies and exaggerations may be 
found, but they would probably stand as a whole. 
This refers only to the statements of facts them- 
selves, and does not refer to the authoress’s 
generalizations about those facts, which I consider 
to be often erroneous. _ ; 


502 UNHAPPY INDIA 


**(2) While conceding this, I feel the book to 
be very unfair, to say the least. The picture that 
-one gets from reading the book is not a fair or true 
picture. What happens in the mind of the 
Western reader who has no facts to set over against 
the statements of the book may be seen from the 
words of one Western reviewer: ‘ India is putrid, 
worse than Sodom or Gomorrah,’ etc. This is a 
libel on a whole people. No one fromthe West 
would feel other than indignant if facts were 
drawn from the underworld of the West along 
with police court statistics and set before the world 
as a true picture of life in the West. This is the 
unfairness of the book. There is another India 
not in the book; if that other India had been put 
in we could not have complained. But the India 
that I know is not there... And that India I love 
and respect and honour. 


E. Sraniey JONEs.” 
October 5, 
_ Ipoh (Federated Malay States). 


* 


Mr, Edward Thompson, British novelist and 
playwright, who served for a fairly long time as 
an educationist in India, and is at present 
Professor of Bengali Literature at Oxford, writes 
inthe course of his review published in the London 
Nation and Atheneum for July 30, 1927: | 


“ The indictment takes so wide a sweep, and 
is so consistently ungenerous, that the book 
becomes one long ‘ nagging.’ If you can convince 
them that you do sometimes see their point of 


-APPENDIX I 503: 


view, and have a genuine sympathy with them, 
and an unpatronizing love for their country and 
the best things in their civilization, you can utter 
the hardest and frankest criticisms, and Indians 
will listen. Officials, professors in Indian colleges, 
and missionaries all know this. But you get no 
hearing if you ‘nag.’ Once Miss Mayo gets away 
from the treatment of woman the signsof first- 
hand research grow few. The prince who 
predicted that within three months of the British 
leaving India there will not bea virgin or a 
rupee’ in Bengal probably spoke truth; but the 
English reader is prejudiced to find the stale yarn 
brought forward, and with so (characteristically, 
I am afraid) pontifical anair. ‘ Here is a story 
from the lips of one whose. veracity has never, I 
believe, been questioned.’ Well, it ought to be 
questioned now, even though her ‘ informant, an 
American of long. Indian experience,’ heard it 
when visiting a Mahratta prince, a man of great 
charm, cultivation and force. The story has been 
told on every steamer that has carried passengers 
between England and India during the last twenty 
years; eighteen months ago I heard an M. P. tell 
it of a Rajput, Sir Pertab Singh. Miss Mayo has 
no. perception of Mr. Gandhi’s courage of force, 
she quotes freely his scathing condemnations of 
child-marriage, untouchability and other abomi- 
nations, but sneers at him because he thinks rail- 
ways and machinery evil and yet uses them. 
Then, is India the only country where students 
consider the possible commercial value of a 
university career? Are there not students at 
Harvard, Yale, Oxford who are worried as to 


504 UNHAPPY INDIA 


whether their education is going to result in a 
decent job? And Miss Mayo is so without 
imagination or sympathy with another race’s 
point of view that she cannot see that perhaps self- 
respect prevented some Indians from being 
enthusiastic over the visit of the Prince of Wales— 
who, after all, belongs to the blood of their 
conquerors. She writes of that visit in a manner 
almost maudlin, which will only amuse any 
English public other than that whose Bible is the 
illustrated society papers. She has taken over all 
the ‘ die-hard,’ virulent contempt-for the Bengali 
trace and assumes that this contempt is universally 
felt by the native princes. Bengalis are important 
ministers in Indian States—even in Udaipur. She 
shows no sign of suspicion that possibly Bengal, 
or even English education. in India has ever pro- 
duced anything but“ babus’ and ‘ failed B.A.’s’ 
and graduates. ‘In the Philippines and in India 
alike little or no current literature exists available 
or of interest to the masses, while in both the 
countries many dialects have no literature at all.’ 
No important Indian language is without at least a 
considerable literature; and Tamil—in the poems 
_of Manikkavasahar and other Saivite devotees; 
Hindi—in the Ramayana of Tulsidas, a singularly 
noble: poem which every autumn is acted in the 
village of the United Provinces during an ecstatic 
fortnight; Bengali—in its versions of the 
Ramayana and Mahabharata, of which hundreds 
of thousands of copies are sold every year, and in 
the exquisite songs of. Ramprasad, which you can 
hear on any Indian road—all have literature in 
which the masses take keen delight. 


APPENDIX I 505 


“On page 258 Miss Mayo gives an epitome of 
the history of India under British rule which was 
obviously picked up at a dinner-table. She quotes, 
with ponderous solemnity, the promise of 1784 
that ‘no native...shall, by reason only of his 
religion, place of birth, descent, colour, or any of 
them, be disabled from holding any place, ‘office, 
or employment under the Company.’ She adds, 
‘ A bomb indeed, to drop into caste-fettered, feud- 
filled, tyrant-crushed India!’ Yes, and it would 
have been a bomb to drop into any collection of 
India’s rulers if it had been seriously meant for 
another century or more. This promise had to be 
repeated in 1833, and again in 1858; in 1822, and 
1824 Sir Thomas Munro, Governor of Madras, 
wrote with acute feeling of the entire closing of 
every office above thé lowest to Indians, and on 
May 2nd, 1857 (eight days before the Mutiny broke 
out), Henry Lawrence wrote angrily of the same 
state of things. Miss Mayo ascribes ‘the Sikh 
Rebellion in 1845’ to ‘this shock of free Western 
ideas.’ Against whom did the Sikhs rebel? They 
were an independent people. 


“To sum up. Hindu child-marriage and 
callousness to misery inflicted on animals—but we 
have our field sports—deserve the fiercest con- 
demnation. But it was a mistake when Miss Mayo 
let her magnificent case be lost ina welter of 
general condemnation. She had no right to forget. 
that despite all the unfairness of Indian politicians, 
some have exhibited unselfish and courageous 
patriotism and a high standard of fairness towards 
opponents. She lost her case when she wove into 


506 ‘ UNHAPPY INDIA 


it a bitter conviction that the white man’s rule is 

so overwhelmingly good for inferior breeds that it 

is only wickedness that makes them dissatisfied.” 
* 


Mr. D. F. McCelland, the American Secretary 
of the Madras Y.M.C.A., speaking at a.public 
meeting in Madras referred to Mother India in 
these terms :* 


“ After the reference by our lecturer, Sir T. 
Sadasiva Aiyer, to the recent book by Miss 
Katherine Mayo, it is incumbent upon me as an 
American to make a few remarks. Thata country-. 
woman of mine should, after_a brief stay in India, 
write so unfairly and offensively of this country is 
a source of deep humiliation. 1 have been able to 
read the book only in’ part, as I have loaned the 
copy, which I had-borrowed, to Mr. Andrews, 
who has taken it off with him. But it is clearly 
apparent that Miss Mayo saw only a part of India 
and could not see that part in proper perspective. 
In many things her accuracy as.an observer will 
not bear scrutiny and her many highly exaggerat- 
ed conclusions give an utterly false picture of 
India as a whole. I have been in India since 1915 
and have moved during these years -among all 
classes. I have no hesitation in_ protesting 
vigorously against the unfairness of her book. 
Generalizations that may be taken for fact by 
readers abroad are too often statements of personal 
opinion based upon prejudice or partial examina- 
tion. A very offensive book could be written as 


*The report is taken from the Madras daily, The Hindu. 


APPENDIX I. 507 | 


well of Americans or of any other Western nation. 
and then we, of the West, would rightly protest 
against such unfair representation. Human sin 
and social evil are universal, and writers who 
generalize would do well to keep that in mind... I 
wish to express to this audience my own sense of 
great regret that an American citizen should. deal 
so unfairly and with such prejudice in presenting 
India to the Western world.” 
* 


Speaking at Geneva to a group of students 
from all parts of the Empire, the Hon’ble Sir C. P. 
Ramaswami Aiyar, Indian Government’s delegate 
at the League of Nations meeting, said : 


“In order to furnish to outsiders a true picture 
of Miss, Mayo’s Mother India it is perhaps most 
useful to employ a figure of speech. Assume that 
a guest is invited to my house and is shown the 
drawing-room and the living quarters and has the 
additional opportunity of seeing the garden and its 
embellishments and assume that when taking 
leave of the host he catches sight of the open drain 
in a corner. Assume, moreover, that this person 
to whom my hospitality has been extended 
proceeds to write a book about what he has seen 
and concentrates onthe drain and ignores the. 
other features of the house and garden—that 
would be to act as Miss Mayo has done. In saying 
this I do not for a moment ignore or minimize the 
many social evils and handicaps from which India 
is suffering. Some of these evils are as old as 
humanity and some aspects of these evils are as 
prominent in Europe and America as in India; 


208 UNHAPPY INDIA 


but every right-minded Indian patriot is willing 
and anxious to right these abuses and is working 
for their eradication. In such an endeavour 
Indians have been helped by men and women of 
other races, but amongst such helpers cannot be 
counted persons like Miss Mayo with filthy minds 
who in all probability are suffering from inhibited 
instincts and who have no eyes but for evil, dirt 
and degradation.” 


* 


Mrs. J. C. Wedgwood, writing in The People, 
Lahore, for January 5, 1928, observes: 


‘‘Many Englishwomen are feeling strong indig- 
nation at the way in which Indians have been 
misrepresented by Katherine Mayo, an American, 
in her book Mother India. We wish you td know 
how deeply we resent her untruthful vilification of 
Indian life and the false picture she has drawn of 
Indian ways and Indian thought. Even if every- 
thing evil which she has related were true, yet, by 
the omission.of the good she gives to her readers 
utterly wrong ideas, and causes them to despise 
Indians, both Hindu and Muhammadan, as ‘weak, 
ignorant and fanatical. Women as well as men 
are made to appear superstitious, sensual and 
slavish,—without desire to be otherwise... 


“For example, a reader of her book would: 
come to the conclusion that there were no happy . 
marriages in India, but always a tyrannical and 
cruel old husband _ ill-treating a terrified child- 
wife. Miss Mayo ignores the beautiful relation- 
ship which most often exists between an Indian 


APPENDIX 1 509 


husband and wife, the tender protectiveness of the 
one, and the responsive devotion and loyalty of 
the other. Indeed, the undying, unquenchable 
love of an Indian wedded pair is traditional, and 
is recognized among all nations. It is the theme 
of many a beautiful legend and song. Miss Mayo 
is, perhaps, the more anxious to have this. con- 
veniently forgotten, because it throws into glaring 
contrast the unfaithfulness and easy divorce of so 
“many American marriages. To these ‘modern ’ 
women, the idea of serving their husbands would 
seem ridiculous, rather they seek to enslave the 


man, and get all they can from’ him, then leave 


him for fresh game... 


“Another evil exaggerated by Miss Mayo is the 
caste system, and again there is just as much 
cause «to attack America for the same thing. 
White Americans despise, and will have no 
contact with, negro Americans—they are the ‘ un- 
touchables ’ in that country. But Miss Mayo is 
so busy picking holes in Indians, she has no time 
to look at home. She quotes Indian after Indian 
who defends ‘ untouchability’ and one only— 
Mr. Gandhi—who denounces it... 


“It would be quite easy for any one of you 
who had the tinie and the opportunity to write a 
Mother America which should show only the dark 
side of that country—its worldliness and un- 
paralleled crime, its lynchings and divorces, its 
prostitution and its slums, etc., and make such a 
travesty of the truth about the U.S.A. as Miss 
Mayo has done about India, but it would not be 
good to lower yourself to her level. Rather, as I 


~ 


510 _UNHAPPY INDIA 


suggest, you should make her ashamed by publicly 
expressing your regret for her lack of wide vision, 
and try to open her eyes to the truth... People will 
then feel amazed as well as disgusted that Miss 
ee should prefer to search with a muck-rake 
and shut her eyes to all the beautiful flowers and 
‘fruits with which India abounds.” 


* 


Major D. Graham Pole, a Labour candidate 
for Parliament, writes in The New Leader, London, 
' for August 19, 1927 : 


“After a perusal of Mother India,...one might 
be led to the conclusion that. the ideal of self- 
government for India could have no existence 
outside the minds of visionaries or fanatics. It 
is reassuring to remember, however, that some 
years ago the writer, Miss Katherine Mayo, visited 
-the Philippines and wrote a book about that visit 
also. It: was called, The Isles of Fear, and was, 
in effect. a defence of American imperialism. 
Miss Mayo has now, after her Indian visit, done a 
brs service for British imperialism in Mother 
India. , 


“No wonder the book is regarded as a god- 
send by those reactionaries who wish to maintain 
our hold over India, who have given up their 
former excuses, and now tell us plainly that ‘ the 
basic fact is that India is not socially fit for self- 
government,’ and that political concession must be 
postponed by this country until Indian conditions 
improve. ‘ We must not betray India under the 
pretext of giving her a political boon,’ one of the 


APPENDIX I 511 


Conservative journals tells us in reviewing this 
book. 


‘Sir John Maynard, K.C.S.1., a retired Indian 
Civil Servant, who has spent the greater part of 
his life in India and has filled every office until he 
‘retired a member of the Governor’s Executive 
Council in the Punjab, says that he finds it hard 
to write with restraint about this book.. I concur. 
‘I have travelled through India from north to 
south and east to west on no fewer than six 
‘different tours during the last sixteen years, and 
‘have lived in Indian households . both in British 
India and in the Indian States. I could write a 
book on India with conclusions as different from 
Miss Mayo’s as could possibly be imagined—and, 
if I wished, as partial) I might confine my 
observations to Indian. life as I saw it through 
these houses in which I stayed, and even so, it 
would give a truer picture of India than Miss 
Mayo could draw from what she has seen. 


“She is interested in Indian society only 
where it-is unhealthy. She creates her ‘ atmos-. 
phere’ in the first chapter with a sketch of what 
is to-us, as well as to many Hindus, a revolting 
religious rite, although it is not in the least 

»characteristic of India, and is practised’ only by 

the lowest and most ignorant of Indians. As with 
religion, so with social customs. To give an idea 
of marriage in India she has recourse to the 
hospitals and to the reports of medical authorities, 
although in the ‘nature of things it is only excep- 
tional cases which come under their notice. 


512 UNHAPPY INDIA 


- © Qne would think from Miss Mayo’s book 
that there is hardly a person in India who is not 
suffering from venereal disease—a suggestion 
which, Sir John Maynard writes, would be con- 
tradicted. by any medical practitioner who had 
worked in Inida. Sir Reginald Craddock, a 
recently retired Indian Governor, writing to the 
Morning Post, also insists that the picture given 
by Miss Mayo is too drab and that she. has ‘ con- 
centrated on the darkest side,’ whilst the reviewer 
in the Times admits that the impartial judge will 
detect ‘ signs of overstatement.’. To write, as she 
does, that Indian women of child-bearing age 
cannot safely venture, without special protection, 
within reach of Indian men.is, to my knowledge, 
a gross and unfounded slander. If Miss Mayo 
came to Britain and visitéd the hospitals she could 
paint as dark a picture.of British life: if sh® spent 
some days in a Police Court there would be very 
little light and shade in her revelations of British 
family life. Or, to take her own country, what 
idea of American civilization could we not derive 
from that most American product, the film? It is 
extremely. ironical that, at a moment when Miss 
Mayo’s book is giving us this appalling picture of 
Indian civilization, the Government of India have 
found it necessary to introduce legislation to deal 
with the importation of American cinema films 
owing to their demoralizing influence on Indians! 


“On political matters Miss Mayo shows as little 
balance. She has visited the Indian legislatures, 
central or provincial, and tells us that sitting 
through their sessions, an outsider comes to feel 


APPENDIX I 513 


like one observing a roomful of small and rather 
mischievous children who by accident have got. 
hold of a magnificent watch. ‘They fight and 
scramble to thrust their fingers into it, to pull off 
a wheel or two, to play with the main-spring; to 
pick out the jewels.’ I have seen the Indian 
legislatures at work, and am hound to say that 
they compare very favourably either with our 
local councils or with the Imperial Parliament. 
itself. The Hon’ble Mr. V. J. Patel, President of 
the Indian Legislative Assembly, has just con- 
cluded a visit to this country. Much of his time 
was spent in the House of Commons and. his 
amazement was intense at the lack of order he 
found there compared with that of the Assembly 
over which he so ably presides. When we are told 
by Miss Mayo that hour after hour and day after 
day the Swarajist Benches in the Indian Legisla- 
tive Assembly spend their energies in sterile 
obstructive tactics, while for the most part the rest 
of the House sit apathetic, we wonder if Miss 
Mayo is aware that in the matter of obstructive 
tactics those who at present sit on the Treasury 
Bench in the British House of Commons are the 
past masters. And, if she would like to feel the 
dead weight of apathy, she has only to attend an 
Indian debate in the House of Commons where, if 
she is lucky, she may find as many as 20 out of 415 
Conservative members present—mostly yawning 
or half-asleep. ! 


“Miss Mayo believes that Britain has tried to 
hustle India into politics, and she tells us that the 
East resents being hustled, evenin reforms. She 

37 


$14 UNHAPPY INDIA 


attributes the failure of Dyarchy not to its inherent 
defects—defects which are admitted by everyone, 
from the late Lord Curzon to the Governor of the 
United Provinces, who described it as a cumbrous, 
complex, confused system—but to Mr. Gandhi’s 
‘ jll-starred adventure into politics.’ One looks in 
vain for any mention of General Dyer. and 
Amritsar. But had Miss Mayo made inquiry of 
almost any Indian she would have been told that 
the terrible Amritsar Massacre of 1919 has had 
more to do with opposition to the reforms than 
has anything else. 


“The authoress discounts the complaints of 
Indians as to the ‘drains’ on their economic 
resources. Army officers, in addition, are spend- 
ing their private incomes there, over and above 
their pay. On the next page she contradicts her- 
self when she draws attention to the fact that the 
children of officers-in the British Army or in the 
Civil Service have to be sent home to England to 
be educated—where a considerable part of their 
pay is necessarily spent. But as recently as 
March ’°21 Jast Lord Winterton, in the House of 
Commons, gave figures showing that there are 
between 4,000 and 5,000 retired military officers in 
this country who are drawing annually from 
Indian revenues and spending it in this country, 
a@ sum amounting to almost £2,000,000; whilst 
there are over 3,000 retired members of the Indian 
gazetted services, retired and living in this country 
drawing annually .£1,500,000. Surely these are 
serious drains on the finances of India, to say 
nothing of the large number of Joint Stock Banks, 


APPENDIX I 515 


Mercantile Houses, Factories, etc., whose profits 
flow to this country. 


“The late Lord Lytton, when Viceroy of India, 
wrote to the Government here a Despatch, in 
which, speaking of the expectation and claims of 
Indians to a fair course of promotion to the higher 
posts in the services of the Government of India, 
he said : 


* We all know that these expectations never 
can, or will, be fulfilled. We. have—to choose 
between prohibiting them or cheating them; we 
have chosen the least straightforward course.’ 


** And he added: 


‘Both the Governments of England and of . 
India had to take every means in their power of 
breaking to the heart the promises they had uttered 
to the ear.’ : : 


_ “This book, it seems to me, will be yet another 
excuse for breaking to Indians pur oft-repeated 
pledges of equality between Indians and Europeans 
in India. ; 


. “The Conservative Government will endeavour 
to hold on to all that we have got, not for the sake 
of India, but for the sake of the financial interests 
that are involved. It is for the Labour Party to see 
that our pledges are honoured—to allow the Indian 
people to take up their own burdens and responsi- 
bilities, to become custodians of iheir own welfare. 

* 


Mr. H. S. L. Polak, a British solicitor, who 
has visited India several times and has had 


516 UNHAPPY INDIA 


opportunity to come into contact with Indians in 
three continents, in the course of a letter to the 
Manchester Guardian writes : 


“Miss Lilian Winstanley takes exception to 
Dr. Tagore’s accusation that Miss Katherine Mayo 
was. impelled by ‘race hatred’ and other 
malignant motives in writing Mother India. She 
quotes in defence of Miss Mayo the fierce criticism 
of their American fellow-citizens by certain well- 
known American writers. 


** The instances cited are not _parailel. The 
victims of those writers can hit back. Miss Mayo’s 
victims, on the contrary, whether in the Philip- 
pines or in India, cannot;.and Indians who have 
read the book, or excerpts from it, are united in 
believing that that was one of the motives that 
impelled Miss Mayo to write it. They assert that, 
under the guise of preparing, for no convincing 
reason, an objective sanitary report, she has 
written, in fact, and intended to write, a political 
pamphlet inline with the corresponding political 
pamphlet that she wrote earlier on the Philippines. 
‘Whatever may have been Miss Mayo’s motive, she 
has, in Mahatma Gandhi’s words, written ‘ an 
untruthful book,’ and she appears to have distorted 
facts and statements to suit her purposes... 


“ But. while the replies to Mother India will 
probably receive little notice, Indians are only too 
well aware of the subtle propaganda-use here, in 
America, and on the Continent, that is being made 

of Mother India. Again and again my Indian 
friends, high in the service of the State and the 


APPENDIX 1 517 


esteem of their countrymen, have come to me 
bitterly indignant at being asked to explain, if 
they can, the various statements in the book by 
questioners who assume their correctness. as 
though it was irrefutable and its writer clothed 
with plenary inspiration. How far this poison has 
gone it is difficult to judge; but of one thing I am 
sure—that, whatever may have been Miss Mayo’s 
motive, the wide circulation and the propaganda- 
use of the book have promoted and intensified race 
hatred in India is beyond dispute,and the conse- 
quences of this are incalculable...” 


APPENDIX II 


DEPRESSED CLASSES 


Miss Mayo has insinuated in many places that 
the Hindus generally, and the ministers of the 
Reformed Government particularly, standin the 
way of the progress of the untouchables or. the 
depressed. classes. The following quotations taken 


from the speech of the Hon’ble the Education 


Secretary to the Government of India in a debate 
which took place in the Legislative Assembly on 
the 23rd February, 1928, shows how unfounded 
Miss Mayo’s insinuations are. The debate was 
raised by a resolution moved by a Hindu member 
to the effect— 


“That this Assembly recommends to the 
Governor-General in-Council to issue directions to 
all Local Governments to provide special facilities 
for the education of the untouchables and other 
depressed classes and also for opening public 
services to them.” 


In practically opposing this resolution the 
Education Secretary said: “ For the Government 
of India the problem is not a problem to provide 
special facilities for the education of the depressed 
classes. It really is a problem of providing educa- 
tional facilities for all classes.” 


Further on in giving figures of progress of 
education among the depressed classes the Educa- 
tion Secretary said : 


APPENDIX II 519 


“T -take 1917, as it were, the datum line, and 
1926 as the year for which the latest report is avail- 
able. Let me state generally that within this 
period (between 1917 and 1926) the number of 
schools belonging ‘to the depressed classes reading 
in recognized schools has risen from 2,95,000.in 
1917 to 6,67,000 in 1926—in other words a. more 
than 100 per cent. increase—and I think it will be 
only fair at this stage to state that a considerable 
part of the progress which has been made in the 
provision of facilities for the education of .the 
depressed classes and the increase that has taken 
place in the number of students belonging:to the 
depressed classes have taken “place sINCE THE 
INCEPTION OF THE REFORMS. IN 1921.” 


In another partof the speech the same 
Hon’ble Member said: - 


** The - barriers of SOCIAL PREJUDICE ARE BREAK- 
ING Down and to-day we find the position THAT 
MEMBERS OF THE DEPRESSED CLASSES ARE READING IN 
THE ORDINARY. SCHOOLS...AND THE REVERSE PROCESS 
IS ALSO GOING ON, NAMELY, THAT MEMBERS OF THE 
SUPERIOR. CLASSES ARE READING IN SCHOOLS WHICH 
ARE “SPECIALLY MEANT FOR THE DEPRESSED CLASSES. 
Let me give the figures. In the United Provinces 
there were roughly 56,000 pupils belonging to the 
depressed classes in 1925 and of these 56,000, 
33,000 were reading in ordinary schools and 
23,000, or less than half, were reading in special 
schools. In the case of the Punjab the figures are 
still more striking. Out of roughly 19,000 odd 
students 16,000 were reading in ordinary schools 
and 3,000 odd were reading in special schools... 


520 | UNHAPPY INDIA 


Practically every province, Sir, has opened special 
schools. Personally I am not much in love with 
these special schools, the reason being that I look 
forward to the day when the social prejudice 
would have softened sufficiently for members of 
all classes and communities to read in the-same 
school. However, as I say, the first step \which 
the Local Governments {which mean the Indian 
Ministers of Education] have taken is to establish 
and start special schools. The second step which 
they have taken is to give special scholarships and 
to remit fees in the case of students belonging to 
the depressed classes. The third step which they 
have taken is to liberalize the rules for grants-in- 
aid to schools and also other special subsidies to 
schools which teach pupils belonging to the 
depressed classes. The fourth step which they 
have taken is to give special capitation grant.” 


Speaking of the United Province, which is one of 
the most orthodox provinces in India, the Educa- 
tion Secretary said : 


‘* There the creidt is due primarily to the 
ministers under whose instructions this work is 
being done...... 36. out of 38 district boards have 
appointed special supervisors in order to foster 
education among the depressed classes.” 


Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya is by common 
consent the head of the orthodox community in 
India and it would be interesting to our readers to 
know what his views on this question are. In the 
course of a long speech on the resolution he 
observed : 


APPENDIX II 521 


“Sir, I have very great pleasure in offering my 
support to the resolution which is before the 
House. It is a matter for regret and reproach to 
the Government and to the country that such a 
resolution should have to be brought forward at 
this advanced period of the history of the world: 
It is a matter for reproach to both of us, ‘and I 
wish that we should each, in criticizing the other, 
frankly recognize our share of the responsibility. 
It is undoubtedly true that for a long time past the 
depressed classes, as they are called,~-have been 
living under conditions which are-very depressing 
indeed. The social customs and rules, as they 
have been understood, or wrongly understood 
among a section of us Hindus, have largely been 
responsible for it in the past. But, Sir, as more 
than-one speaker has ‘pointed out, Hindu public 
opinion has undergone.a very great change on 
these questions, and-to-day it is a matter for 
sincere satisfaction to Hindus that a large number 
of their public men of all classes, and among them 
a large number of Brahmans, are working for the 
amelioration of the depressed classes. There are 
many societies and missions working in which the 
higher classes of Hindus, as they are called, have 
been taking an active and prominent part to 
ameliorate the condition of the depressed classes. 
My friend, Lala Lajpat Rai, has referred to these 
efforts, and mentioned the name of the one large- 
hearted donor, Babu Jugal Kishore Birla, eldest 
brother of our colleague, Babu Ghanshyam Das 
Birla. He alone has been spending between 
Rs. 20,000 and Rs. 25,000 every month for amelio- 
rating the condition of the depressed classes.” 


§22 : UNHAPPY INDIA 


Mr. H. G. Cocke: Is it Government? 


Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya: ‘I am speak- 
ing of what Babu Jugal Kishore Birla, brother of 
our friend, Babu Ghanshyam Das Birla, has been 
spending for the last five years for the ameliora- 
tion of the condition of the depressed classes. 
There are numerous other individuals . and 
societies which have been working in the same 
direction, and I am happy to be able to.say that 
Hindu public opinion has undergone a very great 
change. The House has heard from Pandit 
Thakurdas Bhargava what that change means. 
There are thousands of men in the higher classes 
of Hindus who make no -distinction between a 
brother belonging to one of the depressed classes 
and another brother of the higher classes. . 


“ Many of us have.long recognized that this 
question of the amelioration of the condition of the 
depressed classes is. largely a question of educa- 
tion. I can say that this has been recognized by 
‘every sensible man who has looked at this 
question.. The other day I quoted from a speech 
which I-delivered in 1916 in the Imperial Legisla- 
tive Council in which I said that 


‘the question of the elevation of the depres- 
sed classes depends largely, almost wholly, 
nay I say, depends wholly upon education. 
That is the one solvent which will solve this 
problem, and most certainly do I wish and 
pray that the Government will do as much 
more as it can towards the spread of education 
among these classes. I also urged that the 


APPENDIX II _ 523 


schools of the Government and. of the com- 
munity should be open to the children of the 
depressed classes as much as to any other 
children.’ 


“That was in 1916—i.e., before the Reforms. But 
let me say,—and it pains me to say it—in connec- 
tion with this question of the elevation of the 
depressed classes, that while I gladly recognize 
that a few officers of the Government have indivi- 
dually expressed a great deal of sympathy with 
them, and while the Local Governments have 
taken some steps to improve, their condition, what 
they have actually done for them is very very 
small compared to what they should have done... 
4 

“T°draw attention to these facts to show that, 
while the Government of India as a whole and 
many Officials of the Government of India indi- 
vidually, repeatedly expressed deep sympathy 
with the cause of the education of the people, and 
while the Government of India’s records are full 
of resolutions. recognizing that it was their duty 
to extendit and expressing their desire that it 
should. be extended, as a matter of fact the 
Government of India did very little to promote 
general mass education. And what is worse, 
when, as I have said, a resolution was brought 
forward in 1910, by Mr. Gokhale in the Governor- 
General’s Council, the Home Member at the time, 
Sir Harvey Adamson, opposed the resolution. A 
year later Mr. Gokhale brought forward his Bill 
for permitting compulsory and free primary 
education to be introduced in certain areas. It is 


524 UNHAPPY INDIA 


sad to recall that the Government opposed that 
Bill also. Mr. Gokhale’s resolution of 1910 was 
withdrawn, but when the motion that his Bill of 
1911 be referred to a Select Committee was brought 
forward the Government members voted against 
it. It is painful to recall how that modest Bill 
which sought only to give permission to certain 
Local Boards under certain conditions to make 
elementary education free and compulsory was 
defeated by the votes of the Government. Only 
13 of us—humble representatives of the people— 
voted for the motion to refer the Bill to a Select 
Committee, and 38 persons—at the head of whom 
stood His Honour the Lieutenant Governor of 
Bengal—and which included all the officials, and 
I am sorry to say, certain Indian members, voted 
against the motion, and killed the Bill. Now that 
was in 1912. In 1918, my friend, Rai Bahadur 
B. N. Sarma, brought forward a resolution in this 
Council that one of the post-War reforms should 
be the introduction throughout British India of 
free and compulsory primary education imme- 
diately after the War. That resolution again 

was opposed. by the Government...” 


The reference to Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava 
by Pandit Malaviya was with reference to that 
part of Pandit Bhargava’s speech in which he 
said that he was not only prepared to shake hands 
with untouchables but also to eat with them. 
Pandit Bhargava said : 


“So far as the Hindus are concerned to-day 
it is not correct to say that the Hindus are not in 


_APPENDIX It 525. 


favour of equal treatment being meted out to the 
depressed classes. Now, Sir, I speak for every 
section of the Hindus. I do not belong to the 
advanced section. I BELONG TO THE ORTHODOX 
PART OF IT BUT I MAY SAY THAT YOU WILL NOT FIND 
ANY HINDU WORTH HIS NAME IN THE WHOLE COUNTRY 
WHO IS NOT READY TO CONCEDE EQUALITY OF RIGHTS TO 
ALL MEMBERS OF THE DEPRESSED CLASSES. (An 
Honourable Member: ‘‘ Will you shake hands 
with them?) What is shaking hands. I am ready 
to dine with them. To-day...the question is out 
of date and you will be glad~to know that 
thousands like myself are doing their mite in 
their own unostentatious way.. I would rather 
inform the Hon’ble Member that there are 
societies in various districts.of the Punjab which 
have taken up this question and which have done 
perhaps more than -what the Local Governments 
have done in this matter.” 


In moving an amendment I made the follow- 
ing speech : ; 


“ Sir, my friend the Mover made it clear what 
the object of this resolution is. We do not admit 
that sufficient has been done either by the Govern- 
ment: of India or the Governments of the provinces 
in this direction. Moreover, we also complain 
that there is great diversity of practice between 
different provinces as to what local governments 
are doing in this matter, and there seems to be 
great confusion of ideas between local administra- 
tions about what they should do and therefore it 
is necessary to clarify this by a clear pronounce- 


. 


526 UNHAPPY INDIA 


ment of the Government of India. I must say 
that to my mind that pronouncement is very 
disappointing. It shows that although a very 
great and loud claim has been made for the 
solicitude of the Government of India for the 
depressed classes—the trustees of 60 millions of 
depressed classes—yet sufficient is not being. done 
to bring them. educationally at least to the level of 
the other communities of India, or to \give them 
<a privileges by virtue of their being citizens of 
ndia. 


“IT will first take the Education Secretary’s 
figures. First of all I might clear this point by 
saying what I mean by special facilities. It is a 
recognized principle of the Government of India, 
which has been stated in many. despatches on 
education, that classes which are backward in 
education must be taken in hand by Government 
and brought up tothe level of other classes. It is 
the considered policy of the Government of India 
and has been put into practice in different pro- 
vinces for the. last twenty or twenty-five years, 
nay, even more, by different measures taken by 

, different provinces for the purpose. It is now too 
late to say that there are general institutions that 
are open to all classes of His Majesty’s subjects, 
that they are quite sufficient for the purpose of 
giving education to the depressed classes, and that 
‘special facilities are not required. It is shown 
that special facilities are being given and are 
required. In certain places those special facilities 
are being provided, and Government is alive to 
the necessity and importance of providing special 


APPENDIX II 527 


facilities in these places. But what are those. 
special facilities that have been so much dilated 

upon as having brought about remarkable results? 
I would remind the House that there are only 
three provinces out of nine in which special steps 
are alleged to have been taken to provide facilities 
for the depressed classes, and one of them is. the 
United Provinces, where great credit is due to the 
minister. I want to pay my tribute to him 
openly. In the case of the other provinces, 
Bombay has only one Division in which anything 
special is being done, and in Madras the Commis- 
sioner of Labour has been asked to look after the 
depressed classes. 


“TI ask the House to. consider whether the fact, 
that in three provinces out of nine any special 
care is takeri for the education of the depressed 
classes, is satisfactory. This is a very meagre 
record, and I don’t think that any Government 
should be proud of it. In only one province some- 
thing adequate has been done, and that is the 
United Provinces. That also has been done by 
the exertion of the minister and also by private 
agencies,”” 


Mr. G. S. Bajpai: “TI would like to correct one 
mis-apprehension which my friend seems to be 
labouring under. It was not the purport of my 
remarks to say that special measures had been 
taken only in three provinces. What I said was 
that a special staff had been appointed in three 
provinces. In addition to that I stated that 
certain measures of a general character, such as 


528 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the offer of special scholarships, remissions of 
fees, opening of schools, liberal grant-in-aid had 
been resorted to; these I said were common to 
more than three provinces.” 


Lala Lajpat Rai: “Ifmy Honourable friend 
had waited, he would have found that I was 
coming to that point. What he has explained to 
us does not at all explain the matter fully. He 
has stated that in three provinces only, special 
staff had been appointed to look after-the educa- 
tion of the depressed classes. If he goes into the 
Education Report he will find that almost in 
every province a special staff has been appointed 
by the Government to look after the other classes 
considered to be backward; but only in three 
provinces has any special staff been appointed to 
look after the depressed classes. That is a point 
which is worthy of note. 


“Now we will come to what has been done in 
the matter of special facilities. I will dispose of 
the special concessions first; with regard to that I 
submit that the practice in different local govern- 
ments is not quite uniform, and in all places there 
are not special scholarships granted for the benefit 
of the depressed classes. 1 will read to you another 
question which was putin the same session of 
the Punjab Legislative Council, in which the 
question read to you by the Honourable the Mover 
was put, about the enrolment of the depressed 
classes in the Police: 


‘Lala Mohan Lal:—(a) Will the Honourable 
Minister for Education be pleased to state if it is a 


APPENDIX II 529 


fact that the Government has fixed some aeOlit 
ships for the boys of the criminal tribes? 


(b) If the reply to the above be in the affirma- 
tive, will the Honourable Minister be pleased to 
state if they intend to extend this privilege to the 
boys of the members of the depressed classes?’ 


‘ The answer by the Honourable Mr. Manchar Lal 
was : | 


(a) Stipends are awarded. 


(6) Members of the depressed lasses are eli- 
gible for fee concessions under article.12, pene 
IV of the Punjab Education Code.’ 


‘s The House will see how cleverly the Minister 
evades the question that was put to him. The 
question was, if special scholarships similar to 
those provided for the children of the criminal 
tribes were also provided for the children of the 
depressed classes. He did not reply to that ques- 
tion but he referred to the general concessions that 
were provided in the provincial Educational Code. 


“Sir, great importance has been attached to the 
rise.in the number of the scholars of the depressed 
classes. It has been said that within the last 
decade, since when the Government of India dis- 
covered the existence of the depressed classes on 
account of the announcement of August 1917, and 
on account of the Reforms being on the anvil, 
since that time the number of scholars of these 
depressed classes has increased from about 3 lakhs 

38 


530 UNHAPPY INDIA 


to about 6 lakhs, that is 100 per cent., as my friend 
said. Yet, Sir, it is being dinned into our ears 
every day and disseminated broadcast all over the 
world that there are 60 millions of these depressed 
classes who are protected by this Government 
against the tyranny of the superior Hindu castes; 
and in these ten years, since this enumeration has 
taken place, the Government is very proud of 
having put one per cent. of this community as 
scholars in schools. Is that an achievement 
which the Government is proud .of, considering 
the boast they always make and the interest they 
profess to take in these classes, ‘saying that it is 
their concern? Then, Sir, I want this House 
particularly to remember that this increase in the 
number of scholars of these depressed classes is 
not due to the efforts of the Government alore. I 
do not deny that something is being done by the 
Government, but I.think that that something is 
extremely insufficient. The increase in the number 
of the scholars of these depressed classes is due 
very largely to private effort. J may tell my 
Honourable friend, if he does not know it, that. 
various. Hindu organizations have been trying not 
only ,to .encourage the introduction of these 
scholars of the depressed classes into the ordinary 
schools and to remove any bans and _ prejudices 
that may be existing against them, but also to 
open up special schools and to provide special 
scholarships for them. I know of one individual 
(Hindu) who has been spending within the last 
five or six years from Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 25,000 a 
month on the education of these depressed classes 
and that is the eldest brother of my friend, 


APPENDIX II 531 


Mr. Ghanshyam Das Birla. So the Government 
cannot take exclusive credit for having increased | 
the number of scholars of these depressed classes. . 
The cause of this increase is due, in part at least, to 
the Hindu organizations that have been working 
in this direction very zealousy and devoting funds 
—they are also entitled to the credit.. I wanted to 
know exactly what part the Government» has 
played in the advancement of the depressed classes 
and what they are at present prepared todo. The 
reply to that question is practically nil; because as 
far as the expenditure is concerned, we have been 
told grandiloquently that 30 lakhs had been 
sanctioned for education by the Government of 
India; but we were not told this more relevant 
point of how much of that money had heen spent 
for the advancement and education of the depres- 
sed classes. Not even my friend, Mr. Joshi’s 
question has been’ answered as to how much of 
that has been spent on primary education. The 
bulk of that money is being spent on education, 
no doubt; but surely the Education Department 
could have given us the figures of how much is 
being ‘spent on primary education and on the 
education of the depressed classes; that informa- 
tion is not forthcoming. I know that something 
like 6 lakhs out of this 30 lakhs have been given to 
two universities; I do not quarrel with that and I 
am glad they have got that money; but after 
providing for them, you must also provide more 
for the depressed classes and for primarry educa- 
tion. I want to know from the Government of 
India what example they are going to set to the 
different local governments in this matter and 


5382 UNHAPPY INDIA 


that is why I propose a definite sum of one.crore 
of rupees to be sanctioned for the education of 
these depressed classes from Central funds; surely 
that is not too much—one crore of rupees for six 
crores of people whom you announce under big 
headlines in the newspapers to be under the 
special protection of the Government and whom 
you use for. your political propaganda: I could 
surely ask the Government to sanction. one crore 
of rupees for the immediate uplift of these people 
by providing them with education in order to up- 
lift their social and economic. conditions. It is 
not a very big demand considering the proportion 
. of the population—6 crores out of. 24 crores 
which are wnder British rule. They amount to 
one-fourth of the population-on your figures and if 
we ask you to Sanction one crore of rupees in 
order to give them a-start so that they may after- 
wards be taken into the schools under the ordinary 
rules, surely that isnot a very big demand. And 
it is a test of your sincerity and of your alleged 
concern for the interests of the depressed classes. 
T want the Government to play up and show us 
that they.are really anxious; that their claims are 
sincere and bona fide; that they are not. playing 
a political game, but that they are really interested 
in the education and uplift of the depressed 
classes. That is my point in bringing forward 
this proposal to spend one crore of rupees on their 
education. Do Government really want that these 
depressed classes should be educated, should be 
uplifted and be brought to the level of other 
communities? If so, let them accept my amend- 
ment. But the Government of India is not 


_ APPENDIX I 533 


accustomed to do things of that kind; they are 
not in the habit of doing things of that kind; they 
simply want to use catch phrases for their own 
political ends; but when it comes to doing any- 
thing tangible, there is nothing doing. There are 
a large number of other things; there is the army, 
there is the navy, and there are so many other 
things on which money can be spent and must be 
spent; but when it comes to the education of these 
classes for whom Government of India here and 
the Secretary of State at Whitehall-profess so 
- much solicitude, then there is an evasion of the 
question or there is a plain, refusal and an 
absolute “No.” I hope the people of this country 
and the people of the world will take note of the 
state of things and will value the professions of 
the Gévernment of India at their proper worth. 


“Now coming to the figures that have. been 
given by the different provinces, I do not want to 
go into them now, because I have not got the time, 
otherwise I could have shown that the different 
provinces have practically neglected the depressed 
classes... The only two provinces which have 
made some progress are Bengal and the United 
Provinces. The Honourable Member pointed out 
rather scoffingly that the Punjab had not done 
much. I may tell him that in the Punjab we have 
done much more than the Government has done 
for the education of the depressed classes. We 
have provided special schools; we have given 
scholarships; we have opened special wells for 
them which the Government never provided for 
them considering that these were the classes who 


534 UNHAPPY INDIA 


were so much oppressed by the tyrannical Hindus. 
The Honourable the Home Member said the other 
day that the complaint of the depressed classes 
was not so much against the Government as 
against the Brahmanical caste system and against 
the Brahmans. Well, here I want to test your 
good will and your sympathy for these depressed 
classes. Here is something tangible to be done; do 
it please. ‘We are as much interested, perhaps 
even much more interested than you are, in the 
elevation of the depressed classes;-we believe that 
untouchability is a great slur, and-a great blot on 
the fair name of Hinduism, and the sooner we 
remove it the better. We are also interested in 
bringing them up to our level because we want our 
ranks to be solidified and to.come up to one level, 
so that we may be able to take India with us as a 
whole at an early date. We are much more 
interested in the elevation of the depressed classes 
than any Government can possibly be; but we 
want to know what you are doing when you are 
making empty boasts that you are interested in the 
uplift of these sixty millions of the depressed 
classes, as against us who are striving to raise 
them and.to bring them up to our own level. 


Now, Sir, I do not want to sav much more, as 
my time is very limited. I want to say only a 
word or two about the other points which I have 
raised... 


“I was just going to say a word about roads 
and wells. This point has been raised in mv 
amendment for this reason that the Hindu 


APPENDIX iI 585. 


members once brought up a resolution in the 
Punjab Legislative Council that all public wells in 
all municipalities and district boards should be 
thrown open to all communities including the 
depressed classes, and the resolution was resisted 
by the Government and lost. As regards roads 
several times attempis have been made in the 
Madras Presidency to have al] roads opened to the 
depresssed classes, in fact some people in their 
zeal for bringing about this reform, have gone to 
jail; but the main obstruction has-come from the 
Government; and that is why I want the Govern- 
ment of India to enunciate a policy which will 
apply to the whole of India and to which all 
local governments and administrations will 
conform. Of course the word ‘‘ Local” is a wide 
term and will include all those administrations 
which are directly or. indirectly under the Govern- 
ment of India and therefore they can spend their 
money on those areas which are in their charge 
directly. 


‘One word more, Sir, and I have finished.- I 
want a special list of untouchables and other so- 
called depressed classes to be made. because I am 
perfectly certain that many of the classes who are 
classified as untouchables at present are really 
not untouchables. The figure has been swollen 
for political objects as I said the day before. In 
1917 the. figure was estimated to be somewhere 
near 30 millions; in the census of 1921 the exact 
figure came to about 52 millions; then it was 
simply stated in the Report somewhere that the 
figure may be estimated to be somewhere between 


536 UNHAPPY INDIA 


52 and 60 millions; and Mr. Coatman in his 
annual report on India has just put it definitely 
at 60 millions. In the next census it may rise to 
100 millions because there is an object behind. it. 
So I want that a special inquiry should be made to 
find out who are untouchables and who are not. 


“With these remarks, Sir, I commend my 
amendment to the acceptance of the House. 


APPENDIX III 


THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA AND CASTE 


‘Some time ago, in the course of an article in 
The People, Lahore, dealing with the attitude of 
the Government of India towards social reform 
among Hindus, I said that both by their military 
and civil policy the Government was bolstering up 
the caste system. A Labour M. P., asked the 
Under-Secretary of State for India.in the House of 
Commons if that was a fact. The) Under-Secre- 
tary of State for India gave an answer which was 
not true. Probably it was no fault of his. The 
information supplied to him-by the India Office 
was incorrect. Upon this I addressed a letter to 
the Military Secretary to the Government of India 
in the Legislative Assembly to which he has sent 
the following reply» which I give below in 
extenso :— 


New Delhi, the 7th March, 1928. 


My pear Lata Laspat Rat, 


Will, you please refer to your demi-official 
letter, dated, the 24th February, 1928. As [ 
explained in answer to Mr. Ram Narayan Singh’s 
question No. 880 on September 6th, 1927, the 
Government of India do not themselves draw any 
distinction between ‘martial’ and ‘non-martial’ 
classes. Recruitment is at present restricted to 
certain classes because the Indian Army is of 


538 “UNHAPPY INDIA 


limited size and the military authorities must 
necessarily procure from their expert point of 
view, the best material they can get. It is not 
denied that other classes would also make good 
soldiers (though not as good as those at present 
recruited). The Government of India have.no 
particular literature about the classes enlisted in 
' the Indian army. Insiructions to Recruiting 
Officers are embodied in the ‘ Recruiting Regula- 
tions, Indian Army,’ a copy of which will be found 
-in the Assembly Library, and the.class composi- 
tion of each regiment is shown. atthe top of the 
pages in the Indian Army List on which the 1st 
battalion of the regiment appears. 


I also forward, for your information, a state- 
ment showing the main classes which are. now 
enlisted in the Indian. Army and the arms of the 
service in which .they- are enlisted. Each of the 
main classes is of course subdivided into various 
sub-classes or clans, e¢.g., Pathans include 
Khattacks, Yusufzais, Bangash, etc.; Punjabi. 
Mussalmans comprise Rajputs, Awans, Tiwanas, 
Jats, etc. Similarly with the Sikh and Hindu 
classes». The various denominations of the sub- 
classes and clans probably run into hundreds. 


Yours sincerely, 
G. M. Younce. 


Regulation No. 14 runs as follows : 


“14. Units should recruit from all sub-divi- 
‘sions of classes and from the whole of the area 


APPENDIX III :. "589 


allotted to them, but must not recruit outside those 
classes or areas without permission. 


‘“ The classes and tribes authorized to be 
recruited by units are shown in Appendix XIV— 
(will be issued separately). 


“The statement of classes recruited for the 
fighting arms of the Indian Army gives the follow- 
ing list of Hindus and others who are considered 
eligible for being recruited to the different arms of 
the Indian Army :— 


Statement of classes recruited for fighting 
arms of the Indian Army. 


Whether recruited for 


ai 
8 
3 es = 
: : | gs 4 
Main class recruited. g.2 aa ‘ 
> we og A ar 
& & on GB Ff ae 
3 = 20 3 Oe EB 
2 ££ 28 & m 
& a 3 oat 3 te a 
9 4 RA hh AA 4a 
Mussalmans. 
Punjabi Mussalmans yes yes yes yes yes yea 
Pathans yes ww yes wks ess 
Punjabi Mussalmans yes yes yes yes yes yes 
Hindustani do. yes yes yes as 
Rajputana do. FOS eae ee FO 
Dakhani do. YES ae eevee OB 
Madrasi do. +e FOS YR wy 


Hoezaras So rrr 7.) 


540 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Main class recruited. 


Hindus and other Classes. 


Sikhs ° 

Dogras 
Garhwalis 
Kumaonis 
Rajputs 
Brahmans 

Jats 

Mahrattas 
Ahirs 

Guijars 

Madrasi Hindus 
Madrasi Christians 
Burma classes 
Gurkhas 


yes 


yes 


Artillery. 


Whether recruited for 


yes 


M. G. Platoons 


British Battalions. 


yes 
yes 


yes 


yes 


Infantry and 
Pioneers. 


yes 


Leaving aside the Sikhs, the Madrasi Hindus 
(what the term means and comprises is not 
intelligible) and Burma classes (which again is 
rather vague) it comes to this that no Hindu who 
is not a Rajput, Brahman, Jat, Ahir or Gujar can 
be recruited in the Punjab, the United Provinces, 
Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Gujrat, Bombay, Sindh, 
and N.-W. F. Province. Amongst Brahmans only 


certain sub-castes are eli 


for the Artillery. 


gible, and those too only 


APPENDIX III 541 


As far as the Cavalry is concerned only Sikhs, 
Dogras, Rajputs and Jats are eligible. These 
distinctions are made even more prominent in the 
nomenclature of the different regiments and 
companies. 


It will be thus seen that the statement made by 
the Under-Secretary of State for India in the House 
of Commons was entirely misleading: 


The Indian Army not only maintains ‘‘class” 
distinctions but it also maintains the distinctions 
of castes and sub-castes. It thereby militates 
against attempts to reform the caste system. The 
other day the Sainis of the Punjab, passed a reso- 
lution asking for admission into the Army. 


Similar distinction-is made in the Police and 
othe? Civil Departments of the Government. <The 
following question _and answer taken from the 
proceedings of the. Punjab Legislative council are 
significant of the Government’s sympathy for the 
depressed classes :— 


-Page\687 of the Council Debates, 23rd Febru- 
ary, 1928: 


“Q.—Will the Hon’ble Member for Finance be 
pleased to state if members of the depressed classes 
are taken in the police? If not, does the Govern- 
ment intend to direct that, in the matter of recruit- 
ment of police constables, the members of the 
depressed classes should also be taken ?” 


“4 .—Members of the depressed classes are not 
enrolled in the police. When there is evidence that 


542 UNHAPPY INDIA 


the depressed classes are treated on an equal foot- 
ing by all sections of the community, or when the 
‘Government is satisfied that enrolment of members 
of these classes will satisfy the requirements of 
efficiency and be in the best interests of the 
composition of the service, Government will be 
quite prepared to throw open recruitment to them, 
provided they come up to the physical and other 
standards required of all recruits.’ 


Yet another: proof. In-answer to a question 
put by a non-official member of the Legislative 
Assembly about the eligibility of the Bhandaras of 
Ratnagiri district (an admittedly sea-faring Hindu 
class) to the lower ranks of the Indian Marine, the 
Military Secretary said :— 


No. 324, 25th August, 1927. (a) The answer is 
in the negative as Government do not propose to 
recruit Hindu~ castes into the lower ranks of the 
Indian Navy at present. 


Caste distinction is most strictly maintained 
in the administration of the Punjab Land Aliena- 
tion, Act. Except certain specified ‘‘castes” 
notified by Government as “agricultural tribes” no 
one can buy land from a member of an agricul- 
tural tribe under the Act. 


APPENDIX IV 


One of the charges levelled against us by Miss 
Mayo relates to the lack of interest on the part of 
educated Indians in the movement, for the educa- 
tion of masses. That the charge is entirely 
groundless can be more than abundantly proved 
by facts and figures. The non-Government 
Schools Conference held toward the end of Febru- 
ary, 1928, at Lahore under the Presidentship of 
Mahatma Hans Raj is a complete refutation of the 
charge. The Chairman of the Reception Com- 
mittee, Mr. K. L. Rallia Ram, an Indian Christian, 
who has for a very long period been connected 
with education in the Punjab, has conclusively 
shown the hollowness of that charge. He says 
“out of 1,11,166 pupils attending schools in the 
Punjab 85,710 are attending private schools,” and 
he then adds that ‘itis hardly too much to say that 
the greater part of the success of the province is to 
be attributed to the existence of private schools 
which have made a real contribution to the cause 
of education.’ Further on he observes that ‘the 
educational sphere of work of non-Government 
schools as well as district board schools—which 
more or less are of the same category—covers a far 
wider range than that of the Government schools; 
so wide in fact that out of every 11 students in the 
province 9 are receiving education in private 
schools. In this connexion it would be interesting 
to note that the Government is spending about 


544 UNHAPPY INDIA 


Rs. 14 lakhs on 71 Government schools, while 214. 
private schools get only Rs. 10 lakhs as Govern- 
ment grant-in-aid’. I have not included the 
income from fees in Government schools which 


amounts to about 7 lakhs. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. | 


The Publishers desire to acknowledge the courtesy 
of the following Firms in permitting them to 
reproduce the Photos mentioned below :— 

hee Jamnalal Bajaj, 

Mr. Mohamad Ali Jinnah, 

Moulana Shoukat Ali. 
Sir Ibrahim Rahmitoolah’ 
Miss Daw Hme Hmee Khin. 
| The Hon’ble Mr. V. J. Patel. 


t 

| 

Press Puoto Acext, Bompay. < 
: | 

| 


( Rani’ Sahiba of Sangli and 
Photographs of the All India 
Women’s Conference, Poona 
1927. 


( The late Deshbandhu 
C. R. Das, 


4 
| Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose. 


Messrs. Sapnis & Co., Poona. 


Mept&srs. Jonyxston & /Horr- 
MANN, CALCUTTA. 


Mussrs, Batt & Sons, Srmza. Mahatma Hans Raj of Lahore. 


Mr. M. V.\Apte, Seva Sapan f Mrs.’ Ramabai Ranade and 


Society, Poona. ; Photographs of the Society. 
PRABASI_ PRESS, CALCUTTA. Several Photographs, 
Press PxHoTo BurzEav, 


: } Mahatma Gandhi. 
TRIPLICANE. 


Fixe Arr PRrRIntTING COTTAGE, 


ALLAHABAD, j Several Photographs. 


and all Ladies and Gentlemen who have so kindly sent us the 
photographs at our request. 


INDEX 


A 


Adams, Brooks, 323 
Africa, treatment of coloured 
people in, 141, 145, 147-59 


Age of Consent, raised in 
England in 1885 from 13 to 
16, 181; attempts to raise In 


India, 182; opposed by 
British officials, Ilviii, 182, 
184, 190, 191 

~—In America, history of 


legislation, 182; attempts to 
lower it from 16 to 14, 182; 
in Kansas, from 18 to 12, 
183; compared to that in the 
West, 215 


Al. ° Carthill, on India’s 
poverty, 352; on Indianiza- 
tion, 462 


Al. Smith, 133 


America, education in, 52, 56; 
Dr. Ellis on, 53; expenditure 
on, 67, note; of Negroes in, 
103; of Red Indians, 137 

America, feeling against 
Catholics in, 132 

America, Gandhi’s message to, 
Ixviii, Ixix | 

American ~~ideal, compared 
with that. of ancient Hindus, 
49, 50 

American journalism, 269-71 


America, mechanization of life 
and love of sensationalism 
in, 124 

American sex morality, 215- 
219; girl mothers, 218; popu- 
larity of divorces on the 


39 


increase, 221; films provide 
exaggerated sex stimulus, 
237; ban on films in India, 
237, 374 
American trade 
India, 373 
America, treatment of Negroes 
in, 106-39; of Red Indians, 
136 : 
America, untouchables in, 105- 
106, 136 
American women, Prof. 
Munsterberg on, 6; take 
part inJynching, 126, 127 
Ampthill, Lord (Governor of 
adras, 1905), on sanitary 
code of Hindus, 285 


Amritsar Congress, resolution 
on Reforms in, 453, 458 


Amritsar Massacre, 452-53 


Andrews, Mr. C. F., 
British rule in India, 489 


Anglo-Indians, number of, in 
India, 95; sexual morality 
of, 250-52; “in India every 
[Anglo-Indian] woman under 
fifty has a ‘boy,’” 251; 
‘women unsafe near British 
soldiers’ quarters, 252; Dr. 
Cornelius on, 252 


Anglo-Russian __ rivalry 
India, 471, 483 

Ansari, Dr. M. A., on British 
rule in India, 423-425 

Army, the, see Defence’ 
India 

Arya Samaj, Miss Mayo omits 
mention of, in social reform 


interests “in 


on 


in 


of 


546 


movement, 
of, lvii, 100 

Asquith, Mr., on inefficiency 
of British officials in India, 
435 


98; uplift work 


Assembly, Indian Legislative, 
: social reform bill in, op- 
posed by Government, 182 


Bajpai, G. S., on depressed 

. lasses, 527 

‘Balfour, Miss M. I. (a woman 
doctor of Bombay) challenges 
Miss Mayo, 188-89 

Banerjea, Sir Surendra Nath, 
406 

Basu, Major, B. D., 401 note 


Behar, education of depressed 
classes in, 100 

Belgian, treatment of natives 
in—Congo, 144 

Bengal, elementary education 
in, 25, 32; education of _de- 
pressed classes in, 99, 100, 
533; -prosperous under natiye 
rule, 311; Macaulay on mis- 
management and corruption 
in Company’s rule 313-14 

Besant, Mrs. Annie, 185 


Bhargava—Pandit Thakur 
asy,~on depressed classes, 

524-525 

Birkenhead, Lord, on Reforms, 
469 

Birla, Babu Jugal Kishore, 
munificence of, for depressed 
class education, 521, 522 

Blackstone, on conditions of 
woman in England, 179 

Blaschko, Dr. Alfred, on in- 
creasing prostitution in 
Europe, 228 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Bloch, Dr. Iwan, on irregular 
sex relationship in the West, 
221, 224, 298, 238, 240; on 
sexual offences in Europe, 
266; on pornographic litera- 
ture and advertisements, 
232-33; on venereal diseases 
in Europe, 240-45 

Blunt, Mr. Wilfred Scawen, 
on India’s poverty,.357; on 
British rule in India, 437-39 

Bolts, William, on hardships 
by the Company’s servants 
on the people, 326-29 

Bombay, elementary education 
in (in 1823-28), 25, 32; 
education of depressed 
classes in, 99, 100 


‘Bose, Dr, Sir J. C., ¥.R.8, on 


Mother India, xxxvi 
Bose Institute, Calcutta, 57 


Bose, Miss (Principal, Lahore 
Victoria School), contradicts 
Miss Mayo’s statement about 
her, li, lia, 208 

Boston, Municipality declared 
bath tubs illegal, 182 


Brago, Sergeant, on the Com- 


pany’s ‘cruel’ trade opera- 
tions, 324-25 

Brahmans, and _ education, 
Miss Mayo on, 16-17; and 
education, 18, 19; not res- 
ponsible for present day 
illiteracy, 24; as teachers 


accepted no fees, 20: as 
village priests, 29, 94; their 
attitude towards the 
‘Pariah’ not more cruel 
than that of the Klansmen 
towards Negroes, 136 


Brahmanic system of educa- 
tion, 18-23; survives. even 
after Buddhism, 24 


oe 


INDEX 


Britain, Great, see England 


British Empire, the, treatment 
of coloured people in—much 
worse than that of ‘ untouch- 
ables’ in India, 139-42; 
Indians treated as helots 
throughout, 141; in Asia, 
Gibbons on, 474-77; foreign 
policy governed by consi- 
derations of safety of—in 
India, 471, etc.;- India in—a 
world-menace, 470, 483, etc. 


British rule in India, see 
India 


Bruce, J., 320, 323 


Buddhism, position of women 
in, 184 


Buddhist system, of education, 
22; not merely theological, 
23; attracted scholars from 
China and abroad, 23 


Bureau, M. Paul, on -sexual 
immorality in France, .221- 
23; on pornographic litera- 
ture and photographs, 229- 


32; on abortion in France, 
248; on infanticide in 
France, 248-49 
Burke, Edmund, on E. I 


Company’s trade policy, 329- 
30 


Burma, literacy before British 
rule in, 23 


Butler, Sir Harcourt, on ‘red 
tapism’ in India, 451 
Cc 


Calcutta "University Commis- 
sion, misquoted by Miss 
Mayo, 74, 75 


“Carnaticus,’ justifies ‘divide 
and rule’ policy in India, 403 


$47 
Catholics, Roman, caste 
. among, 94; number of in 


India, 96: Missionaries, 100; 
feeling against in America, 
132; hated by Protestant 
‘Klan,’ 134, 135 Tt. 


Caste, 81; evolution of, \82; 
M.  Senart on 83-85 ; 
originally in [India as a 


form of social and industrial 
organization, 87; not so 
rigid in Epic™ period, 156; 
marriage relations without 
restrictions of—in Smritis, 
164; among Muhammadans 
and Christians, 92; in 
Ancient Rome and_ Athens, 
83-84; jn modern European 
countries, called ‘class,’ 87; 
Booker T. Washington on 
caste in America, 107; in 
Japan, 88; now disappeared 
because of political and 
economic independence, 90, 
91; Government in India, 
encourages caste for its own 
ends, 91, 92; in the Army, 
537-41; in the Navy, 542; in 
Police, 528, 541-42 


Cattle, Mr. Desai. on—quoted 
by Miss: Mayo, 290-91, con- 
sume considerable portion of 
grain required for human 
consumption, 296; Lupton 
on, 295-97; not increased 
proportionately to popula- 
tion, 297; not sufficient for 
tillage, 297; not prospered 
under British rule, 299; ex- 
porters purchase best stock, 
299; ignorance responsible 
for bad treatment of, 298; 
Mr. Chatterjee on, 298-99; 
large number raised in 
U. S. A. for meat industry, 
293 


548 


Central Provinces, education 
of depressed classes in, 99, 
101 ~ OS 


Chamberlain, Sir Austen, on 
India, 8, 319 

Chatterjee, N., on cattle in 
India, 298-99 

Chesney, Sir George, on 
motives of British rule in 


‘India, 452-55 
Christianity, and women’s 
status, 178 : 
Churchill, Winston, 255, 257 
Clarke, A. M., on Mother 
India, 493-95 — 
Coatman, J., 97 
Coke, Lt.-Col. John, justifies 


‘divide and rule’ policy, 404 
Colgate, Mr. (famous tooth- 
aste manufacturer) on clean 
eeth in India, 280 note 
Colvin, Sir Auckland, 
Indian poverty, 354 
Committee on Sexual Offences 
against Young Persons, 257, 
260-67 
Congo, Belgian, treatment of 
Negroes in, 144 
Gongo, French, treatment of 
egroes in, 144 
Congress, Indian National, 
187; on Reforms, 453, 456-57; 
adopts Non-co-operation, 
457; on Indianization, 396 
Congress, Martial Law En- 
quiry Committee, 252 


Conti, Nicolo de, on India’s 


on 


prosperity before British 
rule, 308 
Connell, A. K., on railway 


finance and ‘cheap capital,’ 
389 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Coote, W. A., (of National 
Vigilance Association), on 
London brothels, 225; men 
attracted by press announce- 
.ments in London brothels, 
225 

Cornelius, Dr. 252 

Cotton, J. S., on India’s con- 
dition under British ‘rule, 
353 
Cousins, J. H., 
India, 497-500 

Cousins, Mrs., Margaret, 
on Mother India, 501-02 


Cow, Miss Mayo on_ starva- 
tion of cow in India, 290; 
Miss Mayo-on care of cow in 
America, 291; condition of— 
in Akbar’s time 299-300; 
ignoraace and poverty res- 
ponsible for bad condition 
of, 298-99; slaughter of—on 
a large scale, a new factor in 
India, 298; question ignored 
by Indian Government, while 
in U. S. A. a primary con- 
cern of the State, 293; 
quality and milk producing 
capacity of—fast deteriorat- 
ing in India, 299; best 
milkers slaughtered, 290 

Cow urine, ‘Holy men drink,’ 


on, Mother 


~—a lie, 291 
Coward, Noel, 236 
Cromer, Lord (Finance 


Minister for India, 1882), on 
India’s annual income per 
head, 365-66 

Curtis, Lionel, xx, xxi; con- 
spiracy suspected between 
him and Miss Mayo, xxiii- 
xxv, bxi, lxii 

Curzon, Lord, on India’s 
annual income per head, 366, 
367; quoted by MacDonald, 
430; on Reforms, 469 


INDEX 


D 


Dahlen, George, - 
Fridoline,’’ 225 


Davids, Rhys, on India in 
Buddhist period, 303 ‘ 

Dean Miller, on Negroes in 
America, 130 


Debt, India’s Public, R. C. 
Dutt on, 343; amount always 
increasing 343; how in- 
creased after Mutiny, 344- 
46; Wingate on, 346 


Defence of India, Miss Mayo 
on Army in India, 3743 
K. T. Shah on expenditure 
on, 375-77; more than half 
of total revenues spent on, 
64; expenditure compared 
to that in other countries, 
374, 375; large expenditure 
a ‘drain’ on India, 379; 
Army employed in__other 
parts of the British Empire, 
377; Esher Committee on, 
377; and foreign aggression, 
482-83; all control in the 
hands of the British, 463; 
caste in Indian Army, 537-41 


on “ Press- 


Depressed . Classes, see Un- 
touchables 
Devadasis,. institution though 


rotten, exaggerated by Miss 
Mayo, 199; Frazer on, 200- 
03; his version materially 
differs from that of Miss 
Mayo, 203; unknown outside 
Southern Presidency, 203; 
even in South, unknown in 
Malabar, 203; no better and 


no worse than prostitutes © 


in Europe and America, 204; 
‘similar evils. spread among 
wider portions of society in 
the West, 223; Madras 


O49 


Council trying to abolish, 
204 : . 
Dickinson, Prof. G. Lowes, on 
‘religion in India, 278; on 
_ incompetency of the English 
people to rule India, 428 


Digby, William, on ‘economic 
drain,’ 338, 384; estimates 
the amount of ‘drain,’ 348; 
on India’s annual income 
per head, 366, 368; on rail- 
way finance, 388 


Dill, Sir S., on Roman easte 
system, 86 : 


Ditcher’ (Mr. Pat Lovett) in 
the Capital, on Miss Mayo, 
272-74, 492-93 


Divoree, on the increase in 
Europe and America, 221 


Doleris, Dr., 246 


Drain, economic, from India, 
323, 331-49; is a subject of 
bitter —_ controversy, 3381; 
Mr. Hyndman pleads for 
substitution of native rule, 
‘as a remedy, 332-33; amount 
ever increasing, 340; English- 
men on, 331-42, 365; amount 
estimated, 340-49; does not 
represent the interest on 
capital invested and 
services rendered, 347; mili- 
tary expenditure as _ such, 
375; in shape of raw pro- 
duce, 379, 380; in shape of 
‘cheap capital’ for railways, 
382-86; in shape of ‘store 
purcahse in England,’ 387; 
in shape: of public services, 
398-94; increasing with the 
increasing cost of adminis- 
tration, 393; further increas- 
ed by Lee Commission’s 
proposals, 398 ~ 


550 


Dubois, the Abbé, 179, 194, 
210; his opinions on Hindu 
religion unreliable, xxxvii, 
xlii; even he does not sup- 
port Miss Mayo, xliii-xlvi, 


25%; on Hindu _ education, 
16, ’36 
Du Bois, Dr. W. E. B. (a 


eonons Negro writer), 123, 
12 


Duff, Alexander, on educa- 
tional a pe to be pursued 
i oman example 


Seid 44 


Dufferin, Lord, made enquiry 
into economic condition of 
India, 358 

Dutt, RB, C., on Public Debt 
of India, 343 

Dyarehy, unworkable, 
see Reforms 

Dyer, General, 452 


E 


Education, ideals of, 12, 59, 
60; is a function of. St ate, 
Il, 58, 66-8; by private 
agency an impossibility, 66- 
67, 190 


Education, in. England, down 
to 1870, 12; in 1917, 61, 62 


Education. in India, uals, of 
Panagal ont uoted » but 
misquoted iss Mayo, 
xlvi, xlvii, a Abbé Dubois 
on, 16 


Education in India, Rev. 
Keay on Brahmanic system 
of, 18-22, 23, 24; Buddhist 
system of, 24; excellent 
indigenous "system of, 26-33; 
as it was financed, 30; at the 
time of British arrival, 28, 
30, 34-35; its decay under 
British rule, 38, 36; in the 


465-69 ; 


Education, 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


njab under Maharaja 
Ronit Singh, 35; literacy 


in Burma before British 
rule, 23; under British 
rule, indigenous system 
destroyed by the policy. 


of the British Government, 
33, 36, 42-46; Duff on,. 44, 
Trevelyan, Grant, and 
Macaulay on, 42, 45; Dr. 
Ellis on, 52, 53; neglected by 
Government, ‘history of 
primary education in India, 
69; introduction of compul- 
sory primary education 
opposed, by Government on 
the plea “that time has not 
yet arrived,’ 69, 190; efforts 
of \ Mexican Government 
compared with those of 
Indian government, 56; 
expenditure in India on,— 

represents, 4 as. per head 
for Indians, 55; and Rs. 25 
per head for Europeans in 
India, 56; expenditure in 
England on, 60-63; and by 
U. S. A Government, 67, 
note; scale of pay in Indian 
schools compared with that 
in American and British 
schools, 78-79; pay of the 
village teacher, 79; private 
agencies’ efforts for, 57: 
Mass education, 543-44 


progress of the 
German Nation due to—, 
Ellis quoted, 52 


Education of women in India, 


Miss Mayo on 36-37; educa- 
tion of Hindu women prior 
to British rule, 87-38; educa- 
tion never denied to Hindu 
women, 185; indigenous 


system of, 38; its decay. and 


causes of its decay under 
British rule, 39, 40 


INDEX 


Education of women in Eng- 
land, a recent thing, 12-13, 
181 

Education of untouchables, 71, 
72, 98-99, 518-36; of ‘ Ameri- 
can untouchables,’ i.e. 
Negroes and Red Indians, 
112, 137 

Electorate,” Communal, _ res- 
ponsible for Hindu-Muslim 
dissensions, 400; helped by 
Government, 400; introduced 
first time in India, 406; in- 
stigated by Lord Minto, 406; 
is a dissension-creating 
device, 407 

Ellenborough, Lord (Governor- 
General of India, 1842), on 
attitude of Hindus and 
Muslims towards the British, 
400; suggests ‘divide and 
rule’ policy, 400 


Elligtt, Sir Charles, on Indian 
poverty, 354 


Ellis, Dr. A. Caswell, on pro- 
gress of the German nation 
due to education, »52: on 
worthlessness of natural re- 
sources without education, 53 


Ellis, Havelock,, on pre- 
marital relationship in the 
West, 212-13, 215, 220; on 
prevalence of polygyny in 
the ‘West, 220, 221; on pre- 
valence of venereal diseases 
in the West, 243-45 


Elphinstone. 
of Bombay, 1859), justifies 
‘divide and rule’ policy, 
cites Roman example, 404 


Elphinstone, Mountstuart, on 
India’s past prosperity, 308; 
on Indian roads, 308-9 

England, education in, 12, 58- 
63; condition of women, see 


Lord (Governor. 


551 


women; supported ‘slavery, 
107; economic condition of— 
in the 16th century, 320; 2 
backward country, Robert- 
son, 321-22; Brooks Adams 
on scarcity of money in, 322; 
prosperity of—built on 
Indian treasures, 324, 332; 
economic ‘drain’ from India 
to, see ‘drain’; prostitution 
in, 225-28; venereal diseases 
in, 245 


Eta, the depressed classes in 
Japan, 89 


Epic period, position of 
women in the, 165-57 
Europe,’ marriageable age 


risen in, owing to spread of 
education, 190; prostitution 
in, 225-28; monasteries and 
churches used as brothels, 
208-4; over-sexed life in, 
238-40; venereal diseases in, 
240-45; was in a state of 
barbarity till recently, xvil- 
xviii 


F 


Fazl-i-Hussain, Hon. Sir 
(late Minister of Education, 
Punjab ard now Executive 
Councillor), 71, 72-73 


Fakhruddin, Sir Muhammad, 
on the Reforms, 466 


Fisher, Rt. Hon. H. A. L., on 
education being the fot ape 
of the State, 58; on ideals o 
education, 59, 60; on educa- 
tion in England, 61, 62; on 
learning and earning, 63 


Franchise, see Suffrage 


Francis, Mr. eile compares 
native rule in India -with 
that of E. I. Company, 334; 


552: 


on India’s condition under 

* Company’s. rule, 334. 

Frazer, Sir James, on Deva- 
‘dasis, 200-03. 

France, (and French), treat- 
ment of .natives in—Congo, 
144; atrocities in Africa, 
147-48; sexual morality in 
223-25; vice, an organized in- 
dustry in, 223-25, M. Bureau 
and Bloch, quoted on porno- 
graphic literature and pic- 
tures, 229-33; obscenity in 
the drama and on the stage, 
235-36; abortion and infanti- 
cide cases, 246-49; expendi- 
ture on defence, 376 


Frontier Province, North- 
West, ‘desires no advance,* 
- says Miss Mayo, 412; Mus- 
lim League demands Reforms 
in, 412 


Flexner, on irregular ‘sex re- 
lationships in London, 225- 
26 . 


Fullarton, Col.,, on, India 
during Hyder Ali’s reign, 
311 


Fuller, Sir Bampfylde, on 
‘favourite wife’ of British 
Government in India, 409; 
on ,Englishmen’s . incompe- 
tency, 429 


G 


Gait, Sir Edward, on child 
marriage in India, 187-88 


Gandhi, M. K., xxi, xxix, 103; 
on Mother India, xxx, xlix- 
li, 267; Miss Mayo’s reply in 
Liberty, to his criticism, 

. Lxvi-lxvii; rejoinder to Miss 

“ Mayo, Ixvili-lxx; passive 
‘resistance movement; 452. : 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Ganga Ram, Sir, on_agricul- 
tural education in India, 48 


George, Lloyd, ‘ steel 
- frame,’ 393, 461 


Germany, progress due to 
education, 52; condition. of 
women in medieval times, 
178; sexual morality in,~213- 
14, 220; popularity of porno- 
graphic literature and pic- 
tures in, 232-33 

Gibbons, H. A. on? India, as 
‘a factor in shaping Britain’s 
foreign policy, 471-77 

Gide, M., Andre, on the atro- 
cities of French administra- 
tor in Africa, 147-49 


Gokhale, G. K., and primary 
education, . 69, 523-24; on 
Railway finance and ‘Cheap 
capital,’ 388 

¢ 

Goldman, Emma, on prostitu- 
tion in churches, 204 

Gorki, Maxim, denounced by 
the American Press, 271 

Gour, Sir Hari Singh, his 
Bill to raise marriageable 
age opposed by officials, 191 

Grant, Charles, on educa- 
tional policy of British 
Government, 42, 45; on eco- 
nomic drain, 336 

Greece, child marriage in, 187 


Gruening, Miss, 123, 127, 129 


Hall, Dr. Cuthbert, on British 
rule in India, 480-82 


Hamilton, Lord George, on 
India’s annual income per 
head, 366 — 


on 


INDEX 


Hamilton, General Sir Ian, 
on India’s defence, 482 

Harrington, A. H., on India’s 
miserable condition, 358 


Hastings, Warren, on Com- 
pany’s misgovernment, 314, 
317, 318 


Haworth, Paul Leland, 
American Negroes, 110-12 


Hearn, Lafcadio, caste 


on 


on 


system in Japan, 88-89; on‘ 


Japanese unfitness for demo- 
cratic government, 90 


Heber, Bishop, on the pros- 
perity of Bharatpur under 
native rule, 317-18 


Hecker, Miss Eugene, on 
miserable condition of 
women in ancient Rome, 178, 
179, 180, 181; on lower age 
of , consent in hristian 
world, 182; on bill in-U.8.A 
. lower age of consent,..182- 


Hellpach, Willy, on over- 
sexed life in Europe, 238 


Hindus, singled , out for 
attacks by Miss Mayo, 1, 2, 
15; Dubois’s opinion un- 
reliable about, XxXxXVili; 
ideals\.compared with those 
of the West, 49, 50; Assembly- 
men’s efforts for education 
of » Untouchables, 70, 73; 
their efforts to raise the age 
of consent, 182, 183; and 
depressed classes see Un- 
touchables; and caste sys- 
tem, see caste ; and 
Christianity, 93; and child 
marriage, see Marriage; 
their attitude towards the 
British, 399, 400; high 
standard of cleanliness, 


553 


Lord Ampthill and. other 
authorities quoted, 278-87 


Hindu Medicine and Seience, 
discoveries in, 285-88 


Hindu-Muslim Dissensions, 
Hindus placed on equality 
with Muslims by Alivardy 
Khan, 313; sheet-anchor~ of 
British policy in India, 411; 
Miss Mayo chuckles over, 
398; unity in Martial Law 
days, 399; - Government’s 
steps to destroy unity, 399, 
411; some eminent British 
statesmen_.on *‘divide and 
rule ’»policy, 399-408; a crea- 
tion of British rule, says, 
John Maynard, 408-09 


Hindu women, treated with 
great consideration, _xlii; 
education of, 37; in Vedic 
times, 155; property rights 
recognized, 154; freedom of 
movement enjoyed by, in 
Vedic and epic times, 155-56; 
attained positions of highest 
distinction, 155; see also 
Woman in India 

Hiuen Tsang, on freedom of 
choice of husbands by Hindu 
women, 159 ; 

Hobhouse, L. T., 10 


Howell, on prosperous Bengal, 
_ 312 


Howell, A. P., on education 
in pre-British India, 30, 31 
Hume, A. O., on Indian 
poverty, 354, 55 

Hunter, Sir William, on 
cleanliness of Hindus, 284; 
on Indian poverty, 353, 356, 
3906 


Hurd, Carlos F., on lynching, 
124, 196 


554 


Huxley, Aldous, on English- 
men’s incompetency, 430 


Hyndman, H. M., on ‘econo- 
mic drain,’ 332-33,. 348; on 
India’s poverty, 350-55; on 
Englishmen’s incompetency 
to rule India, 427-28 


I 


Ibbetson, Denzil, on evolution 
of caste, 81; on safeguards 
to child marriage in India, 
190 


Ibn Batuta, on India’s pros- 
perity, 309 

Illiteracy, Miss Mayo on, 36, 
74; the Brahman not respon- 
sible for, 24, 25; Government 
responsible for, 53 


Imam, Sir Ali, on Simon 
ommission, 431; on Re- 
forms, 467 


Tnchicepe Committee for. Re- 

trenchment, on railways, 387; 
on purchase of stores, made 
in England’s dear market, 
387; on increase of salaries 
of public servants, 396 

Imperialism, the greatest 
‘world-menace’~ known to 
history, 140; forces rising 
against, 484 


India, education in, see Educa- 
tion; widespread propaganda 
being carried on against—in 
Europe and America, lx, 
India and_ the British 
Empire, see British Empire; 
the market of England’s 
raw-produce, 379: a ‘World- 
menace,’ XXxiil, chap. 
XXXIII; Public Debt of see 
Debt; poverty of, see Poverty 

India in historical times, 
State dealt with social life 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


and public health, etc., 8, 9; 
education in, see Education; 
achievements in medicine and 
science in, 285-87; Rhys 
Davids on India in Buddhist 
period, 303; ancient State 
not despotic, 307 


India under Muhammadans, 
compared with «England 
under Normans, . 304}. cruel- 
ties of Muslims much less 
than their Christian contem- 
poraries, 305; should not be 
compared with 19th century 
England,” 306 

India in pre-British days, had 
enormous wealth and pros- 
perity, British authorities 
quoted, 307-36; education: in, 
see Education; village sys- 
tem in, 28 

India under British rule, 
conquered by Zndian money 
and blood, 343; mismanage- 
ment, cruelties and atrocities 
of East India Company in 
India, 310-36; manufacturers 
treated as slaves, 329; silk- 
weaver’s thumbs cut off, 327; 
Bolts on; 326-27; trade 
ruined, 330; past prosperity 
of India vanishes, 310-49; 
India not benefited by 
British rule, says Malcolm, 
388; conditions of the lowest 
classes becoming worse, says 
Cotton, 353; India played a 
reat art in success of 
ngland’s Industrial Revolu- 
tion, 319; John Shore on 
exploitation of, 335; Muslims 
take the same view on Simor 
Commission as Hindus, 412- 
16; Englishmen on incompe- 
tency of the English to rule 
India, 427-37; Sullivan 
pleads for India’s restora- 


INDEX 


tion to Indians, 336; Indians 
excluded from services, while 
Englishmen preferred, 335, 
393-97, 460; claim of Trustee- 
ship examined 413-15; 
Chesney and  Joynson Hicks 
on the motives of British 
rule in India, 453-57 


Indian Finance, under Re- 
forms, controlled by Govern- 
ment, 462; of railways, sce 
‘Railways; Transferred de- 
partments inadequately 
financed, 64, 466 . 


Indian Marine, caste consi- 
deration by Government, 542 
Irwin, Mr., on India’s poverty, 
361 


J 
Japan, depressed classes / in, 
89,,90; Hearn on her_unfit- 


ness for democracy, 90; 
caste and its disappearance 
in, 90; expenditure’ on 
defence, 375 


Jinnah, M. A.,0411 

Joynson Hicks, Sir William, 
on motives of British rule in 
India, 456-57 


K 


Kalidas, the great Indian poet 
and dramatist, 158 


Keay, Rev. F. E.,~ on 
Brahmanic system of educa- 
tion in India, 18-26; on 
popular system of elementary 
education. in pre-British 
India, 24-26, 27; on literacy 


in Burma before British 
tule, 23 

‘Ku Klux Klan,’ a secret 
society in America, 132; 


Leitner, Dr. 


555 


organized against the alien, 
the Catholic, the Jew, and 
the Negro, 132; pledged to 
eternal maintenance of white 
supremacy, 134; lynching 
methods, 114, 182; member- 
ship estimated, 134 note; 
has considerable influence on 
politics, 184; attitude. to- 
wards the Negro ‘Pariah,’ 
186 


L 


Lansbury, George, on English- 


men’s incompetency to rule 
India, 432 


Lawrence, A. J., on Indian’s 


poverty, ‘359 


Lecky, on Indian mutiny and 


its cost borne by India, 344- 
45 


G. W., on 
literacy in the Punjab 
before the British, 33, 34: 
on indigenous system of 
education, 26 note, 28, 32; 
on female education in 
India before the British, 38- 
—and on its decay under 
British rule, 39; on native 
genius and learning, 33, 34, 
35, 36; on widow remarriage 
in India, 198 note, 194, 197; 


on lofty conception of 
marriage among Hindus, 
196 


Leys, Dr. Norman, on treat- 


ment of natives in Africa, 
149 : 


Lily, w. S., on test of pros- 


perity -and India’s poverty, 


Lindsey, Ben, Judge, on sex 


relationship among _ school- 
boys and girls in America, 
217-21; being a radical 


556 


reformer abused by Ameri- 
can Pregs,: 271 ; 

Litoracy, among Indian 
‘masses before British rule, 
23-25, 34, 42 

Lovett, Pat, see Ditcher 


Ludlow, on village system in 
pre-British India, 28 

Lupton, Arnold, on food 
supply of India, 295-97; on 
poverty, 351, 353; on national 
tmecome of India, 366; on 
India’s industrial back- 
wardness, 379 


Lynching, 114-28; number of 
cases in America, 115; of 


women, 126; | American 
women take part in, 124, 127 
M 


Macaulay, Lord, on _ educa- 
tional policy to be pursued 
in India, 45; on E. I. Com- 
pany’s misgovernment, 313, 
338; on Company’s. gains, 
320, 321, 324; on gains of 
Lord Clive, 327-28 


McClelland, D. F.,/on Mother 
India, 506 


MacDonald, ‘Ramsay, on offi- 
cials’responsibility for dis- 
sensions in India, 408; on 
foreign rule in India, 427; 
on incompetency of English- 
men to rule India, 429 

McPherson, Sir Hugh, on 
Reforms, 465, 466 

Madras, elementary education 
in (1892-26), 24, 31; Deva- 
dasis in, 200, 203, ete. 

Malaviya, Pandit Madan 
Mohan, on depressed classes, 
520-24 : 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Malcolm, Sir John (Governor 
of Bombay, 1827), on British 
policy of education in India, 
46, 47, 48; on peace and 
prosperity of Maratha terri- 
tory before British rule, 315, 
16; on ruin of Malwa after 
occupancy, 316; says British 
rule has not benefited India, 
338 


Mallet, Sir Louis, on Indian 
government, 433 


Manu (the great Hindu law- 
giver), on women, 160; on 
mother’s first claim to 
honour, “165; on property- 
rights of wife, 166; on re- 
marriage, 171; on personal 
cleanliness, 281; on evils of 
sexual indulgence, 283 


Mann, Dr. Harold, (Director 
of Agriculture, Bombay), on 
miserable condition 9 of 
people, 370-71; on ‘empty 
stomachs,’ 371-72 


Manohar Lall, (Minister for 
Education, Punjab), on 
India’s ‘grinding’ poverty, 
364 


Marriage, Hindu ideal of, a 
sacrament, and indissoluble, 
169; complete merging of 
two personalities, 172-74; 
Manu on, 171; marriage 
laws of Romans, 176-78; 
among Germanic people— 
women not free, 178-79; ‘npt 
real love marriages’ in the 
West, says Nardau, 220 


Marriage, early child, having 
pernicious effects on the 
physique of Indians, 188, 
218; but not so general as 

’ represented, 166; not an an- 
cient institution, Macdonell, 


INDEX 


Keith and Risley quoted, 186; 
among Romans, 176, 179; 
early marriage among Greeks 
and Romans, 186-87; in 
England, iviii, 188; in India 
means generally a kind of 
betrothal, 187; yet denounced 
in India, lviil; marriageable 
age and motherhood age, 
188-89; rise of marriageable 
age in Europe due to educa- 
tion, 190; attempts to raise 
in India and their opposi- 
tion by Government, viii, 
190-91; Hindu States intro- 
ducing reforms, 191 


Marriage of Widows, 
marriage common in earlier 
times in India, 169; Narad 
on 170; Miss Mayo’s state- 
ment, absurd, Ixv-footnote, 
193-95; restricted now only 
toshigh castes, lviii, 192, 196; 
Dr. Leitner on, 196 note; 
restrictions being removed, 
Wiii 

Marris, Sir William, on Re- 
forms, 466 


Martial Law, 453 


Martin, Montgomery, on eco- 
nomic drain, 341 


Mayhew, Arthur, 75 


Maynard, Sir John, on Mother 
ndia, xXxxvi; on Hindu- 


Muslim Dissensions—‘a crea- . 


tion of British rule,’ 408-09 


Mayo, Miss, a tool of the 
‘Jingoes of America’ in 
British hands, xix-xx;. came 
on a mission of political 
propaganda, xx, xxli, xxx, 
Ixi, 80, 102, 426; her defence 
of British administration, 3, 
426; on British achievements 


re- 


557 


in India, and criticized, 293- 
96; explanation of great 
popularity of her hook, 
Xviii-xix; her way of argu- 
ment criticized, 5, 6; her 
wrong dealing with figures 
exposed, 55-56; her trick of 
dealing with quotations \ex- 
posed, xliv-lvii, 76, 205, 209; 
even Dubois—her favoured 
authority—eleverly handled, 
xliv-xlvi; adopts. tactics of 
‘Scandal Bureau,’ 271; be- 
trays ignorance of Hindu 
‘law, 198; and of agricultural 
conditions.in India, 292; 
and of Indian history, 361, 
302; and of India’s economic 
situation, 373; criticized by 
and replies to M. Gandhi in 
Liberty, Gandhi’s rejoinder, 
xxx-xxxv, lxvi-lxx ot 

Mercantile Marine Committee, 
462 


Mexican Government’s efforts 
for education, 56 


Meyer, Prof. Bruno, on sexual 
irregularities in the West, 
221 

Military, Indian, see Defence; 
caste in recruitment, 539-41 

Mill, James, on wretched con- 
dition of people under 
British rule, 311; on Eng- 
land’s backwardness in [7th 
century, 322 

Minto, Lord, 406 ; 

Montagu, -Rt. Hon: Edwin, 
xx; on defective character 
of Indian government, 431; 
Mesopotamia debate—speech 
of 443-44; on announce- 
ment of 1917, 446-47 

Montagu-Chelmsford Report, 

_on Indian Reforms—recom- 


558 


mends Indianization, 396, 
446, ete. 

Moore, on India’s prosperity 
under Tipu’s administra- 
tion, 311 

Morel, E. D., on treatment 


of natives in British Africa, 
142-48 


Morison, Sir Theodore, on 
‘economic drain,’ 348 

Mother India, 2, 74, 195; 
how it was written, xxvi: 


opinions of some eminent 
persons on, xxXviii-xxxvii, 
xlix, li, and Appendix I; 
criticism. on it of some most 
reliable Indians refused 
publication by British Press, 
xxvii, lxii 


’ Muddiman Commitee on 
forms, 465 

Muhammad Ali, Maulana, 406 

Muhammadans, Muslims; rule 
in india, see India; 
women’s education among 
them aaa pra rule, 38; 
position women, 38; 
‘must he ‘uppressed said 
Lord Ellen rough and 
Thomas, «399-400; ~ ‘primary 
moversin. Mutiny,’ 401; 
are to be patted, 404; Mr. 
MacDonald on special 
favours to, — 408; Sir 
Bampfylde on the ‘favourite 


Re- 


wife of British Govern- 
ment,’ 409; take the same 
view about British goverp- 
ment as Hindus, chap. 
XXIX; and British rule, 484 

Munsterberg, Prof., on Ame- 
rican ‘women, 

Muslim League, _ . prepares 
joint scheme of Political 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Reforms, 443; demands Re- 
forms in N.- Province, 
413; boycotts ” Simon Com- 
ssion, 418 
Mutiny, Indian, of 1857 
caused by Englishmen’s 
_ fault, 344; cost to suppress 


it borne by India, 45; John 
Bright on the cost—calls it 
‘grievous burden’ on 
India, 346; Muhamm dans 
primary movers in—401 


N 
Naidu, Mrs. Sarojini, 185 


Naoroji, »Dadabhoy, his writ- 
ings ignored by Miss Mayo, 
373; on India’s national 
income, 367; on ‘cheap 
goital,’ for Railways, 388- 


« 


Napier, opposed introduction 
ae steam power in Navy, 
18 


Narad, on medical examina- 
tion of man before marri- 
age, 163; on remarriage of 
widows, 170 


National Christian Council of 
India, on Mother India, 
xxxvi, 500-01 


National Medical College, at 
Calcutta, 57 


Nataranjan, K., on unreliabi- 
lity of bbé  Dubois’s 
authority, xl, xlii, xiv; 
criticism of Miss Mayo, liv 


Nearing, Prof. Scott, 9 


Negroes, in America, their 
education neglected, 105, 
106; cruelties against them 
unparalleled in ndia’s 
history, 108, 124-29; denied 


INDEX 


citizenship rights, 107-11; 
oppressive laws against, 111; 
separate accommodation for 
them on railways, etc., 114; 
excluded from public 
schools, hotels, and churches, 
segregation of, 112-13; lynch- 
ing of, 115-31; women 
lynched, 127; some think it 
impossible to treat them as 
equals, 129; called ‘a sacri- 
- ficial race’ by Dean Miller, 
130 


Nesfield, Mr., on caste, 82 


Nivedita, Sister, 
Widows, 194 


Nobili, Robert de, forged 5th 
Veda, xli 


Non-co-operation, 458, 460 


Nordau, Max, on marriage in 
Europe, 220 


0 


Obscene publications, adver- 
tisements in French Press, 
230, 232-36; drama, 3 
Bureau on, 235-387;—and 
their circulation, 230; photo- 
graphs «most popular in 
CentralEurope, 232; news- 
papers, 234-35; see also 
Pornography 

Oliver, Lord, on 
favouritism of Muslims, 409 


Orme, on manufacture of 
cotton goods in India, 321 


P 


Panagal, Raja of, quoted by 
Miss Mayo on Brahmans’ 
opposition to education, 15- 
17; repudiates Miss Mayo’s 
statement, xlvii, 17 


on Indian 


overnment’s 


559 


Pankhurst, Miss Christabel, 
on Venereal disease in Eng- 
land, 244 

Patel, V. J., 69 


Patro, S. P., on India’s 
poverty and indebtedness of 
he people, 364 

Pearson, Charles, on State 
and social duties, 13 

Pietro del Valle (17th century 
Italian traveller), on India’s 
peace and prosperity, 310 

Pioneer (Allahabad Anglo- 
Indian (daily), on _ poverty 
‘ander the yoke of British 


mismanagement,’ 356, 57; 
Mr. Harrington in—, on 
India’s poverty, 358, 59; 
Mr. Grierson in—, on 


India’s poverty, 362 


Polak, H. 8. L., on Mother 
India, 515-16 


Pole, Major D. Graham, on 
Mother India, 510-15 


Pornography, well organized 
in Europe as a successful 
trade, 2329-33. See also Ob- 
scene literature - 


Pouresy, Mr. Emile, quoted 
by Bureau on publication of 
obscene literature in France, 
232 


Poverty of India, 350-72; 
annual income of the people 
per head not more than 
Rs. 30—different estimates, 
354-68; and over taxation, 
355-57, 362-63, 414, 415 


Pratt, J. B., on widows in 
India, 195; on mothers in 
India—‘nowhere in the 

- world more revered,’ 197 


560 


Premarital sexual indulgence, 
opportunities rare for—in 
India, 212, 216; almost 


universal in some countries 


in West, 213, 216; com- 
mended in the West by 
Radical sex thinkers, 213 


Prostitutes—Prostitution, 
vadasis, 200, 203-05; 
spread in the West, 223; 
Dr. Blaschko on, 228; 
developed to a_ gigantic 
social institution in the 
West, 228; Dr. Bloch on 
secret prostitution, 228 ; 
Press in the service of, 924. 
25; in temples and churches, 


De- 


wide- 


203-05; brothels in guise of 
baths, schools, and_ treat- 
ment establishments, 225, 
227 

Punjab, education before and 


after British rule, 27-37; of 
women, and its decay, _36- 
40; number of CRokeased 
class boys in. schools, 99 


= 


Ragozin, on 
women in the Vedas, 153 


Rahimtoollah, Sir Ibrahim, 
examines British claims of 
trusteeship, 413-18; —criti- 
cizes economic policy of 
Britain, 414; on India’s 
capacity to bear taxation, 
416 


Railways in India, history of, 
382-86; Mr. Wacha on_ the 
history of, 386; ‘ cheap 
capital’ exposed, 383-85; 
Mr. Connell on, 389-90; no 
solution of famines, 391-92; 
administration entirely in 
hands of Europeans, 463; 


osition 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


passengers shabbily treated, 
382-386 


Railway, Board, al] European, 
463 


Rallia Ram, K. L., 72; on 
mass education—non-offcial 
efforts, 543 


Ratcliffe, S. K., 
India, xix 

Reddi, Dr. Muthulakshmi, 185 

Reddi, Sir K. V., on Re- 
forms, 466-67 


Red Indians, mercilessly 
treated in America, 136; 
supplied with bad lands 
and /insanitary surround- 
ings, 187; their education 
neglected, 137; Mr. Russell 
on inhuman treatment of 
their boys in schools, 137; 
their property under control 
of Government, 138 


Reforms, 440-69 


Reforms Enquiry Committee, 
465 


Reforms Pamphlet (of India 
Reform Society), 303; about 
India’s past prosperity, 304- 
06, 308;. 309 

Reinsch, Dr. Paul §&., 
British rule, 481-82 


Richey, Mr. (Education Com- 
missioner to Government of 
India), on want of finances 
for educational development, 
65; on progress of education 
in Bombay, 70; on the scale 
of pay in village schools, 78 

Risley, Sir Herbert, on 
Roman and Grecian caste, 


on Mother 


on 


83, 85; on Indian caste 
system, 85; on widow re- 
marriage, 176; on _ child 


marriage, 187-89 


INDEX 


Robertson, 321-22 


Rome—Roman_ caste system, 
88, 84; condition of women, 


176; early marriage in, 176; . 


educational policy of Rome 
as the British ideal in India, 
48-4; ‘Divide et Impera 
policy, 403, 405 

Ronaldshay, Lord, on dyarchy, 
469 


Rose, on indebtedness in India, 
360 


Ross, Prof. E. A., xiii 
Rowlatt Bill, 452 


Roy, K. C. (of the Associated . 


Press), contradicts Miss 
Mayo, xlviii 
Ruding, 322 


Russell, H. L., on treatment 
of Red Indian boys in 
American schools, 137-38 

Russi, venereal diseases in 
245 note; abortion cases in, 
247; and Britain, 477, ~478, 
489, etc. 

Rutherford, Dr. V. H., 
British inefficiency, 435-37 


‘Salisbury, Lord, on ‘economic 
drain,’ 342 

Sanger, Dr., 203 | 

Sanitation, present day bad 
sanitation due to poverty, 
987-88; public health neglect- 
ed by government, 288; 
expenditure on it by govern- 


on 


ment, 288-89; Miss Mayo 
and Hygiene of Hindus, 
278-89 

Sarda, R. 3B. Har’ Bilas, 


proposes a Bill in the Legis- 
lative Assembly to raise the 


40 


561 


_marriageable age and_ oppos- 
ed by official bloc, 182, 191 


Sarma, Rt. Hon. Sir B. N., 
on India’s National income, 
868; on compulsory educa- 
tion, 524 

Seeley, Prof. J., on English 
rule in India, 427 


Senart, on caste system, 83-5 

Sexual morality, in India, 
Miss Mayo takes delight in 
dilating upon_sexual depra- 
vity of Indians, 210;—a 
vital part of her argument, 
210; her sweeping generaliza- 
tions, 211;° Hindu scriptures 


preach. continence, Manu 
and Sushruta on continence, 
283-843. conditions much 


better as compared with the 
West, 212, 213, etc.; of 
Anglo-Indians in India, 249- 
52 


Sexual morality in the West, 
Pre-marital sex relationship, 
212-15;—in American schools, 
Judge Lindsey on, 215-19; 
girl mothers in America, 
217; contraceptive methods 
commonly known to Ameri- 
can girls, 218; ‘no girl a 
virgin after sixteen in 
Germany,’ 220; - divorce 
becoming popular in the 
West, 221; ‘half of sexual 
intercourse outside legal 
marriage’ says Ellis, 921; 
prostitution in the West, 
see Prostitution; obscene 
publications in the West, see 
Pornography; abortion and 
infanticide, 247-49; venereal 
diseases in the West, see 
Venereal diseases 


Sexual offences against child- 
ren, Miss Mayo on,—in 


562 


India, 254; in England, 255- 
67; offences becoming serious 
in England, 263; difficulty 
in punishing the offenders 
in England, 259-62; inter- 
course with children as 4 
cure for venereal disease in 
England, 264-65; in America, 
268 

Shafi, Sir Muhammad, 
Simon Commission, 419 


Shah, Prof. K. T., on econo- 
mic drain, 348-49; on annual 
jncome per head, 367-68; 
ignored by Miss Mayo, 373; 
on military expenditure, 375- 
78; on respective expendi- 
ture, on nglishmen and 
Indians in Public Services, 
393-95 


Shaw, George Bernard, 237 


Shirras, Findlay, on India’s 
national income, 368 


Shore, F. J., on exploitation 
of India by England, 335-36 

Siegfried, Andre, 111, 1384-35 

Sikhs, position of women 
among them, 38; female edu- 
cation, 38 

Sinclair, Upton, on American 
journalism, 269; on Ameri- 
can ‘Scandal Bureau,’ 270-71 


Simon Commission, 
attitude of Muslims towards, 
418; boycotted by Muslim 
League, 418, 20; Sir Ali 
Imam on, 420-23; Sir Shafi 
on, 419 

Sinha, Lord 8. P., on Mother 
India, xxxvi, 495-97; in- 
justice done to him by Miss 
Mayo, lvi 

Sinha, Sachchidanand, on Re- 
forms, 467° ; 


on 


464; | 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Sircar, N. N., on Lord Sinha’s 
reseeence in Mother India, 
v 


Sitalvad, Sir Chimanlal, 
quoted by Miss Mayo, 2 
Skeen, Sir Andrew (Chairman 
of the Skeen Committee), on 
very slow progress... of 
Indianization in India, 378 

Skeen Committee, 879, 464 

Sl.very in America, 104, 130; 
abolished in theory only, 108; 
slaves when | emancipated 
were compelled to leave the 
State, 108; British Judges 
upheld. its continuance in 
Sierra Leone, 149 


Smith, V. A., on India’s 
ancient prosperity, 302 


Social Reform societies in 
India, lvii, 102-03 
Stanley, Jones, on Hother 


India, 501-02 


Strachey, Sir John, on ‘Indian 
famine, 391; on ‘divide and 
rule’ policy, 404 


Stridhan, 156 
Suffrage of women, a recent 
thing in England, 181; in 
India, 185 
Sullivan, John, 
prosperity of pre-British 
India, 336; pleads for 
restoration of British terri- 
tory to native rule, 336; on 
economic drain, 337 


Sunderland, Dr. J. T., on 
economic drain—‘the greatest 
cause of impoverishment,’ 
342; on poverty of Indian 
people, 366-67; proves in- 
competency of British rule 
in India, 434, 437 


on economic 


INDEX 


Sutra, meaning of, 157; first 
attempt of Aryans at scienti- 
fic codification, 157; position 
of women in Sutra period, 
157 

Suttee, unknown to Vedas, 
155; not so general as 
represented, 166; originally 
entirely voluntary, 166 


Swaraj, 104 
T 


Tagore Rabindra Nath, and 

iss Mayo, xXXXv,. xxxvi, 
xlix, lii-lv, 487-92 

Tata, J. N., spent a good 
deal to provide scientific 
education, 57 

Technological 
Calcutta, 57 

Thakore of Gondal, on cleanli- 
neg’s of Hindus, 279-84 

Thapar, Dewan Bahadur Kunj 
Behari, 0.8.5., contradicts 
Miss Mayo, lii, 208-09 


In stitute, 


Thomas, Henry Harrington, 
on attitude of Hindus and 
Muslims towards the 

_ British, 401-03 

Thompson, Edward, calls 
Mother. India one__ long 
nagging, xxxvi, 502-06; on 


_ British rule in India, 436-39 
‘Thorburn, on poverty and 
famines, 362; on high taxa- 
tion, 363, 364 

Thornton, on ‘cheap capital’ 
for Railways, 384-85 


Torrens, W. M., ™.P., on 
India in the past, 307 
Toynbee, .8.1., on  insuffi- 


ciently fed people of India, 
362 


563. 


Transferred department in 
provincial Governments, re- 
venues inadequately provid- 
ed, 64, 466; ministers not 
free to act, 467-69 


Trevelyan, C. M., on State 
efforts for country’s progress 
in England, 12-13 


Trevelyan, Sir Charles, » on 
educational policy to be 
pursued in India/so as to 
render India amenable to 
British rule, 48, 44; Roman 
parallel cited, 43-44 


Tucker, St. John (Chairman 
of East’ India Company), on 
increasing quantity of eco- 
nomic drain, 340-41 


U 


United Provinces, education 
of depressed classes in, 99- 
100 


Untouchables, numbers in 
India, 96-98; Miss Mayo on, 
lxvi, 37, 70, 71, 93, 95; 
Hindus not opposed to 
education of, 70-73; in 
schools, 99:100; in Police 
Service, 528, 541-42; used as 
@ weapon against Indian 
aspirations, xvi, 96, 100-02; 
-a blot on Hinduism, 102, 
140; Hindus trying te 
remove it, lix, 102; Negroes 
and Red Indians in America 
treated as such, 105, 107, 
136; in Japan, 88-90; official 
figures for, 536 ; 

Usher, on’ the position of 
Negroes in U. 8. A., 108 


Vv 
Varna, see Caste 


B64 


Vedas, position’ of women in, 
151-55, 176, 18; on object 
of married life, 153-54; 
Suttee unknown in Rigveda, 
155 : 


Venereal Disease, Miss Mayo 
on, 240; not as widespread 
in India as in the est, 
240-42; Dr. Bloch on. the 
origin of syphilis, 240-43; 
ten times more 
among British troops than 
‘in ndian troops, 244; 
Dr. Bloch, Havelock, Ellis, 
and Dr. White on—in 
Europe and America, 242-45; 
75 per cent. population 
infected in England, 245; 
in Russia, 245 note; sexual 
intercourse with children 
considered a cure for vene- 
real diseases in the West, 
266-67 


' Village school, its working in 
pre-British India, 30-32; 
neglected by the government, 
32 

Village system, in pre-British 
India, 28; elementary edu- 
cation an important funce- 
tion of, 30-32 


Villiers, E., on Reforms, 468- 
69 


WwW 
Wacha, D. E., on Indian 
railways, 385-86, 388; on 
indifference of railway 


management, 386 
War, India’s contribution in 
the, 443, 447 
Ward, on ‘habitually under- 
fed’ people of. India, 360-61 
Ward. William, on literacy 
in Bengal, 26 - ; 


—_ 


frequent ° 


UNHAPPY INDIA 


Washington, Booker T., on 
Negroes, 107-08 


Wedgwood, Rt. Hon. “Col. 
J. C., xxviii; on Mother 
India, xxxvi, 254, 508-10; 

on Lord Irwin, 434 4 

Wheeler, Sir Henry, on. 
Reforms, 465-66 

White, Dr. Douglas, on 
venereal diseases in the 


United Kingdom, 244 


White, on India’s poverty, 
360 


White Slave Traffic in Europe, 
221-23; in England, govern- 
ment’s, circular to warn 
young girls, 226-28 

Widows, remarriage of, see 
Marriage; Miss Mayo’s dia- 
bolic exaggeration about, 
197-98; their lot not so hard 
as depicted, 194; their< life 
of sacrifice, 192; attacks on . 
their morality—product of 
evil mind, 192; their high 
morality, 192; their condi- 
tion different in different 
castes, 193; their property 
rights recognized, 198; 
Mr. Pratt on, 194, 195; 
Sister Nivedita on, 194; 
Dr. Leitner, on, 196-97 

Williams, Mr.’ Rushbrook 
(formerly Publicity Agent of 

_ the Indian Government), on 
Mother India, \xv note 

Wilson, A. J., on economic 
drain, 341-42, 348; on rail- 
way finance, 388 


Wilson, H. H., his protest 
against suppression of 
Indian languages and ex- 
clusive encouragement of 


English, 45-6; on economic 
drain, 341 


. INDEX 565 
duties, 185; see also Hindu 
Women 

Woman. in the 


Wingate, Sir George, on 
s-seonomic drain, 339-40; on 
.:Indian Mutiny and Public 


West, ‘vote’ 


, Debt, 346 for, a very ea thing, 
.Wingfield-Stratford Miss | 376: 3615 among omen 
“Barbara, on low standard could be put o death by 
of Anglo-Indian morality in father or husband, 177; 

- India, 250-52 usually married young 


Woman in India, worshipped 
by Hindus in _ different 
-forms, lvii; was free in her 
choice of mate in early 

- times, 151; 158-59; Hiuen 
-Tsang’s testimony, 159; her 
position in epic period, 155- 
57; Manu on, 160-62, 166; 
‘as 
higher pedestal,’ 165, 197; 
her first claim to. honour, 
165; Mr. Pratt on, 194-95; 
her property rights recog- 
nized, 167-68, 184; her rights 
of adoption, 168; marriage 
and remarriage «of, see 
Marriage; as wife enjoys an 
equal status, 172-74;.in the 
past also enjoyed better 
position than her European 
sister before. Mid-Victorian 
era, 176; 183; even better in 


some respects in Vedic 
times than European 
women in Europe to-day, 


176; as legislator, 185; per- 
forming important public 


Mother placed on a:- 


among Romans, 177; was not 
free to choose her mate, 178;° 
according to Christian 
thought woman is the cause 
‘of fall of mankind, 178; was 
not allowed to give evidence 
or security or to act in 
Court, 178; her rights of 
preperty were not reeognized 
among, Germanic people, 
and among English people, 
180-81; wife-beating still a 
common offence in England, 
180; her present position 
entirely the growth of the 
last 75 years, 184; Negro 
women in America, see 
Negroes; Prof. Munster- 
berg on American women, 
6 


Womenteachers in India, 
reason for the paucity of, 
Ixiii, 74, 76, 77-78 


Y 


Maulvi Muhammad, 


Yaqub, 
Hindu-Muslim Unity, 


on 
420 


CALCUTTA : 


Published by Messrs. Banna Publishing Co., 8-2, Garstin Place, 
and printed by Shadi Ram Monga at Messrs. Lal Chand & Sons, 
76, Lower Circular Road. 


VETTE UE 
00148194 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


ee NSDL 


on 16 Neverber oe 8
